             
                                                
  Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
 on September
 12Œ13, 2012 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, September 12, 

2012, at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Thursday, September 13, 2012, at 8:30 a.m.  Those present 

were the following: 
Ben Bernanke, Chairman 

William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 

Elizabeth Duke 

Jeffrey M. Lacker 

Dennis P. Lockhart 

Sandra Pianalto 

Jerome H. Powell 

Sarah B
loom Raskin 
Jeremy C. Stein 

Daniel K. Tarullo 

John C. Williams 

Janet L. Yellen 
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, and Eric 
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Ko
cherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively 

William B. English, Secretary and Economist 
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary 

Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 

David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 

Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, Wil
liam Nelson, David 
Reifschneider, Glenn D. Rudebusch, William Wascher, and John A. Weinberg, Associate 
Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Govern
ors 
                                                                                                              Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; 
Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, 

Board of Governors 
Andreas Lehnert,
1 Deputy Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, 
Board of Governors 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Di
rector, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
Brian
 J. Gross,
2 Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 

Eric M. Engen, Michael G. Palumbo, and Wayne Passmore, Associate Directors, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Fabio M. Natalucci, Deputy 
Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Edward Nelson, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
Kelly J. Dubber
t, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, respectively 
Cletus C. Coughlin, Troy Davig, 
Mark E. Schweitzer, and Kei
-Mu Yi, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Cleveland, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 
1 Attended Wednesday™s session only. 
2 Attended Thursday™s session only. 
                                                               Lorie K. Logan, Jonathan P. McCarthy, Giovanni Olivei, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,
3 Vice 
Presidents, Federal R
eserve Banks of New York, New York, Boston, and New York, 
respectively 
Michelle Ezer,
4 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
3 Attended after the discussion o
n potential effects of a large
-scale asset purchase program. 
4 Attended the discussion on potential effects of a large
-scale asset purchase program. 
                           
                   
            
                                                          Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
September 12
Œ13, 2012 September 12 Session 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  Our first item is 
a staff report 
on the potential effects of large-
scale asset purchases.  Seth Carpenter will lead, but Vice 
Chairman 
Dudley would like to introduce the other presenter. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would like to introduce Michelle Ezer from the 
Markets Group.  Michelle and I actually had the interesting experience of writing a paper on the 
case for TIPS
, right in the heart of 
the financial crisis, along with Jennifer Roush
. I am not really 
sure how I managed to do that during that period, but, obviously, Jennifer and Michelle did most 

of the work.  So she is a coauthor. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay
, thank you.  Seth. 
MR. 
CARPENTER.
1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the 
material that™s 
labeled ﬁPotential Effects of a Large
-Scale Asset Purchase Program
.ﬂ  The Committee received three memos from the staff discussing various aspects of 
potential new large
-scal
e asset purchase (LSAP) programs.  I will discuss some 
considerations about how LSAP programs might be structured, and Michelle will 

discuss the balance sheet and income implications, along with the associated exit 

issues. 
When considering the financial and economic effects of LSAPs, the staff analysis 
starts from 
a term 
structure 
model that embeds Treasury and MBS supply factors as 
determinants of 
the yield 
curve.  
These effects depend on market participants™ beliefs 
about the entire trajectory of the SOMA
 portfolio™s holdings of securities and the 
types of those securities.  The FRB/US model assumes that declines in the 
10-year 
Treasury yield pass through roughly one-
for
-one to 
other market rates. 
In addition, 
the lower Treasury rate reduces the discount 
factor in pricing equities, boosting stock 
prices.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar falls as well.  For LSAPs that 

include purchases of MBS, there is an additional assumed reduction in MBS and 

mortgage rates.  Finally, the changes in these market 
variables are 
used to simulate 
the macroeconomic effects of these 
purchases using the FRB/US model. 
Of course, the results depend critically on the models used and a wide set of 
assumptions, any of which could be challenged.  First, in the staff models, the one-
1 The materials used by Mr. Carpenter and Ms. Ezer are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 
                   
             
                    
  
                     
      for
-one pass
-through from the 10-
year Treasury yield to other market rates could 
misstate the connection 
among 
these rates
.  For example, frictions like 
capacity 
restrictions 
for originations may prevent mortgage rates from fully adjusting
, at least 
in the short run.  Another source of uncertainty concerns the embedded effects on 

equity prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar.  Some event studies of 

previous unconventional balance sheet actions point to smaller effects than 

incorporated in
to staff analysis.  Finally, the macroeconomic effects of the changes in 

asset prices are calculated using the FRB/US model, and other models would 
of 

course 
yield results that could be larger or smaller. In short, while the projections 
represent the staff™s best assessment, the effects are clearly subject to considerable 

uncertainty. 
Buying either longer
-term Treasury securities or MBS should, in principle, put 
downward pressure on longer-
term interest rates and
, so, stimulate the economy. 
Although staff models suggest that purchases of MBS have 
a somewhat smaller effect 
than Treasury purchases on most longer-
term interest rates, they have somewhat 
larger effects on mortgage rates, and when translated into estimated macroeconomic 

outcomes, the differences 
are fairly small, especially relative to the substantial 
uncertainty that surrounds such estimates.  As a result, the staff memos did not 

provide clear guidance regarding the allocation of LSAPs between purchases of 

longer-
term Treasury securities and purchases of MBS. 
Looking at your first exhibit, to illustrate the macroeconomic effects that are 
implied by the staff models, we compare a projection in which the MEP, the Maturity 

Extension Program, is continued as plannedŠ
the solid
, dark blue lineŠ
to a 
projection that assumes 
that 
the Committee instead ends the MEP and purchases $600 
billion in Treasury securities and $400 
billion in MBS by late next year
.  That™s 
labeled 
option 1 
as in the staff memo
 and it™s the dotted blue line.  In addition to 
lowering term premiums from LSAPs, this option is also assumed to put downward 

pressure on longer-
term rates by pushing off the first increase in the federal funds rate 
by about six months.  This LSAP program is projected to boost real GDP, 
lower the 

unemployment rate, and increase the inflation rate somewhat.  As a consequence, 

more rapid progress toward both of the Committee™s goals is made.  The staff 

memorandum provided prior to your last meeting concluded that the purchases under 

such a 
program would not likely lead to a deterioration in market functioning.  

Michelle will 
later 
discuss some of 
the anticipated effects of the program on the 
Federal Reserve™s balance sheet and income. 
As I noted 
before
, the estimated interest rate effect of 
an LSAP depends on the 
public™s understanding of the FOMC™s intended plans for purchases and exit.  This 

consideration is particularly important for a flow
-based
 or open-
ended program that 
continues until a certain economic outcome is achieved.  If the public understands the 

FOMC™s stopping rule and has the same forecast for the economy as the Committee, 

and the economy evolves according to those projections, then our models would 

suggest that the flow-
based LSAP is 
roughly equivalent to a stock-
based LSAP 
of the 
same ultimate size.  Of course, the economy would likely not proceed exactly in line 

with expectations, so under a flow-
based LSAP, the anticipated total amount of asset 
             
      
        
         
          
                                 purchases would 
likely 
be more state dependent and evolve as the economy evolves.  
Option 4 in the memo entitled ﬁOptions for an Additional LSAP ProgramﬂŠ 

presented here 
as the dashed red lineŠwas intended to correspond roughly to such a 
program when the economy faces an adverse shock, and, as a result, purchases end up 

at a level tha
t is higher than originally assumed. If the ultimate size of purchases in 

this case is $2 trillion, our models suggest that the net effect would be somewhat 

smaller than if, from the beginning, a $2 trillion LSAP had been implemented.  

However, a flow-
bas
ed approach, if communicated clearly to the public, also could 
boost business and consumer confidence by reducing the odds of adverse tail 

outcomes and limiting the expected variance of economic outcomes.  This confidence 

effect is not captured in the staf
f projections but could be important
.  Alternatively, if 
the 
stopping rule is not clear, and the public believed that the Committee might stop 

purchases somewhat earlier than the Committee actually intended, then the interest 

rate effect 
could be reduced relative to what our models suggest.  
However, a
s the 
public came to understand the Committee™s stopping rule, the expected size of the 

SOMA portfolio would revise up, and the interest rate effects would become larger.  

Michelle is now going to discuss the 
balance sheet projections and some of the issues 
related to the exit. 
MS. EZER. 
Thanks, Seth.  As Seth mentioned, I will be discussing the balance 
sheet and income projections described in the LSAP options memo and associated 

exit issues.
  I plan to focus on the same two LSAP options Seth discussed, though the 
memo presented several options.  Turning to the top-left panel of exhibit 2, you can 

see the path of the portfolio under a baseline scenario in which MEP is completed and 

options 1 and 4 from the memo.  Under the latter two options, the portfolio grows 

significantly as a result of the asset purchases. 
Consistent with the exit principles, we 
assume that 
6 months prior to the first increase in the target federal funds rate, 
securities are allowed to ma
ture without reinvestment, and 6 
months after that first 

increase, sales of agency securities begin. These actions normalize the size of the 

portfolio through time.  The addition of a new LSAP program extends the period of 

time between the start of asset sales and when the portfolio normalizes in size. 
For 
example, under option 1 it takes 41 months for the portfolio size to normalize after 

the initiation of MBS sales.
  This is 6 months longer compared 
with 
the MEP 
scenario. 
In terms of Federal Reserve income, cumulative remittances to the Treasury over 
the projection period are lower than in a scenario with no additional LSAP.  
The 

lower remittances reflect higher inte
rest expense and the larger capital losses from 
MBS sales. 
Looking at the top-right panel, until 2016, remittances are higher under 
the LSAP scenarios, because of the higher interest income from the larger portfolio 

and minim
al additional interest expense
.  Thereafter, income is lower as a result of 
higher interest expense and larger capital losses. 
Under option 
1, annual remittances 
are projected to bottom out near zero.  By contrast, under option 
4, remittances fall to 

zero for more than 5 years, and a 
deferred asset is created. 
Of course, income and balance sheet projections can be sensitive to interest rate 
projections, and those projections are subject to uncertainty.  
One gauge of the 
               
          
       
   
              
       
    
  
           
              interest rate risk in the portfolio is presented in the middle
-left panel. Here, we 
present the projections of Federal Reserve remittances under an assumption that 

1 year after federal funds liftoff, the federal funds rate and 10
-year Treasury yield are 
100 basis points above the baseline levels, and these higher levels 
persist for the 
remainder of the projection period.  Under all of the LSAP options shown, the higher 

interest rate paths result in a period of no remittances to the Treasury and the creation 

of a deferred asset, as shown in the middle-right panel.  Under option 4, 
remittances 

to the Treasury would cease for a considerable number of years, and a substantial 

deferred asset would be created. 
The portfolio projections highlight two implications that an LSAP may have on 
the exit strategy.
 First, as shown in the bottom panel, the level of reserves would be 
higher at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate.
 Second, in order to 
remain consistent with the existing exit principles, MBS sales would need to take 

place over a shorter period than 5 
yea
rsŠthe period currently assumed in the 
projections.  
Absent a shorter MBS sales period, or other changes to the exit strategy, 

the size of the portfolio would not normalize within 2 to 3 years of the initiation of 

asset sales as anticipated by the exit strategy principles. 
Starting with the first point, under option 
1, reserve balances will be about 
$2.3 trillion at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate
Šabout $1 
trillion 
larger than expected under the current policy
, and also $1 trillion
 larger than assumed 
in June 2011.  
While increasing the IOER rate will raise short
-term market rates by 
itself, reserve
-draining tools can help to ensure a closer connection between the rates, 

and greater use of these tools may be needed
, given the increased quantity of reserves.  
The memo entitled ﬁThe 
Effect of an 
Additional $1 Trillion LSAP on the E
xit 
Strategyﬂ discussed the status of each of the different draining tools.  However, it is 

too early to provide specific details of a drain
ing plan
, because such a plan will 
depend on how markets evolve and the lessons learned once these tools are used in 

large scale. 
Turning to the second point, the exit strategy principles themselves will not have 
to change as a result of a new LSAP. The e
xpectation
, however, 
that the size of the 
balance sheet would be normalized within 2 to 3 years of assets sales might not hold, 

depending on the size of the 
asset purchase
 program.  Under option 1, by reducing the 
period of asset sales to 
3½ years from the
 5 years assumed in making the projections, 
the portfolio size would normalize within the assumed 2 to 3 
years. 
The s
taff 
currently believes that the faster average pace of MBS sales would likely be 

manageable from a market
-functioning perspective.  
That said, reducing the sales 
period would concentrate capital losses and result in Federal Reserve remittances 

declining to zero for a few years and create a deferred asset. 
In contrast, assumptions 
associated with the exit strategy principles would need to b
e altered under a $2 trillion 
LSAP like that under option 4.  Agency sales alone would not be enough to normalize 

the size of the balance sheet within 
2 to 3 
years of the initiati
on of asset sales in this 
case. 
Moreover, sales of securities in the volume envisioned under option 4 over a 
three
-year perio
d may cause market disruptions. 
          
                       
                  
In any event, the Committee may wish to review its exit principles periodically, 
particularly if the Committee implemented a flow
-based LSAP program, where the 
ultimate size o
f purchases would be unknown.  Adjustments to the principles could 
include more heavily relying on asset sales as a tool to drain reserves, for example, by 

expanding it to include a moderate pace of Treasury security sales. Asset sales could 

also occur so
oner.  
On balance, although the current exit strategy principles remain 
valid, additional analysis will be useful to determine 
whether alternate strategies 
might prove more helpful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Seth and I will be happy to 

answer any question
s. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Of course, this is just a summary of 
a lot of work that the staff has 
been doing on all aspects of asset purchases. You have received a 
number of memos.  Also, let me just mention that a little bit later this morning we will talk about 
the consensus forecast, which gives, in more detail, the staff projections of the effect
s of 
programs of different sizes on the economy.  
Let me now open the floor in case there are any 
questions 
for staff.  President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  I appreciate all of the 
work that went into this.  It has been quite helpful to me in thinking about what is going on.  Seth 

has made 
a good summary of the uncertainties and the range and assumptions that are needed to 

get the po
int estimates. 
I want to focus on two things. 
One has to do with the assumptions about market segmentation and 
pass
-through.  In 
some sense, the FRB
/US assumes
Šas you mentioned, SethŠ
that the 
pass
-through from the 
reduction of Treasuries to corporate and mortgage-
backed securities is one
-for
-one, which 
suggests, as you alluded to, that there is more segmentation across duration than there is across 

asset classes
, in the case of the models.  So one question I have would be, suppose that actually 
there was more segmentation across asset classes than across the term structure?  In other w
ords, 
if 
5-year 
Treasuries
 were a better substitute for 10-
year 
Treasuries
 than mortgage-
backed 
securities or corporate bonds are for 10
-year securities
Šwhich is the way it is kind of structured 
in the modelŠhow would that change your analysis of these e
ffects?  That is one question. 
                           
   
       
      
          
             
  
 And the second question is, you talked about the assumptions that are made and 
the 
uncertainties, and yet what we really got
, at the end of the day, w
ere 
some point estimates. 
So if 
I had to push you and I wanted to think about standard errors on these point estimates, how big 
do you think they are truly likely to be
?  Can we tell the difference, given the uncertainties 
among these different strategies
?  W
hat 
is 
your assessment of 
that? 
So those are the two 
questions I have. 
MR. CARPENTER.  Okay. 
The first question, what if there were more segmentation 
across asset types than across 
maturit
ies
? I think pretty clearly what you would see in that case 
is that we might have an effect on Treasury yields if we are buying 
Treasurie
s, and that would 
tend to push down 
Treasury 
yields and widen the spread relative to other asset types.  And to the 
extent that it™s other interest rates that have a direct effect on economic activity, you would get a 

smaller effect.
  So I think, in principle, that™s the way it would go. 
The hard part there
, I think, 
is there has clearly got to be a little bit of that going on.  And 
the previous memo about market functioning that we sent around said we might get to the point 

where you are buying so much that you are dislocating the 
Treasury 
curve from the rest of 
market interest rates. I think we are very sensitive to that possibility, and I think the staff 

conclusion so far is that we haven™t gotten to that point.  And I think some of the other studies of 

LSAPs and how they work also point to pretty substantial spillovers to other asset classesŠ
some 

Fed studies and some academic studies.
  So I think that™s a reasonable hypothesis to maintainŠ
I think 
it™s something that we will want to worry a lot about, esp
ecially if the purchases were so 
large that they were to somehow disrupt market functioning.  But my reading so far is that we are 

not there yet
, for some of those reasons. 
             
               
      
      
             
    
   Another reason isŠespecially if you go back to some of the previous LSAPsŠ
as the 
Desk has made clear what segment of the market we are buying
, there ha
ve been some pretty 
clear adjustments in interest rates at different points along the curve
.  This
 suggests 
that the 
maintained hypothesis that we have
, that the maturity matters a lot
, is coming through in some of 
the event studies.  W
hen the Desk helped the market understand exactly what the maturity 
distribution of purchases 
was 
going to be, we saw some movements of yields at the long end 
relative to the belly of the curve that suggest t
hat people see this sort of segmentation across 
maturities.  In addition, I think some of the reaction 
to the MEP caused us to feel 
a little bit better 
about that assumption.  The movement in the short rate relative to the long rate, once you control 
for e
xpectations, seemed 
to conform reasonably well with some of the inte
rest rate models that 
we have. 
So I think the short answer is you would get a widening of spreads, and to the extent that 
Treasuries are
n™t 
the thing that matter
s for economic activity, you would get less of an effect.  
On the other hand, if you were to do mortgage-
backed securities purchases, and the same 
hypothesis came up, then presumably you™d get a bigger effect just on the MBS rate, and 

presumably mortgages a
s well.
  And so the scenario you bring up might be an argument for 
having both asset classes
Šan argument
 that we didn™t cover in the memo.  I
f there is 
this 
segmentation across asset types, then buying both 
Treasuries
 and MBS may be a good thing to 
do, because then you will be able to affect both of those 
rates
, instead of relying on the purchases 
of 
Treasuries
 to also push down mortgage and MBS yields along with it. 
MR. PLOSSER.  To interrupt just a second on that point, though, that begs the question 
about 
buying MBS
Šlet™s say, 
even if it might help the mortgage market
.  You don™t have any 
evidence on whether that pass
-through 
to corporate and other asset classes is either differential or 
            
      
      
                 
the same or less than it would be with 
Treasuries
? Are you assuming 
that other asset classes 
would follow the same amount then, in that kind of story? 
MR. CARPENTER.  Right.  So I was trying to go into the counterfactual world where we 
are assuming this asset segmentation
.  And so there, 
there are 
lots of other hypotheses.  O
ur 
models sort ofŠ
and they are empirical models, where we get the results based on actual data
Š suggest that the purchases of MBS do have the same general effect on longer-
term interest rates 
by pulling out the longer-term assets and pushing things down.  I
f we had a different model, we 
would have to confront all of those same questions that you asked, including
, if there is a 
segmentation, what sort of 
pass
-through would there be?  But the models that we have, and the 
estimation that we have done, sugge
st that we are getting more or less the same effect on longer
-term rates of MBS and Treasuries
.  I was just saying, in the alternate version of the world, 
where 
there is a segmentation, 
it might be an argument for buying two different types of assets that 
we 
didn™t discuss in the memo. 
Your second question about standard errors is a really good one, and it is hard.  There are 
lots of different models that we have coming together, and I think Dave can probably speak 

really knowledgeably about the standard errors, especially from the FRB/US model.  But there is 

layering
, model upon model, 
to try to get these effects. 
I think we feel pretty good that we know 
for sure the sign of the first derivative, which is in what direction these things would happen.  

We pr
esented a lot of results, though, for different-
sized LSAPs in the memos, as Michelle 
pointed outŠ$750 
billion
, $1 trillion, 
$2 trillion. 
I think we can™t say with any confidence that 
we know the difference between a $750 billion LSAP and a $1 trillion LS
AP.  We are pretty sure 
we know that the 
$1 trillion
 one does more, but those are so close to each other that I don™t have 
       
              
      
                      
     
     
   
         much confidence in being able to differentiate.  
It™s t
hat sort of uncertainty 
I see, b
ut I don™t 
know if you want to talk about the 
macro effects. 
MR. PLOSSER.  I™m sorry.  Just to push it just a little bit.  So rather than the difference 
between 
$750 billion 
and 
$1 trillion, let™s just take one of them, the 
$1 trillion
 one.  And you 
estimate, what was it, 62 basis points on the unempl
oyment rate after two years?  Was that it? I 
can™t remember the exact number.  Whatever that number was, can you give me a standard 
error 
on that point estimate? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I™m going to come to that directly.  
First
, just to reiterate what 
Seth s
aid, your logic is correct.  To the extent that you think 
that the 
pass
-through 
from buying 
Treasuries 
into corporate 
bond yields
, stock market prices
, the exchange rate, 
and 
things like 
that
, are 
less than in the model simulations
, you are going to get smaller results. 
Second, I agree with Seth that the 
pass
-through 
effects 
that 
we have in there
Šas we have 
been saying right from the start back in 2008, early 2009Š
are
 highly uncertain.  And as time has 
gone on, I think the one source of uncertainty that has gone down is the 
concern
 about whether 
purchases 
would have any effect
.  At least we 
now 
think they ha
ve an effect. 
But having said 
that, 
there is 
still 
much uncertainty around these estimates. 
In terms of actually coming up with a confidence interval, I can™t do that, but I c
an say 
the following qualitative things that 
I think 
are helpful. 
First, take the model that Min We
i and 
Canlin 
Li 
developed that we are mainly using for pricing the effects on Treasuries
 and MBS.  
Now, that model kicks out a standard error.  I don™t know what it is, but it does not 
have 
tight 
error bands.  There is considerable width 
to the confidence intervals.  That said, we think the 
number is reasonable.  But could the number 
be somewhat smaller or somewhat bigger?  Yes. 
One point on why 
it could be bigger is, if you go back to the first LSAP, the event studies 
                                        
          
           suggested 
the LSAP
 might have lowered 
Treasury 
yields by 100 basis points.  
In the analysis that 
Min and 
Canlin
 are doing, it™s 50.  So that™s an example, 
where they are not necessarily taking 
the highest-
side estimates. 
There are other studies that suggest that we could be getting lower effects on financial 
markets than in the FRB/US analysis.  On the other hand, 
FRB
/US ignores some things, 
such as 
the 
potential 
pass
-through to house prices
; it has no effect 
in the simulations
.  And, there 
are 
confidence effects
 that Seth alluded to.  Even if you knew what the financial effects would be, 
there would still be a subs
tantial confidence interval for the economic effects
.  I don™t have them 
off the top of my head, but we have generated confidence bands for FRB/
US 
impulse responses 
over the years.  They are a lot like 
those in other models.  They are fairly significant 
around what 
the unemployment rate 
effect 
would be.  
The effect
 could be considerably closer to zero, or it 
could be bigger.  L
et™s say that
, for 
a given LSAP, the point estimate is a half a percentage point 
on the unemployment rate after three years
Šthat™s t
rue 
for the way we are scoring 
alternative 
B. Could it be a quarter?  Yes.  A quarter 
is certainly inside the 
70 percent 
confidence interval
.  Could it be three-quarters of a percentage point? Yes.  That would be inside the 70 
percent
.  So 
that™s just sa
ying what
, I think
, everyone agrees upon: there are v
ery wide confiden
ce intervals 
on these effects. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  While I was listening to Seth™s disclaimers at the beginning, it sort of 
sounds like an Allegra ad on television [l
aughter]
: These are the risks, et cetera.  And the papers 
actually were quite good.  The paper you particularly referenced had a lot of disclaimers in it.  

And what I am interested in seeing vetted more thoroughly is the degree to which this 

compounds the complexi
ty of a
n exit when we decide to exit. 
          
          
                        
    
     It seems to me one of the virtues of, 
particularly
, ﬁThe 
Effect of an 
Additional $1 T
rillion 
LSAP 
on the E
xit 
Strategy
ﬂ was the discussion of substantial uncertainty.  There are lots of 
quotes in there that are qualified. 
It seems to me that the proponents of 
an extended LSAP would 
take a view from a signaling channel perspective that one of its benefits is that 
it is effective 
precisely because it makes it more difficult to either raise short
-term interest rates or sh
rink the 
balance sheet for some time.
  And in a way, what I am concerned aboutŠand I am interested in 
learning more
Šis the degree to which we tie the hands of our successors, or if not tieŠ
maybe 
that is too strong a wordŠwe tangle their hands, and how much 
more difficult the exit strategy 
becomes. 
It strikes me that the stronger the recovery
Šthat is, the more rapidly we achieve 
equilibrium interest rates
Šthe harder it is going to be for us to exit.  And I would like to see that 
vetted a little bit more. 
I thought the papers touched on that, particularly the paper you referred 
to, but I think it would be helpful, Mr. Chairman, if we got a better sense of what complexities 
this imposes upon exit at the right time. Just a comment. 
MR. CARPENTER.  No, that™s 
really helpful. 
MR. FISHER.  I don™t know what your take is on this. 

MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely.  We clearly have a lot of details to write down.  So if 
the Committee wanted to exit 
next week
, or something like that, we would have lots and lots and 
lots an
d lots of details to write down, none of which are we prepared to give you right now, 
because the world presumably, between now and exit, is going to change.  And so it is going to 

take some time. 
That said, I just want to leave you with one thought.  When 
we were writing these 
memos, one of the first points that we wanted to have clear in our heads before writing themŠ
all 

of the staff who were working on this, including staff at the Desk who are experts on both 
      
  
                            
      
    
           
  
financial markets as well as 
the execution of things and the staff 
at the Board
Šwas
, does 
anybody think that if we were to do another LSAP as envisioned in these memos, that when the 
Committee wants to tighten monetary policy
, the staff would not be able to follow through on 
that
?  Because I wanted to make sure that everybody was able to look in their heart of hearts and 
say, ﬁWe think that the Committee will be able to tighten policy appropriately to hit its
 dual 
mandate,ﬂ and everybody said, ﬁYes, we think we are in that situation.ﬂ How we do it is not 

perfectly clear yet
, for a variety of reasons
.  But we would have had to write a very, very 
different memo
, I think, if we really thought there was some risk to the conduct of monetary 
policy in terms of our ability to execute the exit strategy. 
MR. FISHER.  You point out in the memo that there is a learning process here, 
in terms 
of the different tools that might be used.  But I still think we should press this in our discussion 

before proceeding. 
MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely. 

MR. FISHE
R.  Yes, sir. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I 
want to follow up on one point b
ecause it also relates to what 
President Plosser was talking about.  I think, 
whether it is connected to fear that we won™t be able 

to exit or whether it is a signaling that the Committee is willing to be more accommodative 

persistently out in the future, those policy expectations 
can have a big effect 
on some of the 
results
.  Ofte
n, the way we score thingsŠand I think I threw out a half a percentage point a 
second agoŠ
doesn™t take 
into account this additional signaling effect
 about the future path of the 

funds rate t
hat 
you potentially can get.  T
here is some evidence from the even
t studies that you 
did get 
it with the first two LSAP programs
Šthat by announcing 
a program
, you are also 
sending the signal that you are going to be more willing to keep rates lower for longer. 
      
           
               
        
           
    MR. FISHER.  That™s what I was
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right. 
At least as far as the model scores it, if that™s fully 
credible, if the expected funds rate path the market has really flattens out, in principle, you get a 
nontrivial kick from that. 
MR. CARPENTER. 
The only thing to highlight, though, is the difference 
between a 
willingness to keep the interest rate lower
 for longer versus an ability 
to raise them
.  And we 
don™t currently worry about the second partŠwe don™t worry about the ability to raise interest 

rates.  But what the Committee decides to do, obviously, is about the willingness to keep interest 

rates lower
. MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Does the FRB/US model allow you to 
isolate the kind of intermediate estimates
Šthat might be credit aggregates or asset price index 
levels
Šthat fit between lower interest rates and GDP growth, so that you could actually get a 
sense of the transmission mechanism working through the model? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
You can snip cer
tain transmission mechanisms and see what it 
does to the total effect 
if you
 just zero it out.  We have done experiments like that, and what it 
shows is, roughly speaking, changing 
Treasury 
yields, if it doesn™t go out into any other asset 
prices, doesn™t do anything in the model, to a first approximation.  
What matters is that it goes 

into private long-term interest rates, like MBS and corporates; second, that it goes into 
the 
stock 

market; and, third, that it goes into exchange rates.  So you can think of 
it as 
three channels
: cost 
of capital, wealth effects, and exchange rate.
  The model says each of those is worth 
roughly a 
third of the overall effect.  So if you didn™t believe one of the channels was operating, or you 
      
                                  
  thought it was operating only half 
as effectively as it usually does, you could then scale the 
numbers down with that rough math.  And that would be approximately correct.  
But in terms of 
what it implies for bank lending, or something like that, no, the model doesn™tŠ 
MR. LOCKHART. 
It doesn™t explicitly estimate the
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It doesn™t have any explicit predictions about what happens to 
bank lending or anything like that. 
MR. LOCKHART.  So to simplify, for my purposes, the exercise assumes some kind of 
historic
al correlation between lower interest rates and economic activity. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Which may or may not prevail in this current situation. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Which may or may not prevail, with one very important 
caveat.  Because housing is at such an extraordinarily low percentage of GDP, in essence, 
that 

historical correlation has been marked down in these analyses.  Ordinarily housing is a big 

source of a kick.  In these scenarios, the direct channel on housing construction activity is worth 

hard
ly anything.  It™s a little bit, but it™s very small.  That could be right or wrong, but in the 
results that Seth was showing and 
that 
were in all the other analys
is we™ve sent you, 
there is,
 in 
that very important sense, 
an attenuation of the effectivenes
s of monetary policy, whether it™s 
conventional or unconventional right now. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to follow up on this issue 
about confidence intervals.  In 
figure
 1, there would be data uncertainty; there would be 
uncertainty about transmission channels; there would be uncertainty about models.  If you 

layered all of that together, you are going to get very wide confidence intervals.  But on 
              
          
    
   
          
              exhibit 
2, where we are
 looking at the SOMA holdings, there we can sort of mechanically map 
out, more or less, what is going to happen.  There is some uncertainty based on interest rates
, and 
so on, but 
I just want to be clear on this
: This is
 much more solid, I would say, than page 1, 
which is very uncertain and very speculative about 
what the effects might be. Is that a fair 
assessment? 
MS. EZER. 
Our portfolio projections depend importantly on the interest rate 
assumptions that were provided, so those confidence intervals will feed through into our 
projections when it comes to things like Federal Reserve income over time.
  When it comes to, 
say, the top-
left
 panel, the path of the portfolio over time, the confidence interval is probably a 
little bit smaller
, provided that the 
assumptions that we made about the timing of liftoff and the 
strategy used for exit remain constant.
  There the confidence band would be in your projections 
for prepayments on your MBS portfolio.  But since you are assuming that you are going to get 

rid o
f your holdings of agency securities over a set period of time, it is just going to change kind 
of the wiggles in how MBS declines over that period.  But we would still eliminate it over a 
five
-year period with confidence. 
MR. BULLARD.  Just one other comment, Mr. Chairman.  On exhibit 2, 
panel
 4, ﬁD
eferred 
Asset.
ﬂ  T
hat is kind of a nice term
, ﬁdeferred asset.
ﬂ As far as I know, the Committee 
has never used the deferred asset.  It strikes me as a possible political firefight to bring that into 

play.  
All 
of the scenarios here, other than 
option 1, if I™m reading this correctly, would bring the 
deferred asset into play
, with possible repercussions, I think, 
for the Federal Reserve. 
MR. CARPENTER. 
Just a small bit of clarification:  I
t has never been the case that we 
have had
, for the Federal Reserve 
System as a whole
, a deferred asset
.  It has 
been the case on 
several occasions that there has been a deferred asset for a given Reserve Bank. 
        
       
                     
     
        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think the defense in that case would be that 
the total, 
which was including the very high 
remittances
 early in the period, still would be higher than 
historical norms. 
MR. POTTER.  That™s correct. 
MR. BULLARD.  That might be a hard story to tell when the time comes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair
man
, you have a two-hander? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
  Yes.  I think the confidence intervals on interest rates are 
going to be almost proportionate to the confidence intervals on the real economy variables, 

because you are not going to know what the trajectory o
f short
-term rates is going to be or the 
shape of the yield curve. And, in fact, you are probably even more uncertain about the shape of 

the yield curve because you have never gone from purchasing all of these assets to selling all of 

these assets.  So we
 don™t really know how the market is going to react to that. 
The second thing I just want to note very briefly is a lot of this also depends on what 
monetary framework you are actually going back to.  And the presumption of the staff memo is 

that we are going back to a 
corridor system.  But you might decide, as you go through this, that 

maybe IOER works pretty well. 
And 
you might actually want to go back to a floor system that 
would allow you quite a bit more discretion in terms of how your exit actually works.  And that 

would feed into a lot of these projections.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Again, I want to thank the staff for all of the work 
you 
did to help prepare us for this meeting, including the work on LSAPs, but also work on other 
tools like IOER.  So we appreciate it very much.  
Let me turn to item 
2 and cal
l on Simon Potter 
to discuss financial developments. 
                 
                             
    
                                                                             MR. POTTER.
2 Thank you
, Mr. Chairman.  Over the course of the 
intermeeting 
period, global financial markets were dominated by three areas of focus: 
the ECB™s 
new Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) pr
ogram, fluctuating expectations for 
further policy accommodation from the FOMC, and continuing concerns over global 

growth prospects.  By the end of the 
intermeeting
 period, market perceptions of the 
effectiveness of policy measures to at least attenuate t
ail risks facing the global 
economy contributed to improved risk sentiment in financial markets, as seen in 

higher advanced economy sovereign yields and stock markets. 
I will begin with developments in U.S. interest rates, which in the Treasury 
market were moderately higher over the 
intermeeting
 period.  The upper-
left panel 
shows the decomposition of changes in nominal yields for 5- and 10-
year securities 
during key portions of the intermeeting period.  
Nominal 
Treasury yields increased 
significantly early in the period, with the 10-year yield up by more than 35 basis 

points at one point.  Most of the 
initial increase in yields was driven by improved risk 
sentiment on expectations of a forceful ECB policy respons
e, as well as by stronger
-than
-expected U.S. economic data
.  The rise in yields partially reversed following the 
release of the August FOMC minutes and continued somewhat after the Jackson Hole 

symposium.  The move lower in the 5-
year real component was co
nsistent with 
growing expectations for policy easing.  
To date, there is little evidence of worries 
of the fiscal cliff affecting pricing in the Treasury or other markets. 
At the same time, inflation compensation
, as derived from inflation
-indexed 
securities
, rose at the 5
- and 10-
year tenors
.  Higher energy prices contributed to the 
increase in inflation breakevens, particularly at shorter maturities
.  However, spot and 
forward 5
-year breakeven inflation rates remain well within recent historical ranges, 
as seen in the upper-right panel. 
As shown in the middle-left panel, dealers continue to assign the highest 
probability of a first increase in the 
target
 rate to the second half of 2015.  However, 
the distribution has continued to shift from earlier liftoff
 dates and into 2015 and 
beyond.  The survey results are broadly consistent with market-
implied measures of 
liftoff, as market prices indicate significant odds that the target rate will not be 

incre
ased until the middle of 2015. 
Immediately following the F
OMC statement on August 1, interest rates increased
, as markets had been pricing in close to even odds of an extension of the forward 

guidance
.  The middle-right panel shows an event study based on the small sample of 

forward
-guidance surprises.  Reading from left to right, the blue dots represent the 
three events in our study: 
first, the decision to maintain the late
-2014 forward 
guidance at the 
most recent 
meeting; second, the extension of the forward guidance to 

late
 2014 at the January meeting; and third, the introduction of the original mid-2013 
language in August 2011.  
The 
x-
axis measures the surprise component of these 
decisions, which we measure in months and derive from the difference between the 

announced 
forward
-guidance date and the ex
pected month of liftoff calculated from 
2 The mate
rials used by Mr. Potter are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 
      
               
  
    
       
      
                 
          
   our d
ealer surveys
.  The 
y-axis measures the change in the 10
-year Treasury yield 
after the FOMC announcement
.  Alternative methods of measuring the surprise in 
months yield broadly similar results
.  Averaging across 
these measures suggests a 
rule of thumb of roughly a 1 basis point change in the 10-
year Treasury yield for each 
month of 
forward
-guidance 
surprise
.  Of course, measuring announcement effects is 
complicated by the interaction between forward guidance and 
expectations for the 
balance sheet
, including exit, which this analysis does not consider.  In the three 
events examined
, there were no explicit changes to the balance sheet or exit 
principles. 
Turning to other domestic assets, MBS spreads to Treasuries ar
e narrower over 
the 
intermeeting
 period, as seen in your lower-
left panel
.  Investors attributed much of 
the fluctuation in MBS spreads over the period to shifting expectations for Federal 

Reserve purchases, especially in the last few days.  By contrast, t
wo other 
intermeeting developments may serve to tighten mortgage market conditions on the 

margin
.  First, the FHFA announced that it will raise guarantee fees on GSE loans by 
10 basis points starting in the fourth quarter of this year, a fee that lenders w
ill likely 
pass on to borrowers.  Second, the Treasury announced that the wind-down of the two 

GSEs™ portfolios will accelerate to a 15 percent yearly rate, from 10 percent at 

present
.  Much of the wind-down is expected to occur through paydowns, 
necessita
ting only a small portion of sales from the portfolio over the next year.  

Given this, investors do not expect the accelerated wind-downs to be disruptive to the 

MBS market, and spreads to Treasuries were little changed following the 

announcement. 
The final panel looks at how recent developments have affected 
U.S. 
risk assets
.  Overall, the stabilization in European financial markets and heightened expectations 

for domestic policy easing have supported both equity and debt markets.  
The 

S&P
 500 index rose over the intermeeting period by more than 4 percent and is 
currently at its highest level since the beginning of 2008.  
Near
-term uncertainty, as 
measured by the VIX, is near multiyear lows
.  High
-yield bond spreads have 
tightened to levels last observed in
 2011:Q3, and corporate bond issuance in July and 
August has been higher than 
over the same period last year. 
Your second exhibit turns to developments in Europe and global asset prices more 
broadly.  
The most important 
development 
in global financial markets was the 
steadily growing expectation that the ECB would announce an effective new program 

to purchase shorter-
dated peripheral sovereign debt
.  As seen in the top-
left panel, 
these expectations led to a significant narrowing of
 peripheral sovereign debt spreads 
to German yields, particularly at shorter maturities wi
thin the scope of the program. 
Many of the uncertainties regarding the new program were resolved by the ECB 
announcements last week, leading to a further narrowing of peripheral spreads, 

additional gains in European equities, and appreciation of the euro against the 
U.S. 
dollar and the Swiss franc.  
Indeed, euro
-area financial markets have exhibited a 
greater degree of stability over the 
intermeeting
 period, and investors do not appear to 
be seeking significant protection 
against 
large swings in asset prices
, as seen in the 
                                       
    
  
  
               upper-
right panel
, ﬁImplied Volatility on 
Euro
pean Equities and on the Euro-
Dollar 
Currency 
Pair
.ﬂ 
As Steve Kamin will note in his briefing, the OMT
 program has the potential to 
ease financial stresses but must be accompanied by fundamental reform measures at 

the national level
.  Changes in forward peripheral spreads to Germany appear 
consistent with this view
.  Your middle-left panel shows Spanish an
d Italian 
five
-year 
debt spreads 
relative to Germany on a 
five
-year
-forward basis
.  These forward 
five
-year spreads have come down much less than spot spreads on instruments that are 

within the maturity range
 of the ECB™s purchase program. 
In the near 
term, financial markets will face a number of uncertainties, including 
the ongoing EU and IMF review of Greek compliance with the terms of its aid 

program.  In addition, for those countries 
not already in a program, the ECB will not 
activate the OMT unless
 there is agreement on conditions for accessing fiscal support 
facilities
.  It is unclear whether Spain will take this step w
ithout renewed market 
pressure. 
Looking forward, both Spain and Italy need to ramp up debt issuance over the 
remainder of the year
, after issuing at a somewhat tepid pace in recent months
.  This 
can be seen in the middle-
right panel
.  Spanish and Italian banks have historically 
been a significant source of demand for their own sovereign™s debt.  
However, that 

source of demand has drop
ped
 off in recent months.  As shown in the bottom-
left 
panel, since the ECB™s last three
-year LTRO, Italian banks have added to their 

sovereign debt holdings at a greatly reduced pace
.  Spanish banks have actually 
brought down their holdings of sovereign debt since the first quarter, given their own 

funding difficulties.  On a more positive note, anecdotal reports suggest that asset 

managers are reducing their underweight positions on Spanish and Italian debt, and 

access to primary debt markets has improved 
for Spanish and Italian banks. 
The last panel of this exhibit focuses on global risk assets 
more 
broadly.  
The 
accommodative policy stance of many central banks has been supportive of equity 

markets in recent months, particularly in the 
United States
 and Europe.  
In contrast, 
emerging market equities have generally underperformed, reflecting investors™ views 

that th
ese regions may be experiencing a slowdown in economic activity.  China™s 
Shanghai Composite I
ndex remains at levels last seen in early 2009. 
Your final exhibit focuses on recent Desk operations and market expectations for 
additional policy actions as reported in the d
ealer 
survey.  
Over the intermeeting 
period, the Desk purchased $60 billion in longer-term Treasury securities and sold or 

allowed
 to mature without reinvestment $58.5 billion of shorter-
dated securities under 
the maturity extension program (MEP).  These operations continue to proceed 

smoothly.  In particular, the Treasury security purchase operations have recently met 

with better de
mand.  As shown in the upper-left panel, the previous trend toward 
lower coverage ratios and less favorable prices for the purchase
 operations reversed 

somewhat. 
       
              
             
  
                          
           As shown in the upper-right panel, the MEP transactions have been lengthening 
the average dura
tion of the SOMA™s Treasury holdings in line with the policy intent.  

This measure is expected to reach about 
eight 
years if the program continues through 
the end of the year, far longer than the historical range of two to three 
years.  This has 
pulled the average duration of the overall portfolio higher as well, given that the 

duration of the MBS portfolio has recently remained steady at around 
two 
years. 
The next two panels focus on the reinvestment of principal payments on the 
SOMA™s holdings of agency debt and MBS.  Over the intermeeting period, the Desk 

purchased $33 billion of MBS.  These reinvestment purchases have generally 

proceeded smoothly, with market trading volumes remaining steady and only some 

instances of specialness in the coupons being pur
chased. 
The middle-left panel shows the monthly pace of paydowns, which has 
averaged 
about $26 billion since October of last year.  Given continued low interest rates, we 

expect the paydowns to run at roughly $31 billion per month through the end of the 

year.  Such a pace would suggest that 
the 
MBS purchases resulting from the 
reinvestments of the agency paydowns would constitute about one-third of the gross 

issuance of TBA
-eligible securities. 
The middle-right panel shows the distribution for the 30-
year sector of principal 
paydowns to the MBS portfolio, as well as the coupons in which the Desk has 

reinvested.  The portfolio continues to shift into lower-coupon securities, reflecting 

the overall decline in 
rates and the decision to concentrate purchases in newly
 issued 
TBA securities that are more liquid and more directly linked to the primary rate
.  Since June, low interest rates have led to paydowns of holdings of lower-coupons 

MBS, including the 3.5 and 4 percent coupons.  
Newly issued securities also have 

longer duration than those paying down, so these purchases have extended the 

duration of the MBS portfolio. 
Your final two panels of this exhibit show results from the most recent 
dealer 
survey.  
We use
d a phone poll this Monday to update some of the answers, following 

the significant developments in Europe and the e
mployment 
report.  As seen in the 
lower
-left panel, dealers assign a 90 percent probability to any easing action being 
announced at this mee
ting
.  More specifically, dealers place very high odds of 
80 percent on a change to the rate guidance.  The median respondent also saw a 

65 percent chance of an announced increase in the size of the SOMA portfolio.  

Expectations for these policy actions fi
rmed somewhat following last Friday™s 
employment report.  The derived joint probability for an extension of the forward 

guidance and the announcement of additional asset purchases increased to 57 percent 

in this Monday™s phone survey, up from 46 percent in 
the 
dealer survey. 
The panel to the right shows the dealers™ projections for the size and distribution 
of additional asset purchases anticipated through the end of 2013, as derived from 

respondents™ expected path of the SOMA balance sheet.  Respondents ex
pect the size 
of the balance sheet to grow by around $600 billion by the end of 2013.  Median 

expectations are for an increase of $300 billion in Treasury and about $300 billion in 
             
                  
                 MBS holdings by the end of 2013.  While not asked specifically about the st
ructure of 
a potential asset purchase program, some respondents indicated in their written 

comments that they expect an open
-ended program conditioned on economic 
variables.  Mr. Chairman, this completes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions for Simon?  President 
Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Two questions for Mr. Potter.  The first has 
to do with 
the 
duration of our holdings of agency MBS.  The graph indicates the average 
duration of our current holdings is around two.  Now, would our average duration of purchases 

under what we™re going to talk about later today or tomorrow, would that be substantially larger? 

Do you have a sense of what that would be? 
MR. POTTER.  Yes.  Somewhere between four and six.  Is that right, N
ate
? MR. WUERFFEL. 
That™s correct
. MR. LACKER.  Four and six? 

MR. POTTER. 
Yes
. MR. LACKER.  Okay.  So the other question I haveŠ
I was at a conference a couple of 
weeks ago.  I believe I saw you there, Mr. Potter, andŠ 
MR. POTTER. 
Symposium
, yes
. MR. LACKER.  An economist there was arguing that the effect of our forward guidance 
occurred more via revisions in investors™ expectations about future economic conditions rather 

than a change in their views about our future reaction function, and 
becaus
e you folks have such 
rich interactions with the dealer community and you talk to them about 
this forward guidance, I 
wondered if you guys had a view as to the economist™s assertion. 
MR. POTTER. 
Those dealer economists also 
read about
 Jackson Hole.  Some of 
them 
were there
, so I think they viewed that with quite a lot of interest.  I
n the dealer survey
, some 
               
     
            
        
        
      
   people thought that the change in rate guidance might be not just a calendar type, but trying to 
distinguish it from just a pure expectation of where you expected the economy to be.  I don™t 

think it™s possible to get a very clear answer from these respondents, because I don™t think the 

FOMC
™s been completely clear on this either. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Simon, I think I heard you correctly.  So we™ve been purchasing about a 
third of the eligible TBAs, and you also mentioned that there™s a planned 
increase
 in the 
rate 
of 
GSE wind
-downs to 15 percent from the 10 percent level earlier.  I
s that likely to change? If we 
were to proc
eed with just 
$30 or $40 billion, as outlined in a
lternative 
B, would that change our 
percentage of the eligible TBA purchases, given the contraction that™s occurring among the 

agencies
? If my memory is correct, they had about $1.4 trillion.  It goes back 
to last March. 
I can™t remember the last time I looked at the numbers.  So that™s about $15 billion; 15 
percent 

translates to about $15 billion, I think, in the contraction.  I™m just curious if it 
affe
cts the 
percentage of eligible TBA that we™d be hold
ing if we were to proceed. 
MR. POTTER.  No, I don™t think so. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

MS. LOGAN. 
We™re currently purchasing about a third of gross issuance.  That number 
is going to go up to 60 to 75 percent, depending on which option the Committee chooses. 
MR. FISHER.  Right, s
o that is not affected by
Š MS. LOGAN
.  The reduction that the GSEs are doing is happening 
in more than just 
TBAs
; they™re reducing in other types of securities 
as well
.  So I would think that number is 
probably fairly small.  In terms of the total amount outstanding, we™re currently going to have 

about 18 percent of the MBS, and that would move to about 25 percent. 
       
    
   
      
             
         
        
    
   
 MR. FISHER.  Okay
, thank you.
  And just an observation, if you look at your 
panel
 5 and
, particularly
, the high-
yield 
spread 
on panel
 6, things obviously are going our way.  T
his is 
what we would like to see, as well as the equity price response.  What doesn™t seem to be going 
our wayŠand I only point it out as an offset, even though it™s a short time horizonŠ
is 
it seems 

that the 
breakeven 
inflation rates
Šwhether it™s the 
5-year
, 5-year forward
; the 
5-year
; the 
10-year, which is not on this chartŠbottomed in the spring of this year, and the slope is upward.  

We can talk
, perhaps
, later.  I don™t know if we™ve done an LSAP-
type program in a context 
of 
rising inflation expectations or 
not. I think there was at least a 
chart in the 
Teal
book that would 
indicate we haven™t done one yet under those circumstances. 
But I just point out, Mr. Chairman, that if you draw 
a line from the bottom of the 5-
year 
rate, it really bottomed out in the summer of 2011 and has been on the rise. I™m not saying it™s 

dangerous, and it may be something that we would like to encourage, 
or some at this table would 

like to encourage, but we do have rising inflation expectations.  And to say inflation expectations 

are contained
Šwe might think about how we want to phrase that as we get down to the policy 
statement of tomorrow. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I™m not sure I take the same inference.  The 5-
by-5 
is pretty 
flat and is lower than it was last year. 
MR. FISHER.  
And 
the 
5-
year? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  At
 the margin, and the 5-year is obviously being affected by 
the oil price movements. 
MR. FISHER.  And the 
10-year also is not on this chart, and then gold prices, of course, 
have increased significantly
, for those 
who 
care about that ancient relic. 
       
      
           
           
                
   
            
  
                                                     MR. POTTER. It is true that the deflation risk we can calculate is lower than it was in 
2010. MR. FISHER.  Right.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questi
ons for Simon? [No response] 
Okay.  Seeing 
none, we need to vote to ratify domestic open market operations since August.  
Without 

objection?  Okay.  Our next item is the economic and financial situation, and David Wilcox and 

his colleagues will make that
 presentation. 
MR. WILCOX.
3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think there should be a single 
summary exhibit. 
You all may be relieved to know that my prepared text includes 
1,192 words, and I do not plan to ad lib an additional 2,000 words into my delivery.  
[Laughter] 
As you can see from the upper-
left panel of the forecast summary exhibit, the 
near
-term outlook for real GDP growth in last week™s edition of the Tealbook is 
broadly similar to the one that we sent you in July.  To be sure, the July gain in real 

PCE was better than we had expected.  However, consumer sentiment
Šshown in the 
lower
-left panel
Šhas remained downbeat, job gains have been modest, and the price 
of gasoline has moved back up, all of which caused us to largely discount the 

favorable spending news.  Similarly, July shipments of capital goods were stronger 

than we had expected, but forward-looking indicators, including the continued decline 

in the capital goods orders data, as well as the subdued responses to various surveys 

on capital spending plans and business conditions, are consistent with only subdued 

near
-term increases in business outlays.  If you squint hard at the upper-
left panel, 
you will detect that we shifted a little GDP growth from the second half of this year 

into the first half of next, reflecting our assessment that the drought will depress farm 

output in the second half of this year by more than we had predicted in July. 
The one component of aggregate demand that has seemed to have been on a 
somewhat stronger trajectory relative to our expectation in the July Tealbook was net 

exports.  Even so, last week™s forecast called for GDP growth to average just 

1.8 percent through the middle of next year, about in line with our prediction for the 

growth of potential over this period. 
Since the Tealbook closed, the main piece of economic news was last Friday™s 
employment report.  In a seeming exception to Dave Stockton™s famous description 

of the usual shelf-
life of t
he staff economic forecast, our jar of mayonnaise survived 
its first 48 hours in the Mojave Desert with only relatively minor signs of spoilage.  

[Laughter]
  The red line in the bottom-right panel summarizes our effort to combine 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
          
       
                                   
      
   
 the signals from the estab
lishment and household surveys (the latter of which is not 
shown on the chart because it is so noisy compared 
with the establishment results), 

and to control for weather effects and recession-
related seasonal adjustment 
distortions.  As you can see from the downward tilt toward the end of that line, the 

estimated underlying pace of private payroll employment growth has trended lower 

over the course of this year and now 
is 
at the low end of the range that it has occupied 
during the past 2½ years.  The unempl
oyment rate unexpectedly declined 
0.2 percentage point, but like many other analysts, we have been inclined to see more 

weakness than strength in the totality of the results from the household survey, given 

that the employment measure from that survey and 
the participation rate both 
declined.  Based on our projected path for real GDP over the next several quarters, we 

continue to expect the unemployment rate to average around 8¼ percent through the 

first half of next year.  I should also note that the workweek was lower than we had 

expected, and average hourly earnings were flat
, rather than increasing slightly as we 
had expected.  In combination, these results suggest a modestly weaker trajectory for 

compensation and
, therefore,
 household spending than we had factored into the 
Tealbook. 
Two other key pieces of information released since the Tealbook were also 
weaker than expected.  In particular, vehicle assembly plans now point to a slower 

pace of motor vehicle production in the third and fourth quarters th
an we had 

projected in the Tealbook, whileŠ
as Steve will discuss shortly
Šthe latest foreign 
trade data were slightly to the soft side of our expectations in terms of the
ir implications for GDP growth. 
In all, these bits of information would cause us to shave about ¼ percentage point 
off our forecast for the pace of real GDP growth during the second half of this year, 

leaving our forecasted average growth rate for this quarter and next at an anemic 

1¼ percent. 
Turning to the medium term, we upgraded our outlook slightly relative to our July 
projection.  As Steve will discuss, the improvement, such as it is, partly reflects a 

somewhat less worrisome situation in Europe than we had previously believed.  As 

we described in the Tealbook, even after factoring in the disappointment that we think 

would ensue from an announcement of no change in the stance of monetary policy at 

the conclusion of this meeting, we judge that stock prices would remain on a slightly 

higher trajectory and the dollar would be slightly weaker than we assumed in the 

previous projection.  These small positive influences are only partly offset by the 

increase in oil prices, part of which may itself reflect the improvement in sentiment 

related to the crisis in Europe. 
The small upward revision 
to real GDP over the medium term led us to shave a 
little off of our projected path for the unemployment rate, which is shown in the top-

right panel of the exhibit.  Even by the end of next year, however, we expect no 

significant reduction in the unemploy
ment rate. As real GDP accelerates more into 
2014, the unemployment rate declines about ½ percentage point, ending that year at 

about 7½ 
percent. 
         
    
    
     
         
   
   
     
         
     
       
    
  
  Aside from the crisis in Europe, the other main concern that continues to loom 
over the domestic outlook is the fiscal cliff.  On this front, there have been no major 

developments recently, and we continue to expect none, 
at least through the 

November elections.  At this stage, I can only assure you that our decision to stand 

pat on our fiscal policy assumptions reflects no lack of concern or uncertainty on our 

part:  The fiscal cliff continues to figure prominently in our thinking as a serious 

threa
t to the still
-anemic recovery. 
Turning to the inflation outlook, the incoming data on core PCE price inflationŠ 
the 
middle
-right panel
Šhave been close to our expectations.  We continue to project 
that core inflation will hold steady at about 1½ percent through the end of 2014, 

reflecting anchored inflation expectations, a persistent margin of labor and product 

market sl
ack, and modest gains in imported goods prices. 
In response to the upward move in spot prices for crude oil since the July 
Tealbook, we have marked up our near-
term projection for headline PCE inflation
Š the middle
-left panel.  We have, however, made only small revisions to our near-
term 
food price forecast.  Although we now expect the quantity effects of the drought to be 

worse than we had forecast in July, the futures prices that we used in preparing our 

July food price projection had apparently already in
corporated almost all of the price 

effects.  Despite the upward pressure from food prices that we think will begin to 

show through around the end of this year, we expect headline inflation to step down 

slightly in the first part of next year, as the antici
pated reduction in crude oil prices 

implied by futures markets pushes down retail energy prices.  Steve will now 

continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.  In 1972, when Chinese Prime Minister Zhou Enl
ai was asked what 
he thought was the historic impact of the 
French 
Revolution, he famously answered: 
ﬁIt™s too soon to tell.ﬂ 
[Laughter] 
By those standards, assessing the implications of 
the European Central Bank™s plans to intervene in peripheral debt markets would 

seem hopelessly premature.  And yet, as Simon has described, anticipations of 

aggressive ECB action have substantially calmed European financial markets, slightly 

brightening an admittedly still
-cloudy outlook. 
As described in its announcement last week, the ECB plans to purchase sovereign 
debt on the secondary market, provided that the beneficiary governments enter into an 

arrangement with the region™s financial backstop facilities and agree to policy 

conditionality.  Although the ECB will be announcing neither a target ceiling for 

yields on peripheral debt nor the amounts it intends to purchase, it has signaled a 

more aggressive and sustained program than its earlier forays into bond markets. 
Beyond simply comforting investors that the ECB is riding to the rescue, these 
plans could ease financial stre
sses in a number of ways.  First, by lowering yields, the 

bond purchases would reduce public debt service burdens and improve fiscal 

sustainability.  Second, and as a related matter, by taking sovereign bonds out of the 

hands of private investors, ECB purchases may create room in those investors™ 

portfolios for new issues, thereby improving the governments™ access to financing.  
          
  
           
                 
   
   
         
                     
  
    Finally, the package of ECB purchases
, plus access to the regional financial backstop 
facilities
, is widely anticipated to involve less stringent conditionality, and thus less 
stigma, than the full
-blown IMF and EU rescue packages received by Greece, Ireland, 
and Portugal.  In consequence, it is more likely, though far from certain, that Spain 

and/or Italy may request financial assistance before market conditions have become 

so adverse that further financial turmoil is inevitable. 
With markets figuring in brighter prospects for official support, financial stresses 
over the next several months are likely to be less pronounced than we assumed in the 

July Tealbook, and we are anticipating that, barring further adverse shocks, European 

markets could soon begin the long, slow process of normalization.  However, we are 

still very far from being out of the woods.  In the near term, European l
eaders still 
need to work out the conditionality to be required of governments benefi
ting from the 
financial rescue facilities and ECB intervention, and that could be contentious.  

Additionally, IMF and EU officials are currently assessing the status of Gr
eece™s 
struggling adjustment programŠalthough Greece™s official creditors are expected to 

approve a much
-needed disbursement by October and postpone more difficult 
decisions until later, this is not assured, and a messy Greek exit from the euro area at 

this time could be quite dangerous. 
Taking a longer view, the ECB™s new program is not, to 
coin a phrase, a panacea. 
It can only give Europe breathing space to implement the fundamental reforms that 

will ultimately restore confidence.  If the Europeans do not make progress on the 

measures needed to achieve fiscal and financial stability
Šbudget consolidation, 
growth
-promoting structural reforms, and region-
wide banking initiatives
Šthe 
ECB™s ability to contain financial tensions will be sorely tested.  Accordin
gly, market 
confidence likely will not be fully restored until the peripheral economies prove they 

can cut their budgets, improve growth prospects, and strengthen their banksŠ
and all 

that could take a number of years. 
In consequence, economic activity in Europe is also likely to remain subdued for 
some time to come.  To be sure, the easing of financial stresses, combined with some 

data that have been less bleak than expected, have led us to project a somewhat 

shallower recession than we wrote down in the July Tealbook.  Even so, in our 

current projection, euro-area GDP continues to contract through the middle of next 

year and recovers only very weakly thereafter. 
The outlook for our other trading partners, while hardly as bleak as that for 
Europe, is nonetheless subdued.  Excluding the euro area, aggregate foreign growth 

dropped from roughly 4 percent in the first quarter to 
less than
 3 percent in the 
second, below its trend pace.  Moreover, since your last meeting, indicators such as 

PMIs and exports have ge
ner
ally come in on the soft side. 
These developments are worrisome, but considering the factors responsible for 
the slowdown, our best guess is that 
economic 
growth will bottom out in the coming 
quarters rather than deteriorate further.  The pace of 
deterioration in Europe, which 
accounts for much of the United Kingdom
™s stagnation this year, as well as the 
             
                               
              
                    slowdown in Asia™s exports, is projected to become only a little more pronounced in 

the second half of this year.  The recent weakness in U.S. growth has also weighed on 

our trading partners, but the U.S. economy should start picking up a few quarters 

down the road.  And much of Asia™s slowdown reflects the fading of the bounceback 

from Thailand™s floods and Japan™s tsunami last year.  All told, we 
anticipate that 
foreign growth outside the euro area will stay subdued at 3 percent over the remainder 

of this year.  It then picks up to 3¾ percent by 2014, as the euro area starts to recover, 

the U.S. economy picks up steam, and monetary policies around 
the world remain 

quite accommodative. 
Another factor weighing on foreign growth, especially in Asia, has been China™s 
slowdown from near double-digit rates in the past two years.  Chinese growth 

registered 7½ percent in the second quarter of this year.  With recent weak exports 

and PMIs leading us to revise down our forecast, we see growth remaining at that 

relatively subdued pace during the remainder of this year, before picking up to about 

8 percent thereafter. Under these circumstances, we continue to s
crutinize the data 
for indications of a hard landing, but we do not see any compelling signs that one is in 

the offing: 
 Retail sales growth has remained reasonably solid, housing prices have 

flattened out, and the government retains the monetary and fiscal scope to counter a 

decline in demand. 
The effect on oil prices of resurgent political tensions over Iran poses another 
threat to the global economy.  Crude oil prices have now retraced more than half of 

their decline from earlier this year, and our curre
nt projected trajectory of oil prices 
averages roughly 10 percent higher than in the July Tealbook.  A rise in oil prices of 

this magnitude should not substantially affect the foreign outlook.  By our rough 

estimates, it could reduce 
economic 
growth in the advanced economies by 
0.1 percentage point over the next year or so, while the effect on aggregate emerging 

markets growth is roughly a wash
, as gains by oil exporters offset losses by importers.  

By the same token, our inflation outlook is a bit higher i
n the near term but little 
changed further out.  However, no resolution of the problem of Iran™s nuclear 

program is in sight, and we are attuned to the risk of much steeper rises in oil prices. 
All told, considering the momentous developments taking place 
in the global 
economyŠMario Draghi™s plan to save the euro, China™s struggle to achieve a soft 

landing, and 
fluctu
ations in commodity marketsŠthe outlook for U.S. trade is, well, 
not so momentous.  In the first half of this year, notwithstanding the global slowdown 

and the rising dollar, net exports managed to eke out a 
small 
positive contribution to 
U.S. GDP growth.  We received trade data for July yesterday; both exports and 

imports fell, but the trade balance was little changed.  Accordingly, we retain o
ur 
view that for the next couple of quarters, the combination of slowing foreign growth, 

a still
-elevated dollar, and the effects of the drought on agricultural production leads 

to some moderation in export growth, and the external sector imposes a modest 
drag 
on the economy.  After that, net exports gradually shift back toward neutral, as the 

global economy picks up and European stresses subside, so that a reversal of flight-

to-safety flows allows the dollar to start depreciating.  Thanks to Mr. Draghi, th
is 
projection is based on a somewhat lower path of the dollar than in the July Tealbook, 
         
  
      
                     
   
                   
                                                         and thus a bit faster export growth and less drag from net exports.  Andreas will 

continue our presentation. 
MR. LEHNERT.
4 I™ll be discussing material from our recent 
QS report 
on financial stability 
and from an earlier memo on the effect of low interest rates.  In our 
report, the most prominent shocks we identified were an intensification of the 

European sovereign crisis and a U.S. recession, perhaps brought on by a s
uboptimal 
resolution of the ﬁfiscal cliff.ﬂ  The major vulnerabilities we highlighted were, first, 

the market™s perception that some large banks remain weak, despite substantial 

increases in capital and liquidity, which raises the likelihood of funding runs and 

increases the cost of raising capital; second, the unstable funding model of brokerŒ 

dealers
; and, third, the persistent risk of runs on money market funds. 
We have also placed increasing emphasis on vulnerabilities stemming from the 
low interest rate 
environment, and that™s what I™ll focus on today.  After all, long-
term Treasury yields haven™t been below 2.5 percent for a sustained period since 

1954, a time when the financial system was quite different. 
A low short-
term interest rate policy, given st
rained household and business 
fundamentals, is designed to improve macro performance.  The benefits arise, in part, 

from increases in asset prices and
, thus, the value of collateral held by businesses and 
households.  These increases should, in turn, enhan
ce financial stability. 
But a low 
rate environment could lead investors trying to boost yields to borrow too much, take 

on too much risk, or bid up asset prices enough to stretch valuations.  Relatedly, 

important parts of the financial system might become
 vulne
rable to a rapid rise in 
rates. 
To assess these risks, we surveyed a wide range of asset markets and financial 
institutions looking for signs of excessive valuations, greater leverage, 
or increased 

risk
-taking.  To summarize, we found little evidence that the low rate environment 
has fostered additional vulnerabilities to date: 
 Valuations for broad asset classes are 
not stretched
, and we identified only a few isolated pockets of increased 
risk
-taking. 
As shown by the top panel on your first exhibit, 
estimated term premiums 
for 
10-year Treasury yields are quite low, due in part to safe-haven demand for 

Treasuries resulting from strains in Europe.  Term 
premiums
Šand thus Treasury 
yields
Šcould increase quickly if, for example, concerns about the U.S. fis
cal situation were to intensify. 
Your next three panels cover valuations in three major U.S. asset classes: 
equities, residential real estate
, and corporate bonds.  Overall, valuations across these 
asset classes show little sign of pressure.  As shown in the middle left, stocks are not 

trading at unusually high multiples; indeed, forward price-
earnings ratios are 
generally well within their ranges over the past 20 years.  Our measure of residential 

real estate valuation, shown to the right, is near an all-
time low.  Risk premiums
 in 
4 The materials used by Mr. Lehnert are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 
       
           
                   
              
  
        
       the high-
yield corporate bond market
Šas measured by the implied forward spread far 
out in the future (the black line in the bottom-
left panel)
Šare near their average of 
the past 20 years, notwithstanding the extraordinary highs 
experience
d during the 
financial crisis. 
However, valuations of assets in narrower and less-liquid markets have shown 
signs of pressure. Issuance of so
-called leveraged loans has been robust this year.  
Moreover, there is a trend toward lighter use of loa
n covenants and increased 
leverage.  As shown to the right, average ratios of debt to earningsŠknown as a debt 

multiple
Šamong this class increased further this year, although it remains below its 
pre
-crisis levels. 
Your next exhibit considers evidence on l
everage and 
risk
-taking
.  In the 
nonfinancial sector, as shown by the pink and blue regions in the top panel, household 

and business leverage has continued the decline begun in the recession.  Government 

borrowing, by contrast, has picked up, leaving the ratio of debt held by the public to 

GDP at its highest level since W
orld W
ar II. 
As shown in the middle two panels, there are signs that, potentially, commercial 
banks are taking increased interest rate risk.  Banks have increased their holdings of 

long-
mat
urity securities. As a result, their portfolios may be more sensitive to a 
sudden rise in interest rates than they were a year ago, depending on their interest rate 

hedges.  The low interest rate environment, combined with an unlimited FDIC 

guarantee on transactions accounts, has attracted a surge of deposits to banks.  The 

ability to issue deposits at below
-market rates should benefit banks were rates to rise; 
however, we don™t have historical experience to judge the sensitivity of these new 

deposits to a rise in rates.  That said, as discussed in the Tealbook, results from a 

recent informal survey of banks suggested they did not think it was likely that 

deposits would decline rapidly when the added insurance expires.  We™re currently 

working with economists and supervisors from throughout the Federal Reserve 

System on an analysis of interest rate risk at banks and plan to include the results in 

our December report. 
Life insurance companies are vulnerable to extended periods of low interest rates, 
in part b
ecause they have a significant body of liabilities with guaranteed returns that 

exceed current yields on safe assets.  As a consequence, insurers may be feeling 

particular pressure to reach for yield by extending their exposure to duration and 

credit risk. 
Indeed, as shown in the bottom left, the average maturity of insurers™ 
bond portfolios has risen in recent years, as firms accept greater duration risk.  

However, the shift isn™t particularly dramatic, and we are working with colleagues 

here and at the F
ederal Reserve Bank of Chicago to understand the risks faced by, and 
posed by, these institutions. 
The panel to the right shows the rapid rise in assets of real estate investment 
trusts
ŠREITs
Šthat specialize in holding agency-
guaranteed mortgage
-backed 
sec
urities.  While these institutions are something of a niche player, their business 

model of funding agency MBS holdings with repo, while vulnerable to sharp rate 
            
    
                 
      
            
     
        
  
     
   
  
   
                                                   rises, has proved quite profitable in recent years, producing double-
digit returns for 
shareho
lders.  This growth is one of the clearest indications we have of the 
willingness of some investors to take on additional interest rate risk in order to earn 

higher current returns.  This willingness may be enhanced by the apparent safety of 

investing in G
SE-guaranteed securities. In terms of their systemic threat, at their 
current scale, the sudden distress of mortgage REITs would likely be painful but 

manageable for the broader financial system. 
I™ll conclude with a less quantifiable form of risk produced by the low 
interest 
rate 
environment, related to a sense that a great deal of money is sitting on the sidelines.  

Consider two examples:  First, respondents to the SCOOS report that their clients 

have significant unused borrowing capacity; and second, pr
ivate equity firms focused 
on leveraged buyouts have elevated levels of committed but uninvested capital.  
All 

of this and more amounts to ﬁdry powderﬂ that could be deployed quickly.  Thus, 

while our ongoing monitoring efforts have so far found little evi
dence that the low 
interest rate environment has led to excessive increases in leverage, asset valuation
, or 
risk
-taking, investors do have the means to rapidly shift their portfolios.  Ed Nelson 
will continue our presentation. 
MR. NELSON.
5 I will be referring to the packet 
labeled ﬁMaterial for Briefing 
on the Summary of Economic Projections.ﬂ 
As shown in the top panel of exhibit 1, under your individual assessments of 
appropriate monetary policy, you see real GDP expanding only moderately t
his year
, but you expect the pace of the recovery to pick up next year and that economic 

growth in 2014 and 2015 will be somewhat above its longer-run value.  

Correspondingly, you expect the unemployment rate, shown in the second panel, to 

stay near recent readings for the rest of the year
, before gradually declining over the 
subsequent three years.  All of you expect that the unemployment rate at the end of 

2015 will be appreciably below its present rate; nevertheless, almost all of you expect 

it to be above what you judge to be its longer-run normal level.  Turning to the 

bottom two panels, you generally expect total PCE inflation of around 1¾ percent 

over the four quarters of 2012.  For 2013 through 2015, you generally see core and 

overall inflation stayi
ng close to or slightly below your 2 percent inflation objective. 
Exhibit 2 tabulates the ranges and the central tendencies of your projections, 
along with comparisons to the June SEP and the current staff forecast.  Compared 

with your June projections, you now anticipate a slightly stronger recovery and a 

somewhat larger decline in the unemployment rate over the projection period.  Your 

inflation outlook is little changed.  The Tealbook forecastŠwhich embeds the 

assumption of no additional accommodationŠputs economic growth in 2013 and 

2014 at the lower end of your central tendency, and the unemployment rate above it; 

the 2015 forecasts, however, are within the central tendency.  The Tealbook forecast 

for inflation runs consistently below your central tendencies for 2013 to 2015. 
5 The materials used b
y Mr. Nelson are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
                   
             
     
     
       
   
      
     
               
        
          
  Exhibit 3 provides an overview of your assessments of the appropriate path for 
the federal funds rate.  As shown in the top panel, most of you think that it will not be 

appropriate to begin raising the funds rate until 2014 or later.  About two-
thirds of 
you now see firming only beginning in 2015 or 2016, compared with about one-third 

of you in June.  Four of youŠtwo fewer than in JuneŠ
now believe that economic 

conditions will warrant increasing the federal funds rate before 2014.  Two of you 

favoring a funds rate increase before 2014 cited the need to tighten policy relatively 

soon in order to prevent inflation from exceeding the Committee™s 2 
percent 

objective, and two pointed to the need to forestall financial imbalances.  Many of 

those who would not raise the funds rate until 2014 or later cited sizable output or 

unemployment gaps alongside an inflation profile unlikely to exceed 2 percent over 

the medium run. 
The bottom two panels of the exhibit provide your assessments of the app
ropriate 
target for the federal funds rate at the end of each year of the forecast period and over 

the longer run.  For the 6 participants who 
see the funds rate leaving the effective 

lower bound in 2014 
or earlier
, the median value for 
the funds rate at 
the end of 2014 
is 
1.75 percent.  The 12 participants who expect that the funds rate will not leave the 

lower bound until 2015 judge that the appropriate funds rate at the end of that year 

will be 1.6 percent or less, while the 1 
participant who sees the st
art of firming in 
2016 sees the funds rate at 75 basis points at the end of that year (not shown). 
Fourteen of you now judge that ﬁappropriate monetary policyﬂ calls for a more 
accommodative path for the federal funds rate than in your June SEP, involving 
either 
a lower target for the funds rate at the end of the initial year of firming or a shift out 

in the first year of firming.  Moreover, 11 of you indicated that appropriate policy 

calls for additional asset purchases
, at this meeting or before long. 
Exhibit 4 depicts the economic conditions that you anticipate for the year in 
which you expect the first funds rate increase. Your projected unemployment rates 

range from about 5¾ to 8 percent, with a median of 6½ percent, while your inflation 

projections 
are in a narrow range of roughly 1¾ to 2¼ percent, with a median rate of 
2 percent.  Generally, participants who expect the first funds rate increase in
 2012 or 2013 (shown by the 
blue triangle and 
white diamonds) see a higher level of 
unemployment at the time of 
the first funds rate increase
 than do those reporting later 
firming
 dates (shown by the gray circles, dark blue squares, and 
the 
gray triangle
). The final exhibit reviews your assessments of the uncertainty and risks 
surrounding your economic projections.  As shown in the top two panels in the 

column on the left, almost all of you continue to indicate that you judge the current 

level of uncertainty about GDP growth and unemployment to be higher than the 

average level over the past 20 years.  The co
rresponding panels to the right indicate 
that you continue to view the risks to GDP growth as weighted toward the downside 

and, accordingly, the risks to unemployment as weighted to the upside.  Many of you 

attributed your continued emphasis on downside growth risks to concerns about 

Europe and U.S. fiscal policy; other factors cited included uncertainty about the level 

and growth rate of potential output and the possibility of a hard landing in China.  
      
  
  
    
     
    
                                Turning to the bottom two panels, 8 of you assess the uncertainty attending your 

projections for total PCE inflation as higher, and another 10 of you see the 

uncertainty as broadly similar to the average level of uncertainty over the past 

two
 decades.  Most of you continue to see the risks to inflation, shown 
to the right, as 
broadly balanced.  Thank you.  That concludes the staff presentations. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much for your presentation.  The floor is 
open for questions.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Wilcox, the lower right-
hand panel 
displays a model estimate, and I 
was wondering what it™s an estimate of. 
MR. WILCOX. It™s a statistical exercise that tries to combine several different sources of 
information.  First and most broadly, it combines the payroll survey estimate of job gain with an 
adjusted measure from the household survey, 
where the adjustments
Š MR. LACKER.  Have been comparable. 

MR. WILCOX.  Štry to take the household measure and do about a dozen or 
15 adjustments that put it on
, as conceptually 
as possible, 
an apples
-to-apples basis with the 
establishment survey. 
The second category of information that it builds in is that we had one of our seasonal 
adjustment experts, Charlie Gilbert, take a close look at this series, specifically with a question in 

mind of trying to disc
ern effects on seasonal factors that stem from the timing of the sharp 
downdraft in employment in 2008 
and
 2009, and to advise us on the extent to which those timing 
effects may have bled into seasonal factors
, causing published estimates of seasonally adjusted 
job growth around the turn of the year to be systematically higher than they should actually be. 
The third type of information that™s built in is a regression
-based analysis of weather 
effects.  It seems like a dim memory at this point, but we had, a
s you will recall, an 
extraordinarily warm winter this year, and there was some speculation that that may have shifted 

the timing of employment.  Those weather
-related effects are pretty small, but they™re included 
           
    
                    
       
       
     here
, as well
, for the sake of completeness.  And then around all of that, what we do is just apply 
a simple 
Kalman 
filter to the resulting series in an effort to extract for you where we think all this 
statistical evidence would point in terms of what™s the best available estimate of job gain
, taking 
account of all that information that™s available to us. So it™s
, at some level
, nothing more than a 
statistical exercise to try to extract signal from noise.  On the other hand, it packs in a 
tremendous amount of information. 
MR. LACKER.  Those all sound like very useful and constructive statistical initiatives.  I 
just wondered what the target you were aiming at trying to estimate is. I mean, is it the trend or 

the current value? 
MR. WILCOX. It™s essentially a smooth
ed trend that takes account of both the 
information in the establishment survey and the household survey.  I mean, I could reiterate: 
It takes account of that
; it tries to adjust for weather and 
seasonal
Š MR. LACKER.  You™re aiming at a true measure of the cu
rrent gain
, or a true measure of 
the trend? 
MR. WILCOX.  True measure of the current gain, smoothing through 
a variety of 
sources of noise. 
MR. LACKER.  A smooth measure of the current gain.  I™m less confused now. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You™re confused at a 
higher level. President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I actually drove back from our western 
symposium this year with two geriatric dogs and other things, but I want to comment on the fact 

that driving across the s
tate of Nebraska, what
 struck me was the drought and the corn crops and 
just how dead the entire s
tate of Nebraska looked
, at least from Interstate 80. 
       
                                 You made some reference to the drought and the corn crop, and I remember reading 
somewhere
ŠI couldn™t find it in my searchingŠabout your estimated effects of the drought on 
GDP this quarter and next.  And I™d like to hear you talk a little more about what you think those 

effects were
; the ramifications of those effects, of how they bleed, in some sense, through in your 

forecast t
o your employment forecast, for example, through an Okun™s l
aw measure because 
GDP is lower
; how much impact you thought it had on the gap in the near term; and how that 
dissipates through your forecast.  Can you just walk me through those linkagesŠt
his is clearly a 
classic supply shock of 
a dr
oughtŠand how much then it feeds into other things that matter that 
we look at a lot for monetary policy? 
MR. WILCOX.  So I™ll take a first crack at it and invite my other colleagues to jump in 
with additional i
nformation.  We thought in July we had built in some quantity-
related effects
Š about $10 billion is my recollectionŠon farm output.  This time, based on USDA assessments of 

field conditionsŠ
people may be doing something a little more systematic, out walking
 in the 
fields with their clipboard and so forth to look at corn yields
; corn is one of the crops that is most 
affected
Šwe think that it™s about a $30 billion hit to real farm output this time, so substantially 
bigger than what we had built into the July projection. 
We think that that™s likely to show up mostly in a decumulation of inventories in the third 
and fourth quarters.  The way that inventory arithmetic works, the hit to GDP growth is going to 

be concentrated in the third quarter.  We™ve got the same rate of inventory decumulation built 

into the fourth quarter, but because it™s the same rate of decumulation in both quarters, the 
effect 
on GDP growth 
we™ve penciled in 
is zero in the fourth quarter.  
We also think there will be a 
small additional negative effect on agricultural exports as well, so that™s where in terms of the 

GDP accounting
Š        
       
   
                       
   
  
                    
MR. PLOSSER.  And that led to how much of a decrease in your estimate of 
GDP growth for the third quarter? 
MR. WILCOX.  About 0.8 
percent
age point o
n GDP growth
. MR. PLOSSER. 
Yes, 0.8 
percent
age point.  That™s what I thought 
I remembered. 
MR. WILCOX.  We thinkŠwe hopeŠthat™s going to be a transitory supply shock and 
that next year
, our planning assumption has been, crop yields are going to come back to normal.  
Now, there™s sort of a philosophical question about when that actually occurs.  If we were 
operating 
in annual data, it would be perfectly clear that it would happen in 2013.  
However
, the 
way that the BEA does it, and we™ve been in very close contact with them, is 
to smooth that 
through the four quarters of the calendar year, so that snap back to normal crop yields, 
basically 

at this point, of course, by assumption, occurs in the firs
t quarter. 
So we™re mimicking 
the 
BEA™s algorithm in packing in the return to a normal level of GDP in the first quarter of 2013.  

That™s not based on any pretense that anybody actually knows that that™s the way the corn plants 

are going to grow in 2013.  
That™s just the 
BEA 
methodology.  I wouldn™t have anything better to 
suggest to them if I were in their shoes. 
Now, farm proprietors™ income actually sees a much smaller effect because prices are up 
and there™s crop insurance, and so the implications for 
nominal farm income are much less 
severe than they are for real output. 
We think that there™s likely to be very little effect on 
employment because we™ve made the assumption that employers are going to smooth through 

this transitory effect.  I wouldn™t be surprised, of course, if there was some effect on things like 

farm equipment manufacturers and that sort of thing, but I think that™s going to be lost in the 

noise in terms of our ability to actually 
estimate it. 
       
                               
   
   MR. PLOSSER.  So this wouldn™t show up in 
any sense on your estimates of the 
magnitude of your output gap over the next two quarters? 
Would you raise that? 
MR. WILCOX.  M
echanically, I suspect our output gap will be a little wider over the 
second half of this year, and then it will just come back in the first quarter of 2013.  Is that right, 
Bill? 
MR. 
WASCHER
.  Yes, that™s right.  Because we tend to set potential growth on an 
annual basis, we didn™t make an explicit adjustment to the gap measures you see in the Tealbook 

for the effects of the 
drou
ght
.  I would say that in terms of when we look at Okun™s l
aw relationships and thinking about the path of the unemployment rate, 
we did take out the effect of 

the drought from potential in that equation.  So we didn™t want the drought to affect the 

unempl
oyment rate forecast. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Ye
s, that™s kind of what I was trying to get at.  Okay.  Thank you very 
much. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  One minor place it might show up, because we didn™t do the 
adjustment, would be in the Tealbook 
B rules thing. It™s pretty small, but the 
rules
 would 
respond to that. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Did I just understand correctly that you removed the effect of the 
drought on the gap, the unemployment rate gap? 
MR. WILCOX.  In our Okun™s l
aw analysis, in setting the unemployment rate. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It will bounce right back. 

MR. WILCOX.  I™m sorry? 
                           
               
    VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The effects are just going to go away in two quarters. 
MR. WILCOX. It is a transitory effect.  The fu
nds rate is constrained at zero.  So it 
doesn™t have any implication for the funds rate.  And in terms of calibrating the response of the 

unemployment rate to the GDP gap, we sterilized the GDP gap from transitory dro
ught
-related 
effects on GDP. 
MR. LACKER
.  Okay.  So let me just ask the question for which 
this is most germane
Š do inflation dynamics depend on this adjustment? 
MR. WILCOX. 
I think we™re talking about splitting a micron here, butŠ 
MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, but I™m just very curious about the principle here. 
MR. WILCOX.  The methodology is intended precisely to seal off the implications for 
core inflation.  I should say, of course, 
the first
-order implication for inflation is through food 
prices. 
MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, right, righ
t. MR. WILCOX.  That has been allowed to feed through. 

MR. LACKER.  Right.  But in terms of the gap™s effect on inflation, you want to sterilize 
it from the effect that the dr
ought is going to have on real output and employment in a 
year 
or 
two. 
MR. WILCOX
.  Correct, y
es. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question for Andreas.  
On exhibit 2, you have 
this chart that looks at nonfinancial sector credit to GDP.  
I keep staring at it, and I am still trying 
to figure out what implications I™m supposed to draw from it.  The secular uptrend from 1956, at 
          
      
              
       
                   
best
, flattens out for a while
.  So the first question is what implication do you think we were 
supposed to draw from this
?  And, second, if you looked at a char
t of 
nonfin
ancial sector assets 
to GDP, would that also show 
mostly a secular 
uptrend?  And then, how do you put those two 
together? 
MR. LEHNERT.  I think the
re are
 key macro questions that are impli
cated 
by your 
question, which I™m not going to touch, but 
just from a financial stability perspective, at the very 
highest level
, in some sense, financial stability concerns in a low-
rate environment arise when 
you see people and businesses borrowing more.  This picture was just supposed to 
be an easy 
way 
to portray the fact that we™re not seeing households and businesses borrowing more. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Right.  We could 
also interpret it as, gee, credit to GDP 
is still really, really high
, and
, therefore, that means bad things.  That is what I was sort of 
getting 
at. 
So you don™t take a negative signal away at all from the total level of credit to GDP is still 
high? 
MR. LEHNERT.  Ye
s, okay.  I treated that as a separate question.  So then there™s a 
question, are we approaching some kind of 
fiscal moment
, some sort of S
argent
Wallace 
moment, where the global carrying capacity for U.S. sovereign obligations is being reached? 

That™s something that we highlighted in our report as a potential risk.  
If there™s 
a material 
worsening in the fiscal outlook, 
or if 
there™s some really ugly resolution to the debt ceiling 

negotiations in January and so forth, all those things could have negative implications for future 

stability. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But the total level here, if you add household, business, 
and government together, that™s not a good sign. 
MR. LEHNERT.  If you look across countr
ies
, you would see a lot of different 
levels. 
           
          
   
  
      
    
   
           
    
     
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
They™re 
all over the place. 
MR. LEHNERT
.  Exactly.  So I don™t know why Denmark is one and Japan i
s a different 
one, but we can just judge the 
United States
 by its own history. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  First, I wanted to thank Andreas for a very good summary
, very helpful 
graphics
, and so on.  We™re in the middle of doing our 
SABR
 analysis for banks, and one of the 
positive attributes we have noticed is that we seem to be seeing a brighter picture for the average 

bank.  For example, the ones that we rate one or two probably are performing 
the best that we™ve 
seen in terms of the percentage of potential 
downgrades since December of 2006.  So I think 
that™s one positive aspect that wasn™t included.  I™m not being critical, but when you look at your 

second panel of long-
term securities held by comm
ercial banks and so on, there seems to be a 
healthier tenor, and we™re not done with the analysis yet, but I just wanted to point that out. 
With regard to seasonality, I wanted to ask Dave Wilcox about the August employment 
numbers; I think I™m correct in 
saying that that is a number that gets revised more frequently 

than others.  I think 17 of the last 22 years, i
t™s been revised, and if I remember correctly, last 
year it went from zero to 44,000 to 104,000, and I assume we™re taking account of the fact th
at 
that is often a highly unreliable number.  Am I correct? 
MR. WILCOX.  We™re taking account of the fact that it is the best possible information, 
and we don™t confuse it with truth, absolutely.  [Laughter] 
MR. FISHER.  So we assume it gets revised more o
ften than not? 
MR. WILCOX. 
Yes. 
           
          
   
              
             
  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
The BLS has a 
confidence intervalŠ
the 90 percent 
confidence 
interval is 
plus or minus 100,000.  So that gives you an idea. 
MR. WILCOX.  It™s a sample-
based estimate. It is based on a very large 
sample of 
employers. It™s a universal sample of large employers and a statistically drawn probability 
sample of medium an
d smaller employers, but there are a host of issues associated with 
constructing that number, including the fact that not everybody th
at ultimately will report
, 
reports in the first wave of responses and that seasonal adjustment, as my remarks described 

earlier, involves 
a great deal of science but some art as well.
  So I don™t have any specific reason 
for doubting or casting aspersions on the August number, but you™re absolutely correct that 

month in and month out, that™s a number that is subject to two-sided revision. 
MR. FISHER.  And then lastly, just listening to Steve Kamin, this is perplexing about oil 
and gas 
prices
, and particular
ly prices at the pump.  There may be some seasonality in terms of 
the 
switchover 
that
 occurs, but given the weaker economy, which I think almost all of our 
forecasts have envisioned, and given the production that™s taking place stateside, even 

accounting f
or the storm that took place in the Gulf, it just seems odd that we might expect oil 
prices to increase rather than hold level or decrease.
  And f
or what it™s worth, the ﬁoiliesﬂ that I 
speak to
Šfrom the independents to Tillerson at Exxon and so onŠ
their expectation is that this 
has been a bit of a bulge, and that it™s more likely to settle down and actually decrease somewhat.  

For what it™s 
worth
Šand I always emphasize that because Mr. Tarullo insists that I do so when I 
talk about my anecdotal evidence
ŠI just wanted to pass that on. 
MR. KAMIN
.  Thank you. 
Just to be clear, our baseline forecast for crude oil prices in 
the markets is, indeed, to decline over time from the current level. 
MR. FISHER.  It wasn™t clear the way you presented it.  So I wanted 
to add that. 
      
          
                     
    
  
   
    
   MR. KAMIN
.  Yes.  So just to clarify, what I was alluding to was future upside risks that 
could take place if geopolitical problems in the Middle East became more pronounced than they 
are now. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to come back to the financial 
stability handout, exhibit 2, 
chart
 1, which is ﬁN
onfin
ancial 
Sector 
Credit
-to-GDP Ratio.
ﬂ In 
answer to the earlier question, you said 
that the cross
-country evidence on this was all over the 
map, and that does not gibe with what I understood the cross-country evidence to be, which was 

that this line is basically trending up across the developed economies.  S
o it looks very similar 
actua
lly. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Sorry. I meant the cross-country evidence on the level.  I thought that 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley was asking, is 2.5 a magic number? I mean, this number is much bigger 
in some countries and much smaller in other countries. 
MR. BULLARD.  Oka
y, but the picture would look the same. 
MR. LEHNERT. 
Yes. 
MR. BULLARD. 
It has always been trending up, I guess.  The developed world has 
always been trending up, 
is that right? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
The tricky part about this is if you have a secular trend 
of more intermediation, then this is going to be an upward-trending number, and so the degree of 

intermediation in a financial system really is important in terms of what 
number you 
get. 
               
         
              
    
              MR. BULLARD.  When people showed this picture to me over the year
s, I always said, 
well, this was 
financial market deepening
, and 
good things are happening in the 
intermediation 
sector
.  It didn™t pan out so well later. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Well, and presumably by analogy, 
then
, the fact that it™s 
now falling 
for the household and business sectors 
isŠ MR. BULLARD.  Y
es.  Okay, thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I just 
wanted to make a comment on the 
financial stability report. I continue to find a lot of value in this, and I think particularly as we 

look at these trends 
in a low interest rate environment, I would take no exception to the 
conclusion that right now imbalances are not obvious.  But just thinking back to how we thought 

about land values in the 1980s, in the late 1990s and early 2000s, as we watched banks begin to 

concentrate in commercial real estate and even some of the subprime exposures, the point at 

whi
ch to know when to take signal from some of those things is very difficult, notwithstanding 
supervisors and others 
looking at them.
  So I think as you continue to monitor this, as we get into 
December and beyond
, looking at where these trends are going 
wil
l be 
very important. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any other questions for our colleagues? 
[No 
response]  Okay.  Seeing none, on the agenda, we have an opportunity for participants who want 

to raise questions or issues related to financial stability
.  And Vice Chairman
, if you™d like to 
start off
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen and I were in B
asel 
over 
the weekend, and I have to say that there was a 
pretty strong sense of unanimity that what the 

ECB did was essentially the best that t
hey could accomplish, given the various constraints under 
                              
   
                 
  
 which 
they were 
operating.  The fact that the purchases could be unlimited means that the 
program has the potential for actually being an effective backstop, and the fact that the ECB will 
be pari p
assu 
with other bondholders is important because it really will reduce the pressures on 
private holders.  
So in effect, 
there may be private holders, if they view this as credible, who will 
actually want to invest in these sovereign instruments for a carry trade because the yield 
curves 

in these countries, 
of course
, are very, very steep. 
There™s also a bit of carrot now to incent proper actions by the government.  So if you do 
the right thing, we will intervene and we will hold down your debt service cost.  And I don™t 

think th
ere was that carrot before
, so I think that™s pretty significant.  I think that the ECB has 

essent
ially put on the table something that could take the risk of an interest rate-debt service-
fiscal deficit spiral a bit off the table as long as the countries do the right thing.
  And in addition, 
if these purchases do, in fact, materialize, I think this does push you in the direction toward 

further fiscal union.  After all, the ECB is backstopped by 
the entire 
euro zone, so such purchases 
will increase the joint and several nature of the union.
  And finally, I thought the other thing that 
was noteworthy abo
ut the ECB action was that it was a 22 to 
1 vote, with only 
Weidmann
 of the 
Bundesbank dissenting.  Given the fact that the German political leadership, 
at least for now
, seems to be supporting the ECB actions, this means that the Bundesbank™s opposition i
s somewhat marginalized at this point. 
So that™s the good news. 
Despite this, I don™t think we should kid ourselves.  I think the situation remains very 
tenuous despite the ECB™s supports.  I™d be, probably, slightly darker than Steve™s comments on 

this.
  Several issues worth highlighting: 
First, the ECB program would only activate if the 
countries actually negotiate an MOU with the 
euro group, and already we™re hearing signs 
that 
Spain seems to be reluctant or slow in terms of pursuing it.  In fact, the Spanish may decide that 
                       
         
       
            the backstop might be e
ffect
ive even if they don™t seek an MOU.  That seems like a highly risky 
strategy, but it is something that they might decide to do.
  Second, the program obviously will 
only continue if they stay on the progra
m. And, third, it™s going to take a while for this all to be 
implemented because the MOU has to be negotiated with the e
uro group
, and all of the finance 
ministers have to agree, and several parliaments actually have to approve the MOU.  So this idea 
that this is going to be happening very, very quicklyŠ
I think the market is probably a little bit 
ahead of itself in terms of how quick
ly this will come into play. 
Other issues
Šthe 
ECB program will not necessarily crowd in investors, because it™s not 
clear how long this is going to last.  So you might buy things, but you still have quite a bit of 

risk.  
You still have a very bad feedback 
loop from the austerity programs to the economy, to 
fiscal performance
, and
 the state of the banking system.  This doesn™t take any of that off the 
table, and there™s still no road map as to where we™re actually going in terms of the ultimate 

destination
:  What does greater fiscal union in Europe look like? 
So this is a very important 
thing that the ECB has done.  I think they did the best that they could possibly do, and the good 

thing is they put the problem back in the lap of the governments, 
where it b
elongs.  They have 
done what they can do now, and now it™s up to the governments to decide, both in the core and in 

the periphery, if 
they™re going to go along. 
The basic model
, though, of this whole situation hasn™t changed.  Countries have to show 
they™r
e on a sustainable path to regain market access.  The core countries are unwilling to be 
explicit about the level of support because of 
fears that this will undermine the effort.  The 
constitutional court decision in Germany today, which was actually mostly positive, affirmed 

that the German commitment is limited to 
•190 billionŠthat™s it, and so that™s sort of 
significant. 
            
     
          
              
  
   
     
 I think the unwillingness of the German Constitutional C
ourt to be explicit does create 
uncertainty that makes progress more difficult.
  So we do still have a long way to go, and we 
don™t have big, solid backstops to absorb shocks or support confiden
ce.  The ESM
ŒEFSF resources are
 still very much too small to credibly backstop Spain and Italy, and the ECB support 
may be too uncertain as t
o its sustainability.  So it™s progress, but there a
re still a lot of questions 
on the table. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you for the financial stability report.  Like President George, 
I do appreciate the monitoring that you™re doing in this area.  I just had two quick questions.  

They both relate to money market funds.  We™ve had an SEC proposal that wasn™t proposed, and 

I was wondering about your perspective looking at Europe, 
where there™s more than
 $1 trillion of 
money market funds 
and 
they have a mix of floating and fixed NAVs.  I don™t know how much 
time you spent looking at the European money market funds, but I™d be interested in your 

perspective on the industry™s concern with the floating NAV, which se
ems to have been 
successful in stopping forward movement.  And then the second question is, given that they have 

both floating and fixed NAVs in Europe, and the deposit rate went down to zero, is there 

anything to infer about interest on excess reserves fr
om the European money market fund 
experience with the deposit rate going to zero
? MR. LEHNERT. 
Are
 those questions you™d like me to answer? 
[Laughter] 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If not here, at another time. 

MR. LEHNERT.  Very, very briefly, and I certainly don™t approach your expertise in this 
area, we™ve long maintained that the redemption of par, what you call the fixed NAV, is useful in 

certain circumstances.  There are certain elements of the U.S. tax cod
e and other things that 
             
    
     
        
  
   
          
     
     
                                                                 make it useful
.  But basically
, at the end of the day, it™s just a safe place to put your money
, and 
if 
it floats up and down a bit, it™s not the end of the world.  And, of course, the European 
experience highlights that, although p
resumably their tax treatment might be slightly different. 

Then what™s happened to European money markets since the deposit rate went to zero? It
™s maybe still a little early to tell what the long
-run effects are, but the initial wave of reports is that 
there hasn™t been an implosion of the money markets. 
MR. POTTER.  One fund closed.  The Bank of AmericaŒMerrill Lynch fund closed. 

MS. LIANG
.  I guess I would just add that even at current rates, the proportion of U.S. 
funds that are waiving fees is really
 quite high, so the implications of further reductions in 
money fund rates could have effects.  S
ome ballpark estimates
Šthey are not precise
Šis 
that 
about 70 percent of U.S. funds are waiving their fees at this pointŠthat™s a pretty big number. 
CHAIRMAN BE
RNANKE.  Okay.  Why don™t we take a break for lunch?  When we 
come back, I™ll talk briefly about the experimental consensus forecast, and then we™ll go to the 

economic go
-round.  Why don™t we reconvene at 1 o™clock?
 [Lunch recess] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
6 Why
 don™t we 
re-commence?  Please feel free to finish 
your fruit or your cookie. I™ll provide the entertainment here.  [Laughter] 
I™d like to talk for just 
a few minutes about 
the 
latest iteration of the experimental consensus forecast.  You have a 
handout 
with that title. It proceeded in the same way as in previous iterations
:  The staff sent out 
a preliminary Tealbook forecast about a week in advance and 
received your comments. We also 

had the benefit 
this 
time of having the SEP.  So using all that, 
we came up with the forecast 
that™s shown in table 1 on page 1, and which is diagrammed in exhibit 1 on page 4. 
6 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
                  
           
      
    
  
      Like the Tealbook, this forecast or projection is conditioned on no change in policy.  That 
is, it™s 
conditioned on the August policies of continuing the MEP and late 2014 guidance.  
Generally speak
ing, the data are quite similar to 
the 
JulyŒAugust consensus, which is shown 
immediately below.  One exception is the 2013 real GDP forecast on the very first line, 
2.2 percent, which is a little bit weaker.  That was not inconsistent with the comments that came 

on the first draft
; most people either saw the near term as being a bit weaker or about the same
.  But I want to come back to that number in a moment.  The unemployment and inflation numbers 

are pretty similar, and if you care to look at the figure, you™ll see that the trajectories are very 

similar obviously, particularly relative to the standard errors. 
Like last time
, we also looked at the consensus forecast under alternative policy 
assumptions, and that™s given in table 3 on page 3.  Under each variable, the first line, the status 

quo is, again, the same as the consensus forecast in t
able 1.  That™s the forecast assuming the 
August policies continue.  The subsequent lines include, first, a chan
ge in the guidance to 
mid-2015, so simply 
a mechanical moving out of the interest rate path to mid-2015, and then 
subsequent 
additions of 
a $750 billion or $1 trillion LSAP program.  So that gives the 
alternative
s.  The differences are consistent with the 
FRB
/US analysis
; I™ll come back to that 
point as well.
  And 
exhibit
 2 shows the paths for the federal funds rate, the unemployment 
rate, 
and inflation under optimal control, under the no-
policy
-change consensus forecast in red, and 
then the alternative policies provided in t
able 3. 
Now, this time an issue came up
, which was less of a concern last time, but 
it raises an 
important question that I think the subcommittee is going to have to look at, which is that, of 

course, the SEP is conditional on each person™s view of optimal monetary policy.  And in this 

case, if you turn to table 2, which shows median forecasts in the September SEP, you™ll see the 
        
           
     
    
  
     
    
      SEP is broken into two categories
: all participants and participants who assume further easing. 
A major
ity of people submitted a forecast in which they assumed that the guidance would be 
advanced to 2015 and that we would undertake additional asset purchases. 
So the SEP submissions actually assume that change in policy.  So then the question is, 
how do you get from those SEP projections back to the no-policy-
change baseline?
  And what 
the staff proposed, and what they did, 
was basically they took these policy differentials that are 
in t
able 3
, and they subtracted from the SEP results to get the baseline.  An
d to the extent that 
those differentials are not accurate or are different from what people expect, then that will, of 

course, create some noise in the baseline forecast. 
So I raise this for a couple of reasons.  The first is that we need to think aboutŠ
and we 
talked about this last time
Šwhether the consensus forecast we would want to release would be 
the pre-
meeting status quo policy forecast
ŠI think President Lockhart suggested that last time
Š or the postmeeting inclusive
-of-the-action forecast, or both.  We could consider both
; I think we 
need to discuss that.  If we do both, then we will have to figure out how to make sure people are 

comfortable with both the before and the after, if you see what I™m saying. 
For this meeting, I think it will not 
be 
very m
uch of a problem.  What I had proposed to 
do is, as was given to you earlier on, in 
item
 5 after the policy decision tomorrow, I will ask you 

whether you are comfortable with the consensus forecast inclusive of the policy action.  And if 

we do take policy 
action, then this whole issue will be irrelevant because we™ll be looking at the 
policies assuming 
the further easing
Šat least for those participants who submitted that. 
But I 
just want to flag this point and note that we are planning a discussion in October of this whole 

project, and certainly one of the issues we™ll want to discuss is whether or not we want to look at 

ex ante, ex post
, or both forecasts, and how we would best extract that information.  So, again, 
                   
               
         
    tomorrow after the policy decision, I™ll ask you if you are comfortable with the consensus 
forecast, including whatever policy decisions we m
ake; are 
comfortable, with reservations; or 
have a 
very 
different view.  And 
I™ll 
ask you
, if you have a different view, 
to briefly state 
what 
that 
difference is.
  Any questions or comments? Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
You have this issue that the SEP has some people 
who 
have no change in policy; others have changes in policy.  That™s going to still be an outstanding 

issue going forward.  Do you have any thoughts on how we wouldŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that™s what I™m raising
Šwe have to figure out how to 
deal with that
.  One possibility would be to specifyŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  A, B
, and C? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, ye
sŠI suppose.  If we™re going to do the ex ante, 
before
-meeting projection, then everybody would be asked to make a projection conditional on 
the policy prior to the meeting, and the forecast could be used to say, 
ﬁWe thought this was 
unsatisfactory.  That™s why we took the action we did today.
ﬂ  Alternatively, we could ask for a 

forecast conditional on one or more policy actions.  But that™s an issue that 
this particular 
exercise has made clear, and I™m just flagging it for discussion by the subcommittee. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It™s interesting to see the difference that people submit in 
terms of the policy, because you actually find out what people think 
about how 
efficacious the 
policy is
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, of course.  
That™s right.  That™s certainly one of the 
benefits of doing that.  But everything that we are considering here also has the cost of 

multiplying the number of projections and forecasts we™re asking people to do, and that™s 

something we need to take into account.  
President Lacker. 
       
              
         
           
          
MR. LACKER.  You mentioned parts of the consensus forecast process.  We™re asked to 
provide a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, and I™d urge the staff and all of us to give 
some thought to what that ought to mean.  As I read the instructions, I thought of f
our different 
interpretations of that.  You take as a given that what we™re trying to do in writing down a 

forecast is 
to write
 down the mean of a joint distribution of the economy and policy.  Well, if you 
ask us to submit a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, are you asking us to replace our 

reaction function with one that™s fixed at that path unchangingly, 
and averaging over that? 
What 
do all 
of 
the shocks have to be? 
What™s the most likely outcome that delivers that as the policy 
reaction
Šwhat
 economy is weak enough to justify that policy?  That™s a different question.  Or, 
do we take 
our reaction function and add-
factor it so that it delivers that policy 
as a mean? 
There™s a bunch of different ways you can think of doing that, but we ought to be precise about 

it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course
Šwe™ll have to be precise.  These are 
complexities. 
One possibility would be to have everybody, again, assume appropriate monetary 
policy and 
deliver that joint distribution 
that you™re describing; and then, 
try to see if th
ere™s a 
center of gravity 
of that, which looks like the consensus; describe that consensus; and then 
describe those wh
o differ and qualitatively how they differ.  So that would be one approach.  
Another approach could be, for example, to ask people to use a specific reaction function or to 

specify their own reaction function.  
President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. 
Yes
Šthank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I like the idea
, in principle, 
of having a consensus forecast based on status quo policy and then a consensus forecast based on 

the policy action.  I think, though, that 
in practice
, the latter is going to be very challenging
, because you could easily imagine that the Committee could come up with a choice of a policy 
            
  
     
                 
    
action that they had not considered ex ante.  And then it becomes very difficult to know how the 
timing would work and to 
get the logistics to work. 
CHAIRMAN BERNA
NKE.  No, absolutely.  And again, I think Governor Yellen™s 
subcommittee will solve these problems for us [
laughter] and bring that to us in October.  
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Let me just reiterate on this. I do think that the market expectation o
f the Committee™s policy as of a certain date, which encompasses all aspects of monetary policy, is 

a fixed point that we could rally around.  Everyone c
an give their prognostication based on that.  
That would give us just one exercise to do.  Usually the 
market ex
pectation is not a long way off.  
It might be somewhat off, but it™s not a long way off, and it would simplify the exercise in my 

mind and would keep it clear
er what we™re 
doing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s, of course, what the British and some others do. 

MR. BULLARD.  Ye
s. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Does that address President Lacker™s concerns?  I wouldn™t have thought 
so. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not exactly.  Only if it™s approximately 
right
. MR. EVANS. 
Yes
Šright. 
CHAIRMAN BERN
ANKE.  Anybody else?  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  Narayana made the point I was going to make. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments or questions? 
Again, we will be 
discussing this at the next meeting.
  President Evans. 
             
    
                    
   
   
        
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a question 
that™s a little bit different
? I
t was triggered by 
some comments that President Fisher made earlier in asking questions, where he alluded to the 
fact that some people around the table would be, however you put it, more accepting of a high
er 
inflation rat
e than others, or whatever.  And in exhibit 2 on page 5, this question comes to my 

mind, which is, 
there is an optimal control path that is shown that has inflation rising to
ŠI think 
it™s 2.3 percent, 
if it™s co
nsistent with previous Tealbook-
style analyse
s. I personally don™t see 
anything in this path that™s inconsistent with our long
er-run strategic approach that we adopted in 
January, and I just wonder if that™s the sense of the Committee or if there™s an important 

divergence of opinion there, which seems to be one of the points that President Fisher might 

have been raising. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we are clear that our objective
s are
Šthink of a 
quadratic objective function.  They™re symmetrical.  The
re is an 
increasing marginal cost 
of being away from each objective. 
We have a balanced approach, but people w
ill have different 
models of the economy, and they™ll have different weights in their objective functions.  So this 
is 
obviously not a purely value-fee projection.  
President Bullar
d. MR. BULLARD. Is 
exhibit 2 something that would be distributed as part of the 
consensus 
forecast
? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, nothing has been decided, but I would
n™t 
imagine 
we would want to do all of those things. 
MR. BULLARD.  So this is just an internal document, 
like the ones we always use. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. EVANS.  I wasn™t asking a question about communications.  I was asking more a 
question about how we interpret our long
er-run strategic document, 
because at various times
, we 
          
          
                
    
  make diffe
rent comments about these types of outcomes, and it strikes me that there™s less 
agreement on that particular observation than sometimes is given by the words that we use. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I™ve said in press conferences that it™s a symmetric 
objective a
nd we have a balanced approach, and so on.  
Anyone else? 
[No response] 
All right. 
Now we come to the main event. Let™s start ou
r economic go-round with President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Intermeeting data
, I think, 
have done little to 
alter the economic picture.  We
™re in a period of sluggish economic growth, clearly.  
Our Fifth 
District survey measures, which fell sharply in July, 
have 
bounced back to neutral readings now, 
and the tenor of our anecdotal reports has been middling of late, consistent with reports we™
ve 
been hearing since the spring.  While activity is weak, we
™re not seeing any signs in our D
istrict 
of a dramatic slowdown around the cornerŠ
or a dramatic pickup
, for that matter. 
I thought it was appropriate, Mr. Chairman, that at our last meeting you took a longer-
term perspective by focusing on economic growth over the entire recovery.  As you noted, real 

GDP growth has averaged around 2 percent since the recovery began.  I think 2.2 percent is the 

pre
cise number.  We keep seeing swings in growth every couple of quarters around that average.  
So it mak
es sense to focus on the longer-run path around which we™re fluctuating, rather than 
just the last quarter or two.
  At our last meeting, Mr. Chairman, you talked about why growth 
was so low, and you discussed the spider charts put together by Board economists Greg Howard, 

Robert Martin, and Beth Anne Wilson.  I believe they refer to them as butterfly charts, but I™m 

not taking a stand on insects here.  
The 
main purpose of their paper was to show that advanced 

economies recover as rapidly from banking and financial crises as they do from other recessions, 

and I thought they did a pretty convincing job of that.  
Their charts also show that the current 

recovery
 in U.S. GDP tracks quite closely the typical advanced economy recovery from banking 
        
                                        and financial crises
, as well as the typical advanced economy recovery from housing slumps.  
The message I take away from their work is that we shouldn™t have expected to do much better 
than what we™ve experienced, and I think that™
s consistent with the message from some other 
research along the same lines.
  Now, the authors don™t focus on the notion of a gap, however.  
And for many people right now, the motivation for furt
her stimulus is that the relevant gap is 
quite large. 
I was quite pleased to see the memo from Bruce Fallick and Jeremy R
udd on this subject.  
It™s 
a helpful, well-organized description of how the staff thinks about and estimates economic 
slack
Šlays it out
 quite clearly.  And I think this memo should help clarify our mutual 
understanding going forward. 
But I
™d like to make a suggestion or two for further clarifying our 
discussions.  My suggestion is that we distinguish carefully between two distinct concep
tual 

notions of slack.  One concept is defined by the number to which the unemployment rate would 

converge in the future in the absence of unanticipated shocks and under appropriate monetary 

policy.  This is essentially what 
we™ve referred to as the 
ﬁlonger-run normal rate of 

unemployment.ﬂ I think that™s what we called it in our consensus statement in January.  T
hat™s a 
fine term for it.
  When people refer to sustainable employment, this is the concept I think of
:  what the economy is going to converge to 
several years from now, after the current shocks we
™ve 
experienced have dissipated and
, under appropriate policy, we get back to some trend with no 
shocksŠ
the mean forecast out there.
  Now, this number probably doesn™t vary much over time 
because
, by defi
nition
, the effect of current shocks has faded out by the time the economy 
converges to this number.  In fact, this number might be close to constant over time, or it may 

vary only with some slow-moving and predictable things, 
such as
 the demographic compo
sition 
of the labor force and the like.  So I think when you look at a construct like the NAIRU, the non-
              
      
                              
 accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, it
™s constructed with this notion in mind.  I™
ll come 
back to 
the 
NAIRU in a minute. 
The second concept of 
economic slack
, which I think we should distinguish from this 
first one
, is based on the reference level of the unemployment rate 
with which it is most 
appropriate to compare the current unemployment rate for the purposes of assessing current 
monetary pol
icy.
  Equivalently, one can think of this just as well in terms of the reference level 
for output 
with
 which it™s most appropriate to compare current output for monetary policy 
purposes.  
This is sometimes referred to as the 
ﬁnatural rate,
ﬂ although some writers refer to this 
as the 
ﬁefficient rate
ﬂ and reserve 
ﬁnatural rate
ﬂ for something distinct.  But 
ﬁnatural rateﬂ 
tends 
to be the term that 
we™ve used around the table here and 
that 
others 
have used
, and it™
s what the 
staff memo uses.  So 
I™
m going to stick with that term for this reference rate. 
In some very simple models, these two concepts are identical.  But in general, they™re not 
the same.  Indeed, in our standard, modern, mainstream models, almost all of the shocks hitting 

the model should affect the natur
al rate, even if the longer
-run normal rate doesn™t vary much.  
Now, not all of the shocks that hit the economy should affect the natural rate.  That™
s very clear 
in these models as well, and I™
ll talk more a little bit later about 
the difference and
 what kinds 
of 
shocks fall in that category.  By the way, I™d mention that modern models are all extensions of 

the 
Solow 
growth model that the Chairman referred to at our last meeting. That model is 
deterministic, nonmonetary.  These mod
els are extended to include a role for monetary factors 

and to include the role of uncertainty and unpredictable shocks to the economy.  I think the staff 

memo would have been clear
er if it had distinguished between these two notions of slack, 
because the 
estimates they present in this memo
Šsome are aimed at this longer
-run notion, and 
some pretty clearly are aimed at this short
-run reference notion.  
For example, the NAIRU 
            
       
             
      
          
  
      estimates they present ar
e designed to estimate the long
er-run normal rate of unemployment, 
because 
they 
deliberately exclude high
-frequency factors, but our models tell us that™
s clearly the 
wrong benchmark for policy in a world in which the economy is hit by a range of shocks.  
So my 
suggestion would be that staff 
members
, when they present 
to 
us a gap or a natural rate concept, 
be clear about what they™re trying to present.  I™ll note hereŠ
and I
™ll come back to this in a 
second
Šthe discussion we had about adjusting the natural rate for the drought
; that
™s a high
-frequency 
adjustment.  But the logic for making that adjustment is really identical to the logic for 
this reference rate that responds to current shocks. I think it would also aid clarity if we, in our 

discussions, were mindful of this distinction between these two.  The gap between the current 

unemployment rate and the long-run normal unemployment rate is exceptionally high by 

historical standards, and that gap clearly represents a tremendous amount of human suffering.  

And I can understandŠeveryone should understandŠwhy that would add urgency to the search 

for remedies to that.
  But modern macroeconomics is pretty clear about the gap that™
s relevant 
for the conduct of monetary policy, and it™s conceptually different from the gap defined by the 

distance 
between whe
re we are today and 
where we
™re going to be several years from now. 
So how do you estimate policy-
relevant gaps? Well, you need a model because you
™re 
talking about a counterfactual; 
you
™re talking about something that doesn™t happenŠ
it™s a latent, 
unobserved variable.  You need a model to be able to extract something like that from the data, 

and different models, obviously, 
give you different estimates. 
The staff memo presents estimates 
derived from EDO, the Board™s New Keynesian dynamic stochastic gener
al equilibrium
 model.  
And it delivers 
an estimate of the current gap 
of 
a little under 3 percent, defined this second way, 
the natural rate way. 
That compares 
with 
the NAIRU
-based estimate that the Tealbook provides 
        
      
                 
  
         
     
       
     
         of about 4½ 
percent, so you can see 
that you can get a significant difference there
.  This 
illustrates the extent to which the model you bring to bear makes a difference. 
So how big is the relevant gap?  Well, I™ve said beforeŠand I think others around the 
table have said before
Šthat we don™t think it™
s large, and we
™ve tried to describe economic 
factors that, in theoretical models
, would affect the natural rate and so would
n™t
 add to the gap.  
So they™d reduce your estimate of the gap.  
Now, rather than repeat myself
ŠI know that hasn™t 
stopped 
me in the past
ŠI thought I™d take the opposite tack and talk about what™s in the gap.  
The economy in a model that™s taken to the data is envisioned as driven by shocks and other 
developments.  Those shocks 
all affect the data you see, but not all of th
em affect the natural 
rate.  So the things that affect the economy, but don™t 
figure 
into this natural rate, are the things 
that affect the gap. 
What could those things be?  Well, this depends, obviously, on the model 
you use to interpret the data, the mode
l you use to extract an estimate of the natural rate, and so 
determine the gap. 
Let™s take a look at
 EDO, the Board™s DSGE model.  Its 
estimate of the gap 
is based on the natural rate, as I said, and it™s near 3 percent.  What would it take for the gap to 

be that large in that model?  Now, I should caution here
:  What I
™m going to say is based on my 
understanding of the model conceptually, theoretically.  I haven™t looked at the empirical 

decomposition, but based on my understanding of what™s going on in t
hat model
Šthis is true for 
a lot of other models as wellŠ
you
™d have to believe 
that 
one of two sorts of things 
is going on 
for the gap to be large. 
First, you could believe that firms have not fully adjusted their prices in 
response to the downward shift in demand that occurred four years ago.  These models are based 

on the notion of prices being sticky temporarilyŠ
that people set prices and
, for a time
, they™
re 
not incented to
ward, 
or they
™re prevented from
, adjusting their prices to reflect developments 
that they
™re seeing at their doorstep.
  So this price stickiness keeps prices from adjusting.  A 
fall 
                                             
     in demand shows up in quantities rather than prices at first, and then later, as prices adjust, the 
adjustment shows up in prices rather than quantities.  So that™
s the general mechanism.
  To 
attribute it all to that, you
™d have to believe that there™s 
an incredible amount of price stickiness 
in this economy.  I don™t find that plausible, and I don™t think it lines up with other evidence we 

have on the degr
ee of price stickiness in the economy. 
The second class of things you could believe, in order to believe that the gap is large, is 
that the economy has been hit by a string of large shocks that have not affected the model™s 

natural rate but have affected t
he economy.  And this is what the model attributes the large gap 
to.  What would those shocks be? Well, in EDO, there 
are
 only two kinds of shocks that would 
affect the gap.  One is a string of upward shocks to the degree of monopolistic power that firms 

have in setting prices. Firms are monopolistic competitors.  They have a little bit of pricing 

power, not total, and the amount of pricing power they have is determined by the degree of 

substitutability between goods.  For some reason, goods are less of a substitute for each other 

now, so firms have more pricing power, and t
hat™s why prices haven™t adjusted
, quantities have, 
and the gap is high.  Alternatively, you could believe that a string of analogous shocks in the 

labor market ha
s occurred, so that workers have more bargaining power in setting wages and 
are 

able to extract a 
kind of monopoly power from the firms they work for.  Now, I don™t have direct 

observations on any of these.  You infer these from the model and the data.  You 
take the model 

as given, you infer these kinds of things.  But those don™t really match up, in my mind, to the 

kinds of anecdotal stories you hear from people.  You just don™t hear about firms having a lot 

more pricing power than they did four years ago, and it certainly doesn™t seem consistent to think 

of workers as having a lot more leverage now, either.  So I find both of these implausible.  
Now, 

as I said, this is based on my understanding of EDO
; my understanding of how the theoretical 
              
    
    
    
              
     
  
       
  
       model is built
Šthat is well documented.  In that EDO model, in the memo results, they didn™t do 
the decomposition.  They didn™t show us how much of the gap is due to sticky prices left over 

from 
2008 shocks, how much is due to monopoly power shocks, how much is due to wa
ge pricing shocks.  I said they don™t seem plausible, but the right way forward for us, in talking 

about these things, is to put some estimates on the table and do the decomposition.  W
e have a 
working group under 
way that works with a set of these models. 
There are 
other DSGE 
modelsŠPhiladelphia, Chicago.  What™s the other one? 
PARTICIPANTS.  New York. 

MR. LACKER. 
New York.  I forgot New York.  And there 
are
 others around the 
System.  I know 
that 
Atlanta operates a pretty elaborate model as well.
  So e
ach of these taken to 
the data would give you a different estimate of the gap, and they™d give you a different 

decomposition of what the gap was about.  We™d be able to look at those, if we had them in front 

of us, and say, ﬁWell, attributing the gap to this is persuasive to me.  It matches up with what I 

think is out there,ﬂ or, ﬁThis reason for the gap to be large isn™t persuasive to me.ﬂ  And we could 

have a discussion that goes beyond, ﬁI think the gap is big.
ﬂ ﬁNo, I think the gap is small.
ﬂ  ﬁNo, 
I think the gap is big.
ﬂ ﬁNo, I think the gap is small.ﬂ I think we could make progress by putting 
the cards on the table, by putting some more-
explicit analysis on the table. 
So that™s my suggestion for improving our discussion of the gap going forward.  As I 
said, the estimates of the 3 percent gap in EDO seem implausible to me compared 
with 
factors 
that I
™ve talked about that are likely to affect the natural rate rather than the gap
Šthings like 
the 
labor market
, skill problems, 
the 
housing overhang, and policy uncertainty, which 
aren™t 
captured by the models.
  We could have a debate then about what is in the model or not.  T
his is 
what goes into my thinkingŠthat we shouldn™t expect much from monetary policy now.  
                   
                     
 Moreover, we might be pretty close to where the policy-
relevant natural rate is right now.
  Thank 
you
ŠI took some extra time here.  I appreciate it.  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE C
HAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I don™t really understand why the DSGE model should 
be particularly relevant to the current set of circumstances, given that this is a financial shock, a 

huge financial shock, and my understanding is that DGSE models are very rudimentary, 
if 
they 

hav
e anything
, in terms of the financial sector.
  To go to the DSGE models 
as a source of 
determining the natural rate versus the NAIRU and 
the size of the gap seems a little bit 
ﬁoff the 
reservation
ﬂ relative to the source of the shock.  So I™m just curious what your reaction is. 
MR. LACKER.  Sure.  Let me say two things to that.  
The f
irst is that progress has been 
made in putting the rudiments of a financial sector in these models.  The New York model is a 

leader on that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  B
ut we™
re still in elementary school. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  The second thing I™d point out, though, is that if we™re going to 
think about the data we see, draw conclusions, and act on it, we™
re using either an explicit model 
or an implicit model.  There
™s no avoiding that.  Otherwise, what we™re doing is gibberish.  
An explicit model has the advantage of exposing all sides of the reasoning process to scrutiny by 

others.  You can say, 
and it
™s perfectly legitimate to think, 
ﬁAll right
Šyes, this factor that I t
hink 
is important is not in this model,
ﬂ and I just did that with EDO.  I just said, 
ﬁLook, it doesn™t 
have a very articulate labor sector
ﬂŠbut we can debate that, and we can look at the magnitudes 
and talk about that.  
So I think it
™s a vehicle for analysis and discussion that crystallizes our 
thinking, that pins things down, but I don™t think it™s constructive to say, ﬁX isn™t in the model.  I 
       
              
    
    
                have a free pass to say whatever I want.ﬂ I just don™t think that™s constructive.  I know that™s not 
what you were advocating. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, President Lacker.  You™
re a 
perfect straight man for me because 
I™m going to be rather brief 
[laughter] 
to preserve 
time for 
the main event. 
Reports from my 
District contacts were very little changed from August. 
Economic expansion remains positive but very modest.  Just a coup
le of comments from 

contacts.  First, housing-sector contacts and several of my banking directors repor
ted that 
residential real estate activity in general is clearly improving.  Prices have firmed in many areas, 

sales volume has increased, and permitting is rising.  Purchase mortgage applications have 

increased recently, and refinance activity remains positive. I have also seen data suggesting that 

the recent increase in purchases is bei
ng driven primarily by mortgage-financed homebuyers 
rather than cash investors.  Second, a director from a large management consulting firm offered 

the view that a number o
f his firms, very large corporate clients, have resigned themselves to a 
2 percent growth world, and that major actions these businesses might take to accelerate their 

growth are largely on hold.  We heard a similar theme from several contacts.
  And, third, 
inflation and rising business costs are not much of a concern among our contacts.  My director 

from the country™s largest home-
improvement retailer reported that suppliers are not asking for 
price 
increases in this environment. 
Let me shift to my 
Bank™s assessment of the national economy and outlook.  It has 
become pretty difficult, in my view, to reject the view that the economy has been on a roughly 

2 percent growth trend for most of the recovery.  Maybe I™m a little slow, but the recognition has 

gelled
 in my thinking, 
just in the last few weeks
, that this is the prevailing reality.  Based on 
                        
          
     
         recent estimates, this may even overstate the immediate reality.
  My outlook for GDP growth 
continues to show only modest improvement on this trend over the forecast horizon.  In 
particular, beyond this year and next, I remain less optimistic about the pace of 
GDP growth than 
the Tealbook.  With respect to employment, my baseline outlook has been a continuation of the 

trend of roughly 150,000 per month that has prevailed over the past two years.  This pace would 

be sufficient at current participation rates to make continuing but modest progress on the 

unemployment rate. However, last week™s job report makes it pretty clear that employment 

growth has fallen short of the 150,000 trend over the past four months.  Even though four months 

amount to a small sliver of time, I am concerned about the lack of any sustained progress on the 

unemployment rate since the beginning of the year.  It is getting harder to rule out the p
ossibility 

that returning to the 
scenario of 
150,000 jobs a month is at risk.  
My perception is that the well
-known uncertainty factors, including those associated with various downside risks, are 

contributing to some of the recent softness in the data.  I have no argument with the SEP bias that 

GDP growth risks are weighted to the downside, but I don™t rule out that these uncertainty drags 
could dissipate and that there is some upside potential.  For instance, some of the incoming 

information around housin
g and 
Europe has been mildly encouraging, and it
™s plausible that if 
the major sources of uncertaintyŠnotably, the fiscal cliff and European situationŠ
are resolved 

favorably, or more or less favorably, in a few months, the outlook actually could be brighter.  So 

it strikes me that this environment is not as clear
-cut as the situations that we faced on the cusp 
of LSAP1 and LSAP2. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Mr. Wilcox, did you want to add to the 
conversation? 
          
   
        
      
      
                      MR. WILCOX.  
Yes. I don™t have a detailed response to President Lacker™s comments, 
but I thought I might just offer a few observations.  Sometimes I
™m in sympathy with many of 
the points that President Lacker makes.  I think it™s impor
tant, though, to state that we take it as 
our remit to advise the Committee to the limit of our ability to measure the economy, to estimate 
and understand the economy, to observe economic processes.  We think it™
s critically important 
not to do more than that, and we™re profoundly aware of the extent of our ignorance and the 

ignorance of the macroeconomic profession at large, regarding key questions about how the 

macroeconomy works. 
I™
m reminded of a comment that Larry Summers once made in quite a 
differen
t situation
, in which he said, ﬁYou know, economics is an interesting field.  I doubt that 
when astrophysicists get together
, they debate the fundamental validity of the laws of gravity.  
And yet what we as economists do is, we have profound uncertainty about questions that are as 

fundamental as the laws of gravity.
ﬂ  We on the staff do make every effort to distinguish short-

run influences that we can identify.  For example, we have adjusted our reference level of the 

unemployment rate in light of influence
s that we can identify and estimate
, stemming from 
emergency unemployment benefits and from the quality of functioning of the labor market.  We 

have adjusted our measure of the gap between the actual unemployment rate and the reference
, 
or natural, 
rate of
 unemployment for those kinds of things.  But beyond that, we confront the real 
world in which data are imperfect, theory is deficient, policymaker and staff bandwidth is 

limited, and there are a lot of profound and fundamental debates to be resolved. 
With regard to EDO, it is a state
-of-the-
art DSGE model coming directly out of the 
intellectual tradition that President Lacker refers to. It
™s part, but only part, of the intellectual 

base that we consult in the course of putting together our analysis that we provide to the 

Committee.
  Now, whether the empirical properties of that model are plausible or implausible is 
                
                              
              
a little difficult for me to say.  They are what they are, and they
™re derived by an effort to work 
directly in that intellectual tradition.  W
e have pursued a diversified, 
multimodel strategy
, which 
we think provides our analysis with a greater robustness than would be the case if we had a 
single 
model or a single-
intellectual
-tradition strategy. 
So I
™m in sympathy with many of the 
points that President Lacker raises, but I think we need to recognize that the macroeconomic 

profession has a long way to go before we can deliver the kind of clarity and certainty that it 

seems to me is implicit in much of your remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President 
Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate Dave Wilcox™s comments 
there, and I™
ll have a few comments on the slack memo at the end here. 
Let me talk for a minute 
about the Eighth District economy, which continues to expand at a modest pace.  The drought in 

the 
District has been especially severe and is having an important effe
ct on agriculturally 
based 
businesses.  I generally agree with the Tealbook analysis of the 
effe
ct of the drought on the 
macroeconomy over the next couple of quarte
rs. 
District labor markets are improving slowly. 
The 
District unemployment rate, based on 16 D
istrict MSAs, has continued to decline this year 
and is, according to the most recent data, about 7.5 percent, noticeably below the national 

unemployment rate.
  Employment growth in the District has been slow, just a touch better than 
the national data, according to the most recent observations.  District real estate markets have 

improved during 2012.  Data on home sales for District MSAs, for instance, are up by 
a healthy 
margin compared 
with
 2011.  Specifically, year-
to-date home sales are up almost 13 percent in 
Louisville, 7 percent in Little Rock, 10 percent in Memphis, and 16 percent in St. Louis.  

Similarly, building permits for single
-family homes year to 
date in 2012 versus 2011 were up 
42 percent in Louisville, 14 percent in Little Rock, 46 percent in Memphis, and 23 percent in 
               
             
          
   
    
  
    St.
 Louis.  So I think that the housing part of the equation is moving off the bottom in 2012, and I 
find that encouraging. 
Natio
nally, I view the macroeconomy as being in a sluggish 
economic 
growth mode, but 
for a variety of reasons, I do not think the current constellation of data readings is one that should 
trigger outsized monetary policy action.  I view the U.S. economy as being on a path not too 

different from the one suggested in the work of Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rog
off as cited by 
President Lacker.
 They noted that post-
financial
-crisis or 
post-bubble economies tend to grow 
relatively slowly for a long time.  Our economy cl
early suffered through 
a collapse of a housing 
bubble, along with an associated financial crisis, so it is not really that surprising that the 

economy is following a path similar to the one experienced by other countries 
that 
have been in a 
similar situati
on.  In particular, the notion of a rapid return to the pre-
crisis
, bubble-influenced 
real GDP growth trend seems quite unrealistic accor
ding to the international cross-country 
evidence.  This, to me, is the leading hypothesis for our current situation.  I am concerned about 

the global slowdown and that, fed in large part by ongoing recession in Europe, this is affecting 

and will continue to affect U.S. multinational corporations.  These effects are quite apparent in 

my discussions with business contacts in 
medium and large firms in the 
District and across the 
nation.  Many are reporting troubling or worrisome movements in revenue and volume data 

during recent months.  While this bears watching, I do not think it is yet at the point where I 

foresee an especially severe impact on the U.S.  Some of this is certainly to be expected when the 

pan-European economy, which is actually somewhat larger than the U.S. economy, is in 
recession. 
I see U.S. inflation as subdued but generally close to target, unlike the summ
er and fall of 
2010, when nearly all measures of inflation were low and on a downward trajectory.  Again, this 
             
                 
   
   
             
  
     bears watching, but in my view, a threat of continued disinflation and possibly eventual deflation 
has not materialized, at least so far. 
Inflat
ion expectations are, by our own description, stable.  
Five
-year TIPS
-based expected inflation was about 208 basis points yesterday.  This, again, is 
not the situation of 2010, at least so far.  In addition, the five-year TIPS real yield of about 

minus 145 basis points is considerably lower than in 2010, suggesting that monetary policy may 

be much easier today than it was at that juncture.  In addition, I do not see financial stress as 

being particularly high at the current moment.  The St. Louis Financial Stress Index is showing 
a relatively tame reading. Of course, many factors could increase financial stress, but as of now
, those events have not occurred and, in fact, may not occur. 
I think it makes sense to wait and see what Europe can deliver during th
e fall.  As I
™ve 
told all of you before, I™
ve become 
more pessimistic on the medium
-term European prospects 
during the summer, as I have come to doubt that Europe has the type of either informal or formal 

institutional arrangements to deal with a crisis of
 this magnitude.  
Still, I think the jury remains 
out on that issue, so it would make sense for us to wait and see what the Europeans do, 
and see 

what happens.  
Certainly, recent declines in Spanish and Italian yields across the yield curve for 

government debt in both countries have been impressive 
and
 substantial, even if the medium-
and longer-term outlook for Europe is questionable.  
I am concerned that the ECB is not really 
easing aggressively in order to mitigate the 
euro
-area recession. Indeed, the ECB is preoccupied 
with selective debt purchases on a basis that requires some conditionality, which means that they 

have to wait for the country to react to their offer.  This throws off the timing of the relationship 

between the 
normal business cycle 
and 
monetary policy.
  So that™s keeping the ECB from acting, 
which makes me worried that the U.S. action could exacerbate the recession there by 

strengthening the 
euro.  And indeed, the e
uro has been stronger in recent weeks.
  You might say 
      
             
              
          
  
   
 we worry only about the U.S. economy, which I think is very true and very relevant, but this 
could end up feeding back to the U.S. in a detrimental way if we make the European situation 

worse. 
Longer
-term interest rates in the U.S. are already very low.  Ten
-year 
Treasury tr
ading in 
a recent session was around 170 basis points.  That™
s extremely low by rec
ent historical metrics. 
Longer
-term inflation expectations are in excess of 250 basis points, depending on which 
measure you use.  That implies negative real yields over a 
10-year horizon.  That™s an extremely 
long horizon to have a negative real yield.  I think the U
nited States 
can benefit from the lower 
yields that we have in place right now.  We can benefit from the flight to safety that has driven 

capital out of Europe, 
much as the U
nited States
 did during the 1997Œ98 
Asian currency crisis. 
Also, equity markets are at recent highs
Šfour
-year highs, 
if I™m not mistaken.  This seems to 
indicate among investors a certain confidence in the future of U.S. economic performance 

despite an ongoing worldwide slowdown, and I think the jury is still out a little bit on whether 

the U
nited States
 can be the strength in the storm here or whether we™re going to get pulled into 
the global slowdown ourselves.  Obviously, there are detrime
ntal effects from the rest of the 
world, but there are also offsetting 
flight
-to-safety effects in the U
nited States
.  So I think we 
could afford to see how that plays out for a few months here going forward. 
Labor markets in the U.S. are improving, although in a halting and uneven way.  It is 
sometimes noted that the national unemployment rate has not improved during 2012.  I might 

remind the Committee that this was also true in 2011.  We had 9.1 percent unemployment in 

January of 2011.  As of August 2011, 
we were also at 9.1 percent.
  However, today™s 
unemployment one year after that is 8.1 percent, 1 full percentage point lower.  That™s about as 

good as we can do in this game, about as good as we can do in one year™s time.  The U.S. 
              
    
       
       
          unemployment rate has 
rarely, if ever, dropped this much in one year during the past 25 years.  
This improvement, 
of course
, occurred unevenly, but it did occur nevertheless and from a 
starting point last year at this time in September that looked considerably darker than today
™s outlook.  
Some might say we did
n™t
 take action last year, but we took action through the m
aturity 
extension p
rogram.  That program is still in place and still on the table. 
In summary, as always, there are many ongoing developments that bear watching, but I 
think that the current readings on key aspects of the economy do not argue for outsized monetary 
policy action at this particular juncture.  I™m not saying I would never support it, but I don™t think 

that this moment is probably the right time. 
A few comments on the slack memo.  I do appreciate the memo, and I think it did a great 
job of outlining the approach to the slack issue that has been taken by the staff for, 
I belie
ve, 
many years at the Fed.  I thought it was accurate and outlined the issues very well.  The memo, 

to me, suggests that the ﬁ
get
-serious DSGE approachﬂ shows exactly how complicated this 
concept really is when you try to get down to it.  W
henever 
you
™re 
trying to fix something, it
™s good to know what you™re trying to fix.  And the great thing about the New Keynesian model is, 

you know what you™re trying to fix.  You™
re trying to fix the fact that there are sticky prices out 
there, and you can improve welf
are in that model in a certain way by certain types of monetary 
policy actions.  But different assumptions that you might make inside the model are quite subtle, 

and they can imply different welfare outcomesŠ
that is, different amounts of utility that actua
lly 
get delivered to households.  I think 
that 
there
™s no substitute going forward, that the Committee 
just has to take a stand on these complicated issues and we have to roll up our sleeves and say, 

ﬁWhat is it that we think we need
 to do?
ﬂ and ﬁW
hat is it that we want to fix?ﬂ
  The problem is, 
because of the subtleties inside these models, what we learned from the models is that you can 
          
        
                       
       inadvertently be doing more harm than good, depending on what™s actually going on in the real 
world and depending on whi
ch assumptions are really the ones that make the most sense. 
I think 
there
™s a very clear core idea, and you don™t have to read the whole literature to get at the core 
idea.  The co
re idea is that the flexible price level of output is a volatile object. 
Even in an 
economy that had no frictions whatsoever, there would be all kinds of shocks, and that level of 

output, which would be a Pare
to-optimal thing, would be moving around all of the time.  T
he 
actual level of output that we observe is probably not that level of output, and therefore there 

may be scope for a policy action.  But in any event, that volatile flexible price level of output is 

not going to be a smooth trend the way we traditionally have thought about it in macroeconomic 

circles since the 19
50s and 1960s.  Most of what we try to do when we think about potential 
output and measures of slack is to get a smooth trend.  I don™t think that that™s supported by the 

modern macroeconomic literature. 
The memo also makes it clear that there
™s tremendous 
uncertainty about estimates of 
slack, even if you™
re willing to swallow other assumptions about 
the 
statistical models or the 
economic models.  
As I
™ve emphasized in the past, even if all you want to do is forecast, and you 
don™t care about all of the the
oretical issues, the relationships between the slack measures and the 
actual inflation outcomes are questionable themselves and are weak and
, I think, 
have gotten 
weaker over time. 
I™ve talked about slack many times here, but I do think that, 
going forwar
d, it would behoove the Committee to put a clear model on the table.  W
e can argue about whether 
those assumptions 
are
 the right ones, whether 
we like them, 
and whether we think we can bring 
other evidence to bear on the particular assumptions.  And 
we can 
get it clear
er in our own heads 
how we think we™re helping matters with our policy. 
                                    
           I also thought it was very interesting in the memo
ŠI™ve often wondered about the term 
ﬁNAIRU.ﬂ  The memo makes it clear that the ﬁAﬂ no longer belongs in 
ﬁNAIRU,
ﬂ and in fact
, the ﬁNﬂ doesn™t belong in ﬁ
NAIRU
ﬂ either
Šso just ﬁ
IRU.
ﬂ It™s just 
ﬁIRU
ﬂ at the end.  T
he ﬁAﬂ 
stands for ﬁ
accelerati
ngﬂ 
and staff 
members 
make it clear that they™ve had to take that part out 
because it wasn™t working very well over maybe quite a long time period.  So I thought that that 
was interesting.  Maybe we should quit using the term, since the acceleration part isn™t in there 

anymore.
  Thanks a lot.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The past nine months remind me a bit 
of Samuel Beckett™s play 
Waiting for Godot. 
Rather than waiting for 
Godot
, we are waiting for 
the labor market recovery.  And like 
Godot, the recovery in the labor market continues to elude 

us.  
In the Beckett play, the character
s seriously consider suicide as their best solution to the 
seemingly endless wait.  I do hope 
that 
tomorrow we arrive at a better solution.  [Laughter] 
Unfortunately, last month™s labor market report was quite consistent with my submission 
for the e
xperimental consensus forecast.  I had a more pessimistic outlook for the next 18 months 
than the consensus forecast, and it assumed that we would not see robust employment growth or 

a significant change in the unemployment rate by the end of the yearŠ
or, for th
at matter, the end 
of next year
Šwithout further accommodation.  The modest employment growth did not surprise 
me, although I may not have sufficiently considered the possibility of the further declines in 
the 

labor force participation rate that were a striking feature of last Friday™s employment report, 

reducing the unemployment rate but for the wrong reason.  
One of the distinctive features of this 

recession and recovery has been the percentage of the unemployed who remain unemployed for 

greater than
 26 weeks.  Unlike the deep recession in 1982, in which there was a quick recovery 
        
                          
          and, as a result, a re
latively small increase in long
-duration unemployment, this recession has 
had a weak recovery, resulting in more long-duration unemployment.  Work being done by the 
staff in Boston that decomposes the 
Beveridge 
curve by duration of unemployment finds that the 
shift in the curve is primarily generated by workers who suffer long-duration unemployment.  

Faster growth in the economy would likely mitigate some of this problem. 
While some have attributed the slow recovery to a deleveraging process, I would put less 
weight on that argument.  Consumption and business investment have not been the laggards in 

this recovery.  Rather, government spending and housing account for much of the unusual 

weakness.  In fact, if you exclude housing and government spending from GDP for this recovery, 

it looks much like the previous two recoveries.  The unusually weak government spending is, in 

part, a result of the state and lo
cal governments pulling back in response to greatly diminished 
revenues, a direct consequence of the depth of the recession and the weakness of the recovery.  

Many were prepared for a revenue shortfall, with funds accumulated in their rainy day funds, but 

this recession quickly put most rainy day funds underwater.  Housing is usually a driver of most 

recoveries but has been absent for much of this recovery.  However, since the onset of the 

housing bust, the population has grown, per capita income has grown, 
interest rates are low, and 

prices are more affordable, resulting in tentative signs of a housing recovery.  This is a propitious 

time for considering additional stimulus to housing. 
If homebuyers feel that house prices are on 
the rise
Šas many indicators
 suggest 
and
 the Tealbook forecastsŠ
and that mortgage rates will 
remain this low only temporarily, we may start to get new homebuyers to commit before rates 

and prices rise. 
It is important to note the significant downside risks we are still facing.  While there have 
been some positive announcements about financial support out of Europe, the underlying 
                        
              
      
   solutions still require political support.  Domestically, while most are aw
are of the dangers of a 
fiscal cliff, the positive solutions still require political action.
  Should either of these risks 
materialize, we will need to consider a further array of tools: 
 possibly expanding QE even 
further, using asset purchases to target long rates
, or providing more commitment in our 
guidance.  An important addition to these tools might also be an expanded set of discount 

window actions.  The staff memo on this provides a good road map to possible ways forward.  

They include a variant of 
the Bank of England program, a mortgage program that would provide 
low-cost funding for banks to finance mortgage loansŠparticularly to those parts of the 

mortgage market that have been slow to recover, and programs that might require T
reasury 
support to reduce the credit risk entailed on certain types of lendin
g.  While some of these tools 
are likely to be most useful during a crisis where lending markets are disrupted, some could be 

implemented even in the current rate environment. I would encourage the staff to continue to 

search for creative ways that we can support those areas of the economy that are still troubled.  

As further progress is made, it may be worth discussing, either as an additional tool if the 

recovery continues to be quite slow or as a contingency plan should some of the tail risks 

materialize.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  During the intermeeting period, the 
economic data have confirmed that the ec
onomy remains stuck in low gear. Like the Tealbook, I 

expect only modest 
GDP growth in the second half of this year.  
Clearly, the economic recovery 
hasn™t been able to gain traction in the face of a variety of head
winds.  These include household-
sector d
eleveraging, tight credit for many potential borrowers, fiscal retrenchment, and global 
uncertainties.  Given these headwinds, absent further monetary policy accommodation, I would 
          
  
          
         
    
     expect sluggish growth and no meaningful progress toward our employment mandate until 2014.  
Indeed, when judged on a policy-consistent basis, my outlook is somewhat more pessimistic than 

the Tealbook forecast and consensus forecast, with slower 
GDP growth and a higher path for the 
unemployment rate. 
In gauging the medium-
term ou
tlook for the economy and the stance of monetary policy, 
I find the 
Kalman
-filter model that I developed with Thomas Laubach to be a useful tool.  A
fter 
this morning™s discussion, I™
m a little nervous about going into the 
Kalman 
filter, but I
™m assured 
that Thomas is ready with a white board to answer any technical questions regarding our model.  

But this model seeks to distinguish between transitory and highly persistent supply and demand 

influences on economic activity.  In response to President Bullard™s 
earlier comments, I would 
stress that in our model, we do not impose any restriction that potential output growth is smooth.  

We let the data speak to that.
  The highly persistent influences on demand can be summarized by 
what we call the natural rate of 
interest.  In the model, a highly persistent reduction in demand 
lowers the natural rate of interest.  And I think importantly for thinking about the stance of 

monetary policy and a number of issues around that, our balance sheet policies should boost the 

natural rate of interest, all else 
being 
equal, in this empirical model. 
So, influenced by Board 
staff research that highlights the information content of gross domestic income along with gross 

domestic product, I™ve estimated a modified version of the LaubachŒ
Williams model using both 

GDI and GDP.
  The current estimate of the natural rate of interest from this model is about 
minus 75 basis points.  The current real funds rate, therefore, is only about 1 percentage point 

below this estimate of the natural rate.  This implies that the current extent of monetary 

accommodation, including our balance sheet policies, has only modestly exceeded the severe 

headwinds that we™re facing in our economy. 
         
          
        
                             Given my forecast
s for subdued 
economic 
growth and very little pr
ogress on the 
employment mandate over the next few years, my SEP projection assumes considerable 
additional monetary policy stimulus.  In particular, I assume a new program of open-
ended 
purchases of 
Treasuries and MBS.  They expand the Fed™s balance sheet
 by about $1 trillion over 
the next year or so. 
And with this stimulus, I expect a faster recovery, with real GDP growth of 
2½ percent next year and 
3¼ percent in 2014, with the unemployment rate edging down to 
7.9 percent at the end of next year and 7.3 percent 
at the end of 2014.  
I see the risk
s to this 
outlook as skewed to the downside.  Another bout of brinkmanship around the fiscal cliff seems 

likely, if not inevitable.  The problems plaguing Europe also remain daunting, with considerable 

risk to our economy if the financial crisis intensifies. 
Here I would just echo the comments made 
earlier by Vice Chairman
 Dudley.  I share those views and was somewhat more pessimistic than 
perhaps the Tealbook™s description of recent events in Europe.  The bold program that the ECB 

has announced will certainly buy some short-run relief, but the underlying problems remain
:  a 
lack of political federalism, an unsustainable fiscal outlook, and disparities in economic 

competitive
ness across Europe.  So, in summary, the ECB™s actions may serve as a useful bridge 
loan.  
I hope it is not a bridge loan to nowhere. 
The fiscal cliff and the crisis in Europe are not just risks to the outlook; 
by increasing 
uncertainty
, they 
also 
seem alr
eady to be adding to the factors slowing our recovery.  It seems 
everyone I talk to stresses that uncertainty is holding back hiring and investment.  Indeed, 

uncertainty appears to have virtually paralyzed some businesses, prompting them to postpone 

capita
l spending and delay payroll expansions.  So a key question for monetary policy is whether 

this rise in uncertainty should be viewed primarily as a shock to demand, which lowers both 

output and inflation if not counteracted by additional monetary policy stimulus, or as a shock to 
            
    
       
                
           
   
supply, such as the drought, which lowers output but boosts inflation.  R
ecent theoretical and 
empirical research has addressed this question.  As I described back in December, empirical 
research by my staff at the San Francisco Fe
d finds that over the past 30 years, 
higher uncertainty 

operates like a negative aggregate demand shock that reduces both economic activity and 

inflation.  Following uncertainty shocks of the types that we currently face, expenditures on 

consumer durables, investment, short-
term interest rates, and inflation all fall
, while 
unemployment rises
, in this analysis.  
Now, I
™m sure President Lacker will be very happy to hear 
what I
™m about to say, and that is that we also looked at this issue in a fully micro
-fou
nded 
DSGE model.  This finding that uncertainty acts primarily as a demand shock is confirmed by 

the research using such DSGE models, both by my staff and by academic researchers. 
An increase in uncertainty causes households to save more for precautionary reasons.  This a
ffects 
both supply and demand in the models.  However, in these models, the demand effects are by far 

the dominant ones.  This is because the negative effects of an uncertainty shock on consumption 

are amplified when prices are slow to adj
ust, causing businesses to cut production further.  
This 
implies that uncertainty shocks lead to a negative output gap, a fall in inflation, and this is 

consistent with the empirical evidence I mentioned a moment ago.  All told, both theory and data 

sugges
t that the uncertainty shocks that I believe are holding back
 our economy today really 
should be seen more as adverse shocks to demand, which monetary policy should aim to offset. 
Turning to inflation, the medium-term outlook has not changed.  I continue t
o expect 
overall PCE inflation to remain below 2 percent for the next few years, and I view the risks 
to the 
inflation forecast as balanced. 
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 
           
   
                           MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like Presi
dent Lockhart, I
™m going to 
keep my remarks on economic conditions particularly brief today because I believe that we have 
more agreement on the outlook than we have on the policy implications of the outlook, which 

means 
that 
I™m not going to be as brief in my comments on policy 
tomorrow. 
My 
District 
business contacts remain concerned about the risks to the outlook, yet they are generally 

reporting only small changes in activity levels in their own businesses.  A few of my business 

contacts point to either a coming slowdown or a coming acceleration in their sales.  Their 

comments are consistent with the holding pattern around today™s 2 percent growth rate.  
In my 
current outlook, I expect the recovery to remain in this holding pattern for the rest of this y
ear 
and then generally pick up to a GDP growth rate of a little more than 2½ percent in 2013 and a 

little more than 3 percent in 2014.  In order to achieve these projected growth rates, I assume that 

we provide further policy accommodation by extending the period of very low rates into 2015. 
Among the data released since our last meeting, the August employment report stands 
out.  It was particularly disappointing in that the BLS confirmed that the economy had made very 

little progress in labor markets over 
the summer. While the month
-to-month swings in the 
household survey make the progress on the unemployment rate difficult to interpret, the decline 

in the employment
-to-population ratio to essentially its post
-recession trough makes it clear that 
there has
 been little sustained progress in labor markets.  Nonetheless, as GDP growth picks up 
over the next two years, I am expecting that we will make gradual progress on unemployment.  

As mentioned in the memo on economic slack, the Cleveland staff has taken a close look at the 

flows into and out of unemployment to examine the natural rate of unemployment.  This research 

finds that the trends of flows into and out of unemployment, often referred to as labor market 

churning, have been f
all
ing for several years.  This decline in labor market churning implies that 
             
                   
  the current path to full employment will likely be slower than in past cycles. 
Some 
commentators treat the slow progress on reducing unemployment as evidence that the natural 
rate 
is far higher.  However, in the Cleveland Fed model, a faster pace of GDP growth does 

lower the unemployment rate more quickly.  While this result is supportive of monetary policy 

accommodation, it doesn™t answer the question of the effectiveness of our no
ntraditional 

monetary policy tools. 
Turning to inflation, I have made only small changes to my outlook for inflation.  I agree 
with the Board staff that we
™re likely to see more disinflation in core PCE rates, but my forecast 
doesn™t get quite as far away 
from the 2 percent rate as the Tealbook anticipates. 
The risks to my economic outlook remain primarily to the downside for GDP growth.  
Although market participants seem to be taking a more optimistic view that Europeans will solve 
their problems, a 
crisis
 in Europe remains a large risk to 
the recovery in the U
nited S
tates
.  In addition, the fiscal cliff poses a significant risk of 
a dramatic slowing of the U.S. economy.  
These risks to growth imply that unemployment could end up higher than anticipated.  On 

inflation, I continue to see the risks tilted toward the downside, given th
e significant downside 

risk
s to economic activity and 
the
 low levels of 
some measures of 
inflation expectations.  In my 
view, these risks to growth, unemployment, and inflation make the outlook more uncertain than 

normal.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Following our July meeting, the key question 
was whether the incoming data would finally begin to show substantial and sustainable 

improvement in labor markets.  It™s pretty clear that the answer to that question is no.  Without a 

doubt, 2012 will go into the books as another year of unsatisfactory economic performance.  This 
                    
         
         
           
  
 is the third year in a row 
of growth around 2 percent.  This pace of growth leaves 
resource slack 
quite large. 
At the same time
, the inflation outlook is not threatening, and numerous theoretical 
and empirical analyses show that there are ways to provide additional accommodation th
at will 
improve this economic situation. 
In terms of recent developments, the problems that we™
ve characterized as downside risks 
earlier in the year have materialized into actual headwinds.  They are gathering in strength. 
My 
business contacts noted that 
their current operations are being adversely affected by increasing
ly negative forces in the U.S. and around the world.  Similar to some comments that President 

Lockhart made, apparently CEOs are sharing their gloomy outlooks with their fellow CEO 

interlo
cutors, and this has the potential to reinforce downward expectations and spiral into even 
softer spending and hiring.  
For example, one of my regular contacts repeated comments he had 
heard from the CEO of a major U.S. conglomerate, 
who was a former Fed Bank chair 

somewhere.  According to my contact, this CEO instructed all of his business units to plan for 

the possibility that the U.S. will experience a lost decade
, like Japan.  I think that™s disturbing.  
With regard to Europe, many of my contacts thought the odds of truly awful outcomes had 

declined, and that™s a positive comment.  The recent ECB announcements regarding outright 

monetary transactions give the fiscal authorities somewhat more time to maneuver, but the 

additional bond buying will be condit
ioned on fiscal consolidation that likely will be difficult to 
achieve and bad for growth in those countries.  And without stronger growth, the periphery 

countries are going to face repeated crisis events over the next several years. As one financial 

contact we spoke to put it, 
ﬁAll the Europeans have done is transform an acute problem into a 
chronic one.
ﬂ  The other elephant in the room is the U.S. fiscal cliff.  On the upside, my contacts 
say 
that 
surely the parties in Washington will find a way to limit 
the damage after the election
.           
                       
        But on the downside, many currently see uncertainty over the cliff weighing on activity, and no 
one can rule out the possibility of a messy outcome that would result in very significant fiscal 

drag hitting us around the turn of the year. 
One bit of positive news is that I™m hearing commentary that indicates monetary 
accommodation is helping.  Several financial contacts say that today™s low rates are leading them 

to increase investment, and that should facilitate futu
re activ
ity. 
For instance, we heard 
comments on how funding for distressed properties has increased and capital is being redeployed 

to the residential sector. Indeed, there™s been a 
lot of talk about residential construction 

improving, as several have noted.  Furthermore, refinancing continues to help firms strengthen 

their balance sheets, putting them in a position to increase investment or pass on funds to 

someone else more likely to spend them, as you pointed out at our last meeting, Mr. Chairman.  
I should 
note that while lo
w rates are pushing some to undertake more investment, our financial 
contacts do not say that 
they are seeing excessive risk
-taking or anything approximating 
financial 
froth
.  And in the past, they™ve not been shy about pointing that out when they have seen that. 
As I said earlier, condition
ed on our current policies, the outlook for 
economic 
growth is 
unacceptable.  It™s unacceptable in part because recent data reinforce the obvious point that high 

inflation is not a concern, certainly not relative to our long-run objective and certainly not within 

our balanced approach strategy.  And it™
s unacceptable because mainstream monetary analysis 
clearly indicates that there are means of providing more accommodation that can improve these 

outcomes
.  The Board staff analyses clearly demonstrate this.  The LSAP memos had simulations 
that pointed that out, FRB/
US™
s optimal control simulations and 
the nominal-income-
level
-targeting simulations point that out, too.  Mike Woodford™s careful analysis in h
is Jacks
on Hole 
paper showed the same. 
       
    
        
           
    
    
   
               
  
        While I™m at this point, let me make a couple of comments about DSGE models, which 
were discussed earlier today. It is certainly the case that we are presented with results from four 
models that are currently being l
ooked at: 
the 
EDO model out of the Board, our Chicago model, 
Philadelphia™s model, and New York™s model.  A 
question that President Lacker was asking was
, in the context of these models, how big 
is 
slack, 
and 
how is it measured
?  At some level within 
the 
context of these models, this is a bit of a red herring.  For instance, if you look at the 

projections, all of the inflation forecasts coming out of these models are under our 2 
percent goal, 

and that™s true through 2015.  So, 
even
 in a model that™s lookin
g at whatever measure it is that™s 
holding back inflation, 
there is no
 inflationary pressureŠand some of the models have much less 
inflationary pressure than others.  The second point is that the theory in these models is really 

about marginal costs.  That
™s the fundamental variable.  The firms in these models are faced with 
the following question: W
hen I get to change my price and I™ve seen things change, what™s my 
margin
al cost structure that tells me how much I should increase my price, given that I won
™t be 
able to do it next time for sure? What have 
I face
d, w
hat am I expecting others to face, and 
things like that? 
Slack i
s often viewed in these models as a useful proxy at best.  I
f there™s a lot 
of slack, then your marginal costs won™t be rising
; they™ll be low, and things like that.  But the 
fundamental is really about marginal costs.
  And so, when you think about that, these models are 
really looking at the inflation data and everything around those data and saying, ﬁWe just don™t 

see inflationary pressures.ﬂ I can™t tell you exactly what the resource slack is that is embodied in 

that, but we don™t see inflationary pressures, and that™s coming out of all four of the models that 

we™re presented with quarterly. 
Another point that President Lacker ra
ised is, if sticky prices are really what™s 
fundamental here, why haven™t they adjusted already
?  And you hear that a lot.  In these models, 
                     
   
  
     
    
         
      
     a lot of asynchronous price adjustment for whatever reason is 
given
, and John Taylor has 
contributed importantly to exactly that point going way back over the last 20 or more years.  
But 
even allowing for the fact that maybe there would have been adjustments already, I think it™s 
reasonable to assume that we™ve been hit with a sequence of negative aggregate demand shocks 

along the lines 
that I 
believe 
President Williams™
s comments were pointing at.  At least we™ve 
certainly been surprised the last three summers in a row that output has been lower than we were 

projecting, s
o something different is at work.
  And then it™s 
also the case that 
inflationary 
expectations matter in these pricing equations and models.  This is a little more delicate and 

subtle.  Apparently inflation expectations are stable in all of these models, but there 
are
 subtle 
modeling choices at work in each of them about what the stochastic process is for marginal cost 

pressures and how they™re updated and what inflation expectations are.  This gets at a point of 

dissatisfaction
Šwhen I talk with various people in the Federal Reserve, they might say, ﬁI do
n™t 
like looking at the FRB/
US projections because I see all 
of 
this monetary accommodation 
coming, and I don™t see inflation coming, a
nd why is that?
ﬂ  I talk to people, and they worry a lot 
about inflation.  
We aren™t able to model that
Šapparently not sa
tisfactorily, 
because they all 
come back to the same place, which is
, expectations are well anchored or the stochastic process 
is 
mean
 reverting at some level, and so we just don™t see things getting out of hand.  I want to 
point out 
that this is not 
a FRB
/US question per se, but it™s a statement about how much we 
really 
know within the context of well-articulated macro models.  It™s way beyond just FRB/
US. 
All of our DSGE models have that same feature. 
So the bottom line, Mr. Chairman, 
is that this is the
 third summer in a row that economic 
growth has failed to achieve escape velocity, and the economy™s liftoff has fizzled on the 
          
                 
               launching pad.  It seems clear that the outlook crosses the threshold that justifies more action.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Thank you.
  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When we were in Jackson Hole, 
we got to hear you, Mr. Chairman, talk about the tools we have available.  You described our 

asset purchase tools and our communication tools, and so I™d like to give you some feedback 

from the 
Ninth District about how we™re doing on the communication front.  I get the same kinds 
of questions, I would sayŠusually from different people, but they sometimes come from the 

same person
.  The first comment is
, as the FOMC 
considers its date to keep rates low through 
late 2014, people are concerned, 
why is 
it that 
the Fed 
is 
committed to keep
ing 
rates low for two 
years
?  How could the Fed commit like this without thinking about the fact that the world could 
change in some fashion
?  And the second 
comment is
, by saying that interest rates are going to 
be low for that long or 
are expected
 to be low for that long, the Fed is signaling that conditions 
will be weak, and that
, in and of itself, is suppressing demand.  Now, of course, I say to them, 
ﬁNo, you misunderstood what the FOMC is intending to say to you.  It is meaning to 

communicate that the economic conditions threshold for raising rates is now higher than you 

might have thought.  The recovery has to be further along than you might have thought.ﬂ  A
t this 
stage, my questioner says, 
ﬁWell, that makes sense, but why didn™t you guys just say that?ﬂ  A
t that point, I usually turn the conversation to something about fracking 
[laughter] because that 
seems to work.  To me, this kind of dialogue suggests 
that 
we need to communicate more clearly 
about our reaction function.  And communication about our reaction function is sometimes 

motivated in terms of accountability and transparency, and these are, I think, good motivations.  
      
       
    
                           
       But as my brief summary of my 
Ninth District colloquies indicates, communication about 
our react
ion function is also an 
essential
 ingredient to the effectiveness of policy. 
Now, the changes that have been made in B(5) relative to what was in the previous 
FOMC statement in July
ŠB(5) 
now represents even more of a commitment because actually the 
conditioning clauses have been removed, although 
many readers were not paying close attention 
to those conditional clauses anyway.  I think the lead-in sentence to B(5) is much better, but I 

have to say, most people don™t read the words that carefully in the FOMC statement.  Their 

takeaway is the year.  That™s the main thing they™re hearing. 
So before we communicate 
our reaction function, we have to start thinking about how we 
formulate one, and as I™
ve m
entioned before, I think that a good reaction function should have at 
least two inputs
: some measure of inflationary pressures and some measure 
of labor 
market 
underutilization.  These inputs would capture how well we™re doing in terms of our two 

mandates
, and our policy stance, I would think, should evolve as these inputs change.  
I see this 
as the basis for the approach that President Plosser, President Williams
, and I are following in 
our alternative policy statements.  The K
PW statements emphasize only those changes of the 
data that are viewed as leading to changes in measures of inflationary pressures and labor market 

underutilization.  
And then the KPW statement
s translate those changes in inflationary pressure
s and labor market underutilization into 
the rationale for the 
Commit
tee
™s policy decisions.  
At this 
point, I™ll digress briefly to say that I think we™ve completed our cycle of going through the 

parallel FOMC statements, and President Plosser, I believe, will bring forward the KPW 

approach to t
he 
subcommittee on communications for further consideration.  So I™m sure the 
subcommittee members are glad to hear that.
  That said, just like the FOMC statement itself, the 
               
                    KPW memos are very oriented around changes in monetary accommodation and how they 
relate 
to changes in conditions. 
Ultimately
, though, 
a Committee reaction function has to translate the level of 
inflationary pressures and the level of resource utilization into a decision about the level of 
monetary accommodation.  A 
key challenge we
™ve
 struggled 
with is that it™s much easier for us 
to reach accord about the changes in these variables than it is for us to reach accord
, at least 
qualitatively, about the levels of inflationary pressures and the levels of resource utilization.  A
s we saw fr
om submissions of the consensus forecast, there are very different views around the 
table on that.  Some might see this heterogeneity as precluding the possibility of developing a 

Committee reaction function, but I think this is where the consensus forecas
t process is a very 
useful way forward.  It provides a way for us to come together behind a 
Committee view about 
the medium-term inflation outlook and about the economy™s performance relative to the 

employment mandate, conditional on our current policy stance now and as anticipated.  
Then we 

can usefully formulate the Committee™s reaction function as a mapping from that consensus vi
ew into policy choices.  ﬁMedium-
term inflation is too high relative to target
ﬂ:  That would say you 
should contemplate reducing accommodation.  ﬁThe unemployment rate is too high over the 

medium run relative to 
mandate
-consistent levels
ﬂ:  Then the Committee should contemplate 
adding accommodation. 
Mr. Chairman, the Committee™s consensus view about the economy seems clear, and it™
s been described in many recent FOMC statement
s. The Committee expects inflation to be at or 
below target over the medium run and unemployment to continue to be elevated fo
r some time 
relative to mandate
-consistent levels.  That consensus viewŠ
inflation 
running too low; 
                 
        
                         unemployment, too highŠimplies a need for additional accommodation, accommodation that 
would lower unemployment while keeping inflation near target. 
I open
ed by discussing a public desire, 
at least in the Ninth District
, for greater clarit
y about our reaction function.  In the next go-round, 
I™ll describe how
, by fulfilling that desire
, we 
can also provide additional accommodation.  And I™ll return to the question being posed to me 

implicitly by my Ninth District interlocutors
:  Under what conditions 
will
 the FOMC begin to 
raise the fed funds rate? I will argue that our communications often suggest the FOMC is 

unwilling to tolerate low unemployment, even if that low unemployment rate is not translating 

into medium-
term inflationary pressure
s.  And I think p
aragraph 5
 of 
alternative B offers us an 
opportunity to clarify our attitude toward low unemploymentŠthat we™re not against low 

unemployment 
if it doesn™t lead to medium
-term inflationary pressures. Maybe that clarification 
could provide stimulus that™s appropriate in light of the Committee™s consensus outlook.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
The 10
th District economy continues to 
expand at a moderate pace. Our retail, restaurant
, and auto contacts reported higher sales and 
expect gains in coming months, particularly those in the auto sector.  
Energy activity expanded 

further as gains in oil drilling outpaced declines in natural gas drilling.  Housing marke
t conditions continued to improve, and construction activity increased for both residential and 

nonresidential sectors.  
Manufacturing activity in the 
District expanded at a slightly faster pace in 
August.  The number of contacts in our manufacturing surve
y who 
were expecting higher levels 
of production and shipments in six months moved notably higher, and expectations of 

employment gains remained in positive territory. 
One component of our survey that has softened 
      
    
       
                           over the past several months is the expec
ted level of new export orders.  The number of contacts 

reporting higher levels has been declining but still outweighs those expecting an outright decline.  

So far this year
, total 
District exp
orts remain above their level a year ago, though exports to 
Eur
ope have been decreas
ing. 
In terms of the D
istrict labor market
, initial claims for 
unemployment insurance have declined notably over the past few months, and layoff 

announcements have been modest.  Still, employers remain quite cautious about expanding their 

payrolls.  
In terms of ag
ricultural
 conditions, U.S. net farm incomes are 
projected to reach their 
second
-highest level in history despite the worst dr
ought in three decades. Farm incomes are 
being supported by higher crop prices and crop insurance payments, 
which are offsetting 

declines in production and livestock profits.  In addition, the persistent, strong demand from the 

ethanol and export sectors continues to strain low crop inventories and could 
place upward 

pressure on prices heading into 2013 as reflected in futures markets. 
Turning to the national outlook, the recovery has been progressing mostly in line with my 
expectations.  Overall, I take a similar view as the 
Tealbook in that incoming dat
a since the last 
meeting ha
ve not materially affected my outlook for 
economic 
growth.
  For the second half of 
this year, I anticipate 
that 
firms will remain reluctant to undertake large expansion projects or 
aggressively add to payrolls because of the near-term risk.  In particular, I noted in the most 

recent NFIB survey that small businesses cite taxes and the regulatory landscape as their most 

pressing problems, with poor sales third on the list.  These issues are reaffirmed when I talk with 

my business contacts, 
and suggest that monetary policy may find it particularly challenging to 

offset headwinds of this nature.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 
                    
                         MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Incoming information since our last 
meeting suggests that economic conditions in the 
Third
 District have continued to improve 
modestly.  Although labor markets and manufacturing remain subdued, the housing sector and 
retail
 sales have strengthened notably.  Housing markets in the D
istrict are 
showing their 
strongest signs of recovery since the recession began.  House prices are up significantly in the 

second quarter in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.  Housing permits driv
en mostly by multifamily
-sector housing have been on an upward trend, and residential builders and real estate agents both 

reported increased activity in August.  
The commercial real estate market is also showing 

continued signs of strength.  Tightening in the office market in C
enter 
City
, Philadelphia, 
is 
placing upward pressure o
n rents.  
Retail sales in the region have grown somewhat faster over 
the intermeeting
 period, and auto sales have continued to increase at a good pace. 
Turning to the nation, based on incoming information, my forecast for the second half of 
this year is not terribly enlightening. It™s modest
, and I think it will continue to be over the 

coming six months.  
How
ever, my medium-term and longer-term forecasts have not changed 
very much and, indeed, point to a continuing modest recovery.  Given the large size and nature 

of the shocks that hit the economy, a slow recovery, 
as we™ve heard
, is actually the most likely 
outcome.  It™s not necessarily evidence that our monetary policy stance is inappropriate.  Indeed, 

many of the rules reported in Tealbook 
B suggest 
that policy is about right.  Political and fiscal 
uncertainties at home and abroad still cloud the outlook and are holding back business 

investment.
  Overwhelmingly, 
the anecdotal evidence suggests that business leaders
™ reluctance 
to invest and hire i
s driven by uncertainty, not excessively tight financial conditions.  Households 
continue to deleverage, and that™s holding back spending as saving remains high.  My concern is 

that 
none of the
se headwinds will likely be ameliorated or substantially affected in the near term 
                
    
                             with further monetary easing or the 
further 
easing 
of 
financial conditions.  That doesn™t seem to 
be a constraint. 
I know I™m not alone in having wished for a stronger employment report last Friday.  
The 
payroll increase in August and the downward revisions to June and July were disappointing.  
Despite the strong actions that the Fed has taken, the unemployment rate remains above 

8 percent.
 This has generated a discussion about whether the continuing high levels of 
unemployment are structural or cyclical in nature. I actually don™t find this conversation very 

useful, particularly for policy.  Rather, 
I believe 
it™s better to think about whether the high level 
of unemployment can be addressed by further easing of financial conditions, whic
h is what 
monetary policy would entail.  
It seems to me that before we conclude that unemployment calls 
for more monetary policy accommodation, we must understand more about the nature of the 

shock that™s caused high unemployment and its unwelcome persiste
nce.  This is consistent with 
President Lacker™s observations.  It™s not about whether unemployment is 
cyclical, structural, 
permanent
, or temporary, necessarily.  It™s about understanding the nature of the shock that™s 
causing the problem that we observe. 
There™s still a lot we don™t understand about the labor market and its ongoing struggles.  
Academic and public debate expresses a wide range of views, and we should be humble about 

our state of knowledge.  We™ve discussed, for example, the difficulty of t
ransferring skills from 
one sector to another.  Those who lost their jobs in construction will have a hard time going to 

other industries.  But this type of unemployment cannot be solved by monetary policy.  

However,
 it™s not the only source of mismatch.  
Skill mismatch can occur within sectors, not just 
across sectors. 
Jai
movich and S
iu point to what™s called job polarizatio
n.  Job opportunities in 
middle
-skill occupations, which tend to be focused on routine tasks, 
are disappearing because of 
                
                  
          changes in 
technology and other things, while low-
skill
 and high-skill job opportunities are in 
fact increasing.
  The employment share of routine occupationsŠthis middle group, which 
includes jobs 
such as machine operators, meat
-processing plant workers, and 
office a
nd administrative supportŠ
has been decreasing since the mid
-1980s.  At the same time, the 
employment share of nonroutine cognitive occupationsŠincluding surgeons, lawyers, and, 
of 
course, economistsŠand that of nonroutine manual operationsŠ
whether it be janitors, 

gardeners, bartenders, 
or 
home health care
Šhave been rising. 
In other words, there appears to 
be a polarization in the job market to
ward the low and the high, 
or the tails of the distribution
, and away from the middle.  During the three jobless recoveries since 1991, the level of 

employment in these routine occupations has never recovered to pre-
recession levels.  The 
absolute level appears to fall and fall permanently.  The fact 
that 
this job loss seems to occur 
sharply during rece
ssions makes it appear to be cyclical, but it does not recover.  This is a 
phenomenon that cannot be addressed by monetary policy.  
For t
hose who point to low w
age 
growth as evidence against mismatch
, it™s interesting to note that real wages in the tail of 
the 
distribution actually seem to be rising modestly, unlike in the middle of the distribution.  Again, 

we do not have definite answers to what™s happening in the labor market, but we need to 

consider that evidence exists that the problems may not be amen
able to monetary policy 
or easing of financial conditions. 
The FOMC has applied a high level of monetary stimulus during this recession and 
recovery.  The fed funds rate has been effectively zero for four years, and we 
have said we 
expect 
it to remain 
there 
at least through late 2014.  We have implemented two rounds of asset 
purchases, followed by the maturity extension program.  Yet unemployment remains high.  

Given this evidence, one could draw two possible conclusions.  One is that monetary policy is 
         
    
    
                   
  
         
   
   
   the right tool, but we just haven™t implemented a large enough program.  Given the sluggish 
employment response to date and the large amount of stimulus that has been supplied
, it seems 

as though 
it™s increasingly plausible that further monetary accommodation
 is not going to be 
effective in quickening the pace of recovery to 
a higher 
level
 of employment
, much as we wish it 
could. 
One still might argue that because high unemployment is very costly and we are 
uncertain about the effect of more monetary policy accommodation, we should try it.  What do 

we have to lose?  Well, in my view, 
we have a lot to lose. The large
r the balance sheet becomes
, the higher 
are 
the risks to the economy that we will not be able to exit in a way that preserves 
price stability, maximum employment
, or 
our own credibility.  Ever-more-
aggressive action 
increases the r
isk of poor outcomes in the not-too-distant future or maybe the distant future.  
To avoid this, we are going to have to be relying on tools that are not guaranteed to work.  Inflation 

expectations, while stable, are stable 
until they™re not.  Should inflation begin to rise quickly, we 

may have to contract our balance sheet at a very fast pace or perhaps raise IOER very rapidly. 

Will that be disruptive to markets? We won™t 
know until we face that situation.  If our policy is 

not very effective at influencing unemployment rates, then inflation could begin to rise well 

before unemployment has shown much of a decline.  Will we have the fortitude to take the 

necessary actions to reduce accommodation
, and if so, how well will we be able to communicate 
our rationale?  Would we disrupt markets? Would we reverse the progress on unemployment? I 

have grave concerns that we are sowing the seeds of a very complicated exit for little or
 no benefit to the unemployment rate today.  
We say these exit risks are manageable, and I™d like to 

believe that they are, but we really don™t know that.  Given the unprecedented nature of the 

actions we™ve taken, how manageable these risks are is really 
unknowable at this time.  
We are 
       
      
                 
         
    
     
     
   
       and will be in uncharted waters.  That™s one reason I strongly urge us to be prudent.  To my 
mind
, at this point, costs of further action greatly exceed expected benefits.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank 
you.  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, just as 
President Lacker was 
a straight man for President 
Lockhart, in a 
way
, President Plosser has been a straight man for me
.  L
ike President Pianalto
, I will interlocutate 
[laughter] 
more tomorrow than I plan to do today. 
President Williams made a very important point. 
He talked about how uncertainty has 
paralyzed most businesses and how uncertainty acts as an aggregate demand shock.  I agree with 

that analysis. I hear that from my contacts.  The ques
tion is, is monetary policy effective in 
offsetting this form of uncertainty?  President George mentioned the National Federation of 

Independent Business.  She cited some data.  What she did not cite was that 93 
percent of that 

sample makes clear that they
 do not wish to borrow, 
either because of uncertainty or because 
they have access to capital that
™s abundant and cheap.  In my own surveys 
as preparation for this 
meeting, I asked a simple question
: If the actions we were to take at this upcoming meeting 
were 
to reduce your cost of capital by 25 basis points or more, what would it do in terms of your 

investment plans? I deliberately sampled larger companies because that™s 
where cap
-ex come
s from.  Employment comes from small
 and medium-sized businesses.  
We assume that, just by 

sheer wei
ght of numbers, significant cap-
ex come
s from large corporations.  And I would say 
that 
9 out of 10 said it would not change 
thei
r investment plans, even if we took action that led to 
a reduction 
of 
1 percent or more in the
ir cost of capital.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 
                       
     
                           
    
        VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  First, I want to make a comment on President Fisher™s 
last remark.  My understanding is that capital spending has never been particularly i
nterest rate 
sensitive.  It™s really driven by demand and capacity utilization, things of that nature.  So I 
wouldn™t expect that to be a really strong channel by which monetary 
policy stimulates the 
economy. 
MR. FISHER.  Can I just make a point to that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
.  Sure. 
MR. FISHER.  At least in the drafts 
of our statement, we were 
saying that 
business fixed 
investment was weak.  The question is, are we affecting business fixed investment?  And, more 

important than 
that, are we affecting employment? 
My point is that in the responses I™
m getting 
to anecdotal 
inquiryŠ
not systematically organized, although the systematic surveys that we see, 
through the NFIB and others, show 
that it is questionable whether or not we are ac
tually 
affec
ting employment.  The question is, 
are we affecting employment 
over the short term or the 
long term?  We have a wealth effect.  The Chairman has made that a very strong argument, 

including 
at the last meeting. 
If you™re advising 
a corporation about what to do with the savings 
that they can achieve through cheaper capital
, they can invest it in greater plant or equipment 
expansion, they can buy back their stock, or they can increase their dividends.  And I would 

argue that the former would have 
a more immediate impact on employment creation than the 
latter. 
Excuse me. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
My point was that I don™t think very many people in the 
room would debate the point that capital spending is not going to be very influenced by small 

changes
 in interest rates.  So I don™t think that™
s something that we have a big disagreement 
about around the table. 
                    
             
    
          
           
    
    As far as the outlook is concerned, since the last meeting, I think there™
s been very little 
change with respect to the U.S. data.  Some data are 
a bit better
Šthe retail sales data, the motor 
vehicle sales data.  Some are 
worse
Šlike the ISM, which fell below 50, and the components of 
the ISM were particularly weak. 
Inventory strength actually held up the ISM, which is a little 
concerning.  T
he cap
ital goods orders have clearly been weak.  I™ve noticed that, if you look at 
the nondefense capital goods orders ex air, the rate of orders now has 
fallen below the rate of 
shipments, and this is actually not a positive indicator for what™s going to happen 
to capital 
spending going forward. In terms of payrolls, I was prepared to come into the meeting, if we had 

a strong payroll employment report, to argue how noisy the data 
are
 and how we can™t take a
ny signal from 
that
. But the reality is, if you really
 look at the trendŠand understand that there™
s a 
lot of noise in the 
series
Šthe last two months, 118,000 per month
; so far this year
, 139,000 per 
month
; in 2011, 153,000 per month.  Now, there™s noise month to month, but if you look at the 

longer-
term tren
ds, 
what you see is basically either a flat trend or maybe a gradually slowing 
trend.  So that™s what I would take away from the payroll data. 
There are 
also two other negative developments that I think are really worth highlighting.  
First, I think the external environment continues to worsen.  We™ve talked a lot about Europe, but 

we haven™t really talked very much about China.  ChinaŠif you look at the 
official GDP growth 
numbersŠ
is still okay; 7.6 percent, I think, 
was 
the number for the last quarter.  But if you look 
at the actual indicators coming out of China
Šlike 
trade
, for exampleŠ
it would not at all 
surprise me if it turned out that the Chinese sl
owdown was much more substantial than what the 

official indicators 
show.  
We™re also going to be seeing a further shock to real income over the 
near term from higher oil, gasoline, and grain prices.  T
he grain price effect is going to be 
particularly probl
ematic for the EMEs
, where f
ood is a much larger share of the consumption 
          
  
      
          
        
        
     
    
 basket.
  Also, as many other people have noted, the risks in early 2013 are tilted to the downside 
given what
™s going to happen on the fiscal front.  I don™t think any of us knows 
with any 
certainty what
™s going to happen, but the uncertainty between now and then is negative for the 
outlook.  And I think most of us 
believe 
that we
™re probably going to end up with some greater 
degree of fiscal restraint in early 2013 than what we have 
right now. 
So to me, the economic outlook calls for us to do more.  Now, I agree that the tools we 
have are not that powerful.  But rather than concluding from this that we shouldn™t use them, I 
conclude that we should use them more forcefully.  I think 
a failure to act forcefully at this 
meeting would be very damaging to confidence; 
it would imply that we
™re out of ammunition or 
almost out of ammunition
; and it 
also 
might signal that we were cowed by the political 
environment, which I think would be very u
nfortunate.
  When I consider the risks to action 
versus inaction in an uncertain world, I also view the outcome very much as quite 
asymmetric, 
with the bias clearly on the side of action.  
Consider two alternatives
:  We do more, and the 
economy is stronger 
than expected
; versus, 
we do very little
, and the economy disappoints.  
Which creates the greatest disappointment? Surely the latter. 
I would be very happy if we did 
another round of LSAPs, extended the guidance, et cetera, and the economy turned out to 

surprise us and did better than expected.  In that case, we could cut off the LSAP program early, 

and the balance sheet wouldn™t have grown very much.  In contrast, if we do nothing and the 

economy disappoints, I think we will rue that as a lost opportuni
ty. I also think the timing is 
right.  The ECB did something very forceful at their last meeting, and following on right behind 

them might actually provide a firmer underpinning or momentum to confidence and market 

sentiment. 
       
         
             
           Now, what
™s the lesson of the past few years? Well, I think the lesson of the past few 
years is 
that 
we™ve been consistently disappointed on the 
economic 
growth side of the equation.  
There are two explanations for this.  One is that the headwinds were greater than what we 
thought, but there™
s another explanation as well
Šthat maybe monetary policy is not as 
accommodative as we thought.  And this goes back to President Williams™s 
comments. 
I™
m pretty convinced that monetary policy stimulus effects probably become attenuated over time, 
because part of the way that monetary policy works is by affecting the timing of spending 

decisions.  We don™t really have an experience where we
™ve had a period like this in which 

monetary policy has supposedly been very loose for many years in a row.  A
nd I expect what 
we™re seeing is that the monetary policy impulse to the growth side is actually lessening over 
time.
  Regardless of whether you say it™s consistent disappointment because of headwinds or 
consistent disappointment because monetary policy is not as 
stimul
ative
, as we thought, I think 
either way
, they both imply that we should do more.  
We™ve essentially foreshadowed forceful 
action in the August FOMC statement, the minutes to that meeting, and the Chairman™s Jackson 

Hole speech, so I think it™s time to follow up on what we™ve foreshadowed with action at this 

meeting.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anybody for coffee?  Coffee is available.  Why don™t we 
take 20 minutes and return at 3:10? 
[Coffee break] 
CHA
IRMAN BERNANKE
.  This i
s a prompt group.  I like this. 
MR. 
LACKER
.  Thanks to Debbie.  Thanks to the Deputy S
ecretary. 
MS. DANKER.  Happy to help. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  All right.  Governor Yellen. 
      
    
      
           
                     
     
  
    
MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The two employment reports we have 
received since our last meeting confirm that the economy is growing too slowly to generate any 
meaningful progress in improving labor market conditions.  They™re consistent with an economy 
that is expanding at or near its potential.  And although I was heart
ened by July™s strong reading 
on consumer spending, I agree with the staff™s reluctance to make too much out of one month of 

better data.
  Taking a broader perspective, incoming data provide no evidence of any 
fundamental change in the outlook for the better.  I agree with the conclusion, too, of the staff 

memo for this meeting that the preponderance of evidence points to a large margin of labor 

market slack. 
If payroll gains are sustained at their recent paceŠaround 125,000 per month in 
July and AugustŠ
there
™s a good chance that we will look back on a lost decade.  The SEP 
forecast I submitted this round shows unemployment hovering above 7 percent at the end of 

2014, even with substantial additional policy accommodation.  Moreover, continued progress at 

the pace we have seen recently is a big ﬁif.ﬂ 
Readings from some forward
-looking indicators, 
such as the expectations component of consumer sentiment and new orders for nondefense 

capital goods ex aircraft, do not bode well for household and business spending in the months 

ahead. 
Amid the search for explanations of the painfully slow recovery, there™
s been a lively 
debate about the role of economic uncertainty.  Now, there are many different sources of 

economic uncertainty, but many of you have highlighted uncertainty about economic policy, 

especially about European policy responses and about the outlook for U.S. fiscal policies.  

You
™ve noted that this policy uncertainty has been restraining household and business spending.  
And several of you have hypothesized that this might account for the weak spending and hiring 

we saw last spring. 
If uncertainty about economic policy as opposed to uncertainty about the 
                      
     
                    broader economic outlook, accounts for why employers were deferring hiring and investment 
decisions, then a lifting of that uncertainty might arguably provide a significant boost to 

spending.  Under a favorable scenario, for example, we could see some resolution of fiscal policy 

uncertainty in the months after the election.  My own view is that policy un
certainty has been 
exerting some negative influence on aggregate demand.  Some systematic evidence of its 

influence comes from empirical work by Nick Bloom at Stanford.  Bloom and his coauthors have 

developed a high-frequency measure of economic policy uncertainty, and they™
ve related this 
measure to key economic variables, such as payroll employment growth.  They show that 

increases in economic policy uncertainty foreshadow declines in output, employment, and 

investment, and that high levels of policy uncertainty in recent years, such as uncertainty about 

future tax policies and the debt ceiling, have hampered the recovery. 
But economic policy uncertainty is only one of many factors relevant to the economic 
outlook.  And the evidence, as I read it, strongly suggests that an uptick in policy uncertainty 

cannot account for last spring™s slowdown.  Bloom™s index of economic p
olicy 
uncertainty 
spiked up in the summer of 2011, but by March it had fallen back two-thirds of the way toward 

pre
-recession levels. 
It remained at low levels in April and May, at the very time when the 
economic recovery was sputtering.  On the premise that economic policy uncertainty affects 

economic activity through consumer and business sentiment, it™s also worth noting that several 

ind
exes of consumer sentiment and business optimism peaked in April or May.  
So an increase in 
economic policy uncertainty does not seem capable of explaining the spring slowdown.  This 

suggests to me that spending is unlikely to surge, even if policy uncerta
inty were to diminish in 
the months ahead.  Unfortunately, our current economic malaise has substantially deeper roots 

than just uncertainty about the future direction of economic policy, and these headwinds are 
           
       
    
        unlikely to soon subside. Uncertainty, broadly defined, does, however, influence my thinking 
about monetary policy.  Uncertainty provides a reason why we should act forcefully now to 

strengthen the recovery, rather than trying to keep our powder dry.  Given the downside risks to 

the current outlook, and the constraints on our ability to provide stimulus while the funds rate is 

at the lower bound, the best we can do at this point is to ensure that the economy is as resilient as 

possible in case we are faced with fiscal gridlock, a European debacle, o
r other negative shocks. 
Another argument for strong action relates to h
yste
resis.  We face the worrisome risk that 
the longer the economy operates with such high levels of slack, the more likely it is that the 

downturn will have a lasting negative impact on employment and potential output.  I™
ve seen no 
strong evidence for h
yste
resis effects yet, but our current situation is unprecedented, at least in 
recent U.S. history.  
In the early 1980s, the unemployment rate fell almost 
4 percentage points 
over the 2¾ years following its late 1982 peak, to 7 percent.  By contrast, since its most recent 

peak in October 2009, the unemployment rate has fallen less than 2 percentage points.  

Moreover, h
yste
resis effects may become evident not only in the unemployment rate, but also in 
labor force participation.  As the Tealbook box shows, the participation rate remains far below 

the staff™s estimate of its demographic trend rate, and persistently poor job-finding prospects may 

well leave a permanent imprint on the particip
ation rate.
  Taking this argument one step further, I 
would argue that just as there can be permanent costs of allowing unemployment to remain high 

for an extensive time, there can also be permanent gains in output and employment in a high-

pressure labor market.
  We saw some evidence of this in the late 1990s, when h
yste
resis seemed 
to be working in reverse by pulling population segments into the labor force that for a long time 

had been excluded.  Chronic labor shortages induced firms to invest more heavily in training, 
         
        
       
                        
and it fostered upward mobility as firms moved employees up through internal job ladders more 
rapidly. 
Hyste
resis provides a rationale for 
a more expansionary monetary policy.  The argument 
runs as follows.  Our usual loss function is symmetric around 
the 
NAIRU.  It thus assigns equal 

costs to given size deviations of unemployment above and below 
the 
NAIRU.  But with 
hyste
resis
, the penalty for a deviation of unemployment above 
the 
NAIRU should be greater than 
that for an identical deviation of unemployment below 
the 
NAIRU.
  The implications of such an 
asymmetric weighting of unemployment gaps for optimal monetary policy in the present 

circumstances are substantial.  Bob Tetlow, a staff member in the 
Board™s 
Division of Research 
and Statistics, has been exploring optimal control simulations where the loss function depends on 

the squared deviations of a transformation of the unemployment rate from the NAIRU, rather 

than on the squared deviations of the unemployment rate itself from the 
NAIRU. 
This is a 
tractable technique for, in effect, assuming an asymmetric loss function.  In Tetlow™s 

simulations, the only policy tool available is the path of the federal funds rate.  His results 

showed that even a moderately lower weight on unemployment undershoots below the NAIRU, 

relative to overshoots, could postpone the timing of liftoff substantially. 
Based on all of these considerations, in tomorrow™s policy go-round or maybe this 
afternoon™s, I will argue that strong policy action is called fo
r at this meeting. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was going to make comments about my 
forecast compared 
with
 the consensus, but I™m not entirely sure which one of the consensus 
forecasts to compare it 
with. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You pick. 
[Laughter] 
          
              
                      
        
       MS. DUKE. I
™ll just say that I think it
™s not inconsistent, but there are four assumptions 
that are a little bit different in my forecast than in the Tealbook and
, maybe
, in the forecasts of 
some of you.  Th
e first one 
is that there is an underlying strength in the fundamentals of the 
economyŠ
such as balance sheet strength, debt service capacity, and credit supply
Šand that this 
strength is being masked by low levels of business and consumer confidence as well 
as concern 
about risks posed by Europe and the fiscal cliff, but that whenever loan demand picks up, 
the 
credit supply will be fully available to meet it. 
The second
 one is 
that it
™ll be especially difficult 
to interpret data over the second half of this year and the first half of next year, as investment and 

purchase decisionmaking is increasingly either paralyzed or distorted by uncertainty about 

federal tax and spending policies, and that, on balance, the uncertainty itself will depress activity 

and lead to weaker outcomes for 2012 and 2013.  Third, the one place I do still see a potential for 

an upside surprise is in housing, and I 
believe
 purchasing mortgages might be helpful here, but 
not necessarily in the ways that you might think.  And, finally, I 
have assumed that we choose 
alternative B today
.  Furthermore, in light of my assumptions about the fiscal cliff, we™
re more 
likely to face deteriorating conditions than simply unsatisfactory progress as we approach the 

end of the year; 
and that the deter
ioration will lead us to continue asset purchases well into 2013. 
In recent meetings
, I™ve talked at length about my belief in the first assumption, and I™
m not going to repeat that today.  But I™d like to discuss assumptions 2 and 3 in this round and 

rese
rve comments about assumption 4 for the policy round.  
Beginning with my pessimism about 

the rest of this year and the first part of next, almost every conversation that I™
ve had with a 
business person or a banker recently has ha
d the same theme: 
Things s
eem pretty much the 
same
Šslow, steady improvement in business fundamentals, but with a new tendency to put all 

long-term investment or expansion decisions off until after the election.  Oddly enough, these 
                     
             
                  
businesses have the luxury of postponing decisionm
aking precisely because things have 
improved.  They™ve strengthened their balance sheets and found ways to grow the bottom line 
even in the face of sluggish top-
line growth. In fact, their profitability
-improvement efforts are 
likely at least partly 
responsible for the slow improvement in labor markets.  Indeed, the business 
investments that do get the green light are mostly directed at saving labor, and no one mentions 

any plans for hiring.  I believe the marked slowdown in business spending that we™
re already 
seeing is 
a direct result of a wait
-and
-see attitude. 
As we get closer to the end of the year and the expiration of tax cuts, implementation of 
expense sequestration, and expiration of fixes for doctors and alternative minimum taxes, 

businesses 
and individuals will have to start making adjustments for what could happen, whether 

or not it actually does.  For example, contractors who expect that they™
ll have to cut staffing if 
their contracts are affected by sequestration are legally required to is
sue layoff notices in 
advance, even if the spending is not ultimately cut and the layoffs don™t actually happen.  Those 

who receive the notices will surely adjust their spending accordingly, and this potential pall on 

holiday spending has to be making retailers nervous about their inventories.  Those same 

retailers are having to pull the trigger now on their inventory decisions in the face of a potential 

shutdown of E
ast 
Coast ports by a longshorem
en™s
 strike.  So who could blame them if they 
decide to shav
e a bit off their purchases just to be sure? 
Health
-care companies are especially 
cautious as they plan for both sequestration and implementation of health-
care reform.  Simple 
operational changes, like tax withholding tables, have to be put in place for all businesses.  For 

individuals, asset sales decisions, especially for sales of businesses, will have to be made soon to 

ensure the current capital gains tax rate. I had the personal experience of doing a new will 

recently, and my lawyer explained to me 
that things would be very different if I died this year or 
              
                
        
   
         
 in January [laughter].  For these reasons, I believe that the fourth quarter is going to be 
affe
cted 
by the fiscal cliff regardless of its ultimate resolution as businesses
, in particular
, hit the 
brakes. 
And I ca
n™t convince myself that a lame
-duck Congress will somehow resolve all of the fiscal 
issues by the end of the year, no matter how the election turns out.  In fact, the best case I can 
construct is a temporary extension that pushes the poli
tical wrangling well into the first quarter 
of next year.  And after the debt ceiling brinkmanship we saw last time, I think a perfectly 

plausible scenario is a plunge off the fiscal cliff
, on the assumption that some sort of deal will be 
easier to construct after the damage becomes more obvious.
  So I think we have to make 
contingency plans for how we can shore up confidence in the face of a really bad outcome, 
rather 
than thinking just about 
how we react if the recovery stays unsatisfactorily slow.  For these 
reasons, I
™ve taken on board a bit of a lean toward the 
ﬁFiscal 
Cliff
ﬂ scenario in the near
-term 
portion of my forecast. 
In contrast, my continued optimism about housing and the underlying strength in the 
economy shows through in my medium-
term foreca
st.  I think 
that 
the inventory factors that 
began to emerge early in the year are now taking full hold in house price movements, and that 

the momentum arrow is pointing up.  This makes a difference.  
The s
taff estimates that roughly 
3 million households, 
almost 
one-
fourth
 of underwater households, moved from a negative to a 
positive equity position in the second quarter.  The Tealbook baseline forecast assumes a 

5 percent increase in house prices this year that
™s already pretty much baked in, 
followed by a 
leveling
-off.  But some models are predicting continued strong gains in house prices.  Staff 
forecasts of house prices and residential investment are on the conservative side, tempered by 

concern about foreclosure pipelines, 
the elevated level of vacant h
ouses, weak household 
formation, and the tepid pace of 
the 
housing recovery so far. 
                                  Here I think there™
s reason for more optimism. 
Foreclosure pipelines are full because the 
exits are still clogged, but the pace of new delinquencies has slowed markedly.  
The exits are no 
longer clogged by national moratoriums or retooling for new modification programs.  The 

current backlog is more closely tied to state
-specific or operational issues that seem to me 
unlikely to suddenly clear and release a flood of foreclosures onto the market.  
As for the vacant 

inventory, a large portion of the vacant homes not listed for sale 
is outside of bank REO 
inventory.  
Becaus
e we don™t know why they™
re held off the market, I
™m not sure we can make 
assumptions about their sudden return to the market.  I view the potential for pent-up demand to 

show through in faster household formation and put upward pressure on house prices as even 

more likely than the potential for a surge in foreclosures to hold prices down.  At some point, 

demographics win.  Those kids now living at home with their 
parents will not stay there until 
they™re 40.  
[Laughter] 
And when they do form households, they™re going to require housing 
units, whether rental or owner occupied. 
MR. 
FISHER
.  We™re going to hold you to that. 
MS. 
RASKIN
.  Ship them to Betsy™s house.  [Laughter] 
MS. DUKE.  To me, this represents the one area of dry tinder in the economy that could 
be lit with a spark of confidence.  To be sure, mortgage lending conditions are still extremely 

tight, but some recent developments should help.  The specte
r of putback risk has reportedly 
been holding back loans to borrowers at the lower end of GSE standards.  
The 
FHFA has now 

committed to reducing putback risk beginning in January 2013 through better front-end quality 

control and time limits on liability.  Wit
h house prices on the rise, fewer loans should fall 

through 
because of
 appraisal issues.  Regulatory uncertainty should clear, 
as new regulatory 
               
     
                  
      
          requirements for loan origination, securitization, and servicing are likely to be finalized in the 
coming month
s. Probably the biggest drag on lending is the shrinkage of loan origination capacity.  The 
industry is showing signs of strain in what looks to be only a tri
llion
-dollar origination year, 
compared 
with 
a peak origina
tion of $3 trillion not that many years 
ago. 
But if high profits are 
the best fertilizer, we should see more banks entering the business.  I want to investigate actual 

data, but anecdotally, the bankers I spoke with this time 
who
 were in the mortgage business were 
actually having record profits, while those who weren™t in mortgage origination were wondering 

about their survival.  I™
m talking about the difference between a range of 
0.5 to 0.6 ROA, 
for 
those with no mortgage business, versus one of 1.30 to 1.50, for those with a mortgage business.  

So, for all of these reasons, I think there™s a lot of meat left on the house price and housing 
finance bone, and I™
m optimistic about that part of the forecast.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO
.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Because
 John captured my views on the 
economic outlook, I™m going to jettison most of what I would have said.  In fact, I think John 

captured my views better than I had captured my views.  So I thought I™d turn back to labor 

markets
, moved by some of Charlie Plosser™s comments.  The first comment I™d make 
is that it™s 
important to distinguish between cyclical lab
or market conditions and longer-
term labor market 
issues.  I don™t think there™s any doubt that we™ve got some chronic labor market issues in the 

United States.  There
™s been evidence of declining dynamism in U.S. labor markets for well over 
a decade.  There certainly is a substantial sense tha
t people currently taking lower-
income 
service
-sector jobsŠ
if they had better ed
ucation and trainingŠwould be available for jobs that 
might then 
be created with higher value added. 
What Charlie referred to as polarization is 
                         
     
                   
  
     
   undoubtedly true, but again, a chronic issue rather than a cyclical one.  I actually think that 
unlike so many other questions, there™s been a substantial convergence of viewsŠnot entirely, 

but a substantial convergence of viewsŠaround the proposition that a relatively small portion of 

the big jump in unemployment that we™ve seen is attributable to structural fact
ors. There
™s been, 
as you all know, substantial, good, and careful work from the Federal Reserve Banks of 

Cleveland, New York, 
and San Francisco over the past several years that
 has supported that 
conclusion.  A
nd I think among academic researchers, the c
onvergence is also manifesting itself
, as shown most recently in Ed Lazear™s paper at Jackson Hole, following on, by about five 

months, Jesse Rothstein™s paper, 
which surveyed much of the same material and came to many 

of the same conclusions. 
Jeff
, at the last meeting
, suggested that a paper done by Richmond Fed research staff was 
a dissonant voice on this basic proposition that structural unemployment was not a big part of the 

story.  This paper, of course, starts from a very different perspective on long-
term unemployment 
than the literature I just referred to a moment ago.  The Richmond Fed paper argues that an 

unobserved heterogeneity among unemployed workers means that newly unemployed workers 

have inherently different exit rates
, and that over 
time, the composition of the pool of the 
unemployed shifts toward workers who started with the lower exit rates.  I looked at the paper 

after Jeff talked about it at the last meeting, and I spoke with others here at the Board about it, 

and I actually don™t think it establishes a case for structural unemployment. There are a lot of 

empirical and technical questions about the paperŠ
it™s certainly interesting 
and may well have 
significant merit
Šbut I actually don™t think it™s making a structural argument, at 
least not if we 
think of ﬁ
structural
ﬂ as referring to nontransitory unemployment that can™t be affected fairly 
directly by fluctuations in aggregate demand.  It would be unsurprising to learn that firms are 
                
      
        
  
          more likely to lay off relatively less
-valued employees whose lesser perceived abilities may 
mean that they™re less likely to be quickly plucked up by a firm that is hiring.  That phenomenon 
is entirely consistent with 
a demand
-driven increase in unemployment.  
More generally, the 
Richmond Fed model attempts to decompose the variation in the pool of the unemployed over 

time.  So it addresses the reasons for fluctuations in unemployment over historyŠin recessions, 

but also in recoveries.  The reasons for unemploym
ent increases also explain the reversals that 
take place during recoveries.  That is, as there are fewer unemployed
, firms cannot afford to be 
as demanding and thus are more likely to turn to the pool of the supposedly less 
valuable 
workers. 
This seems
, to me at least
, more a 
cyclical than a structural explanation
, and thus, 
again, whatever the ultimate merits of the paper, I don™t think 
it really undercuts the consensus 

reached in the papers to which I referred earlier. 
One final thought on structural unemployment, 
and this relates a bit to what Janet was 
saying a moment ago.  The Richmond paper describes something as the ﬁtrue duration 

dependence
ﬂ position, as opposed to the ﬁunobserved heterogeneityﬂ position that it takes.  The 

true duration dependence position is that, quite apart from any inherent worker qualities, the bad 

luck of being unemployed for an extended period will itself begin to erode the overall 

employability of enough workers that there 
will 
be macroeconomic effects. As Janet said, 
histo
rically
, we haven™t seen much evidence of this in the United States, though many, myself 
included, have thought that the severity and duration of the current employment problem could 

produce some observable h
yste
resis effects this tim
e around.  L
ogically
, one would think that at 
some point these effects would manifest themselves.
  But I have to say, 
to date
, there still isn™t 
much indication of any such effects.  And indeed, I think if one looks at what™s been happening 

to long-term unemployed, you might sa
y there™s actually been a little bit of an improvement in 
                                       
their performance, which would suggest that we™re not sliding closer toward h
yste
resis, but that, 
once again
, for reasons not entirely understood, the U.S. 
labor market seems relatively insulated 
from those effects. But again, as Janet said, basically
, whether you believe that h
yste
resis is 
around the corner or not doesn™t change your policy prescription.  If you think that it hasn™t 
clicked in to date but it might, that™s an argument for greater stimulus now in order to stop it 

from happening.  If you think that there™s unlikely to be h
yste
resis and thus the cyclical 
explanation dominates, then obviously the unemployment should be susceptible to increased 

aggregate demand stimulus.  So, in that sense, I think 
these arguments
 happily converge around 
the same policy prescription.  And for me, 
this all, again, reinforces the view that the story of the 

economy is still one of inadequate aggregate demand.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  First
, I™d like to thank Governor Tarullo for reading the Richmond Fed 
paper
.  Second, I™d like to point out 
that
Šin terms of the distinction I was making before 
between what the unemployment rate would converge to in the long run and the reference rate 

that™s relevant for current policyŠ
a shock that hits the economy today, if it™s a structural shock 

that™s permanent and long lived, 
it is going to affect the longer-
term normal rate of 
unemployment
. But whether it™s permanent or transitory is irrelevant for whether it affects the 
policy-
relevant rate today.
  See what I™m saying? It doesn™t matter if it fades out right away or if 
it™s going to last a long time. It could affect the policy
-relevant rate to
day either way. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How does that handle policy lags?  Monetary policy doesn™t 
work for 
a while. 
       
                     
                 MR. LACKER.  I think that™s orthogonal.  I think that™s tangential to this question.  In the 
models, you™ve got policy lags.  Policy tak
es effect over time, but it™s still the case that you™re 
carrying around this reference rate
ŠPresident Bu
llard talked about a flex price equilibriumŠ 
and it™s affected by both transitory and permanent shocks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook has not changed materially since 
the JulyŒ
August meeting.  Maybe incoming data ha
ve been mixed, but forward-looking 
indicators still remain consistent with an economy growing in the near term in 
a range between 
1½ per
cent and 
2 percent. 
Similarly, the fact
ors shaping the medium-term outlook have not 
changed significantly
; the general contours of my outlook remain the same.  Yes, some of the 
incoming data during the interme
eting period suggested modest increases in household spending 
and employment, and the household sector showed some further slight signs of improvement.  

But no data 
are 
yet showing a basis to believe that these modest increases will be sustained to 
such an extent that faster momentum might be expected
.  Indeed, other data, such as those for 
business spending and consumer confidence, remain soft.  It is not yet obvious that this path, 
or 

even
 a couple of months of stronger-
than
-expected economic activity
, could reduce the amount 
of slack in labor market
s or alter the trajectory of expected inflation to a degree that would 
obviate the need for a further easing of monetary policy.  
Last week™s employment report
Š payroll employment only 55,000 higher than reported in July, 
after taking into account 

revisionsŠdoes not suggest above-trend 
economic 
growth or a declining trend in the 

unemployment rate.  It suggests, 
instead
, that the unemployment rate is likely to move sideways 
with no sign of a substantial and sustainable strengthening in the pace of economic recovery. 
               
                          And this unsatisfactory modal projection is what exists 
before
 even considering downside 
risks to the outlook.  One particular downside risk that remains quite elevated relates to what 
we™ve been talking about
Šthe depressed level of labor participation and the enhanced level of 
long-
term unemployment. 
The decline in the labor force participation rate since the
 beginning of 
the recession is ominous, and although the Board staff predicts that over the next couple of years 

the labor force participation rate will flatten out, the recession
, as Governor Yellen described, 
may well have permanent effects on the labor force participation rate
, just as the high-
pressure 
labor market of the late 1990s pulled people back into the labor force 
who
 had been excluded for 
a long time
Šonly now, unfortunately, 
in reverse. 
In addition, with a substantial and growing 
proportion of unemployed workers having been jobless for long periods, we face an elevated risk 

that such a high level of long-term unemployment will persist long enough to permanently 

depress labor supply and potential output.  Unlike downside risks emanating from the European 

crisis and U.S. fiscal policyŠ
which
, were they to occur, 
theoretically can be addressed with 
accommodative monetary policy after the fact
Šthe potential h
yste
resis created by drops in the 
labor force participation rate and increases in long-
term unemployment will prove intractable to 
address with accommodative monetary policy that isn™t inflationary.
  So I find the particular 
downside risk of h
yste
resis to be especially pernicious because it™s difficult to address after the 
fact. 
But
, more optimis
tically, it is one downside risk that monetary policymakers do have some 
ability to mitigate prior to its occurrence. 
Similarly, I wonder about the permanent or transitory nature of household and business 
expectations.  The economic outlook appears damped by some form of pessimism.  Look at the 

Michigan survey question on the proportion of households expecting unemployment to improve.  

Earlier this year
, that number had recovered, but now it has dropped down again.  
Similarly, 
      
        
     
                         
  households™ income expectations for the coming 12 months have hardly recovered at all since the 
recession despite the fact that actual income has somewhat increased.  On the business side, 

expectations for business conditions six months hence as measured in the Empire State and 

Philadelphia Fed surveys have dropped back sharply again.  In the case of the Empire State 

survey, they™re back close to levels seen during the recession.  Capital spending plans also don™t 

look great.  Surveys from the National Association 
for
 Business Economi
cs show capital 
spending to have dropped sharply in the second quarter.  Surveys from the National Federation 

of Independent Business show capital spending to be gradually rising, 
but still remaining at less 

than half of 
its pre
-recession level. 
It™s diffic
ult to project whether these expectations will 
transition from being temporary blips to permanent shifts, but the fact that these expectations 

have tried to recover from the recession before but been knocked back, sometimes more than 

once, might be a facto
r that could keep households and businesses from getting too hopeful 
again. The longer we have an economy that looks bleak as far as the eye can see, the more this 

bleakness gets built into expectations.  Households and businesses now see a recovery slow to 

materialize.  They assume that things will get better because they always have, but then th
ings 
don™t 
get better
.  So households and businesses start to wonder if this is just a delay or if it™s just 
the new normal.  If they think it™s the new normal, it could become just that.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In terms of the outlook, I™m reasonably close to 
the consensus forecast you put forth, and just a shade more upbeat than I was at ou
r last 

meeting
Šthat is to say, maybe a tenth or two lower on the unemployment rate for 2013. 
I™ve 
interpreted the incoming data since the last meeting inclusive of the jobs report on Friday as 

approximately a 
wash and feel 
as though the situation in Europe looks just a bit brighter.  So, 
             
       
     
   
                    
  
 overall
, I would say it appears we™re still about as 
ﬁstuck in the mud
ﬂ as we have been over the 
last several months, and I agree with Governor Tarullo™s characterization that it™s largely an 
aggregate demand phenomenon. 
In trying to think about the factors that are leading demand to be so sluggish and about 
the channels by which monetary policy might be able to help, I™ve been struck by a few pieces of 

survey evidence.  Now, they turn out to be the s
ame pieces of survey evidence that Governor 
Raskin was just referring to, thereby scooping a fair portion of what I was going to say. 
MS. RASKIN.  It happened to me for a long time.  [Laughter] 

MR. STEIN.  I™m going to 
just start juggling next time. 
Anywa
y, just to underscore, 
really
Šon the Michigan survey, we had a very interesting briefing a few weeks ago by Claudia 
Sahm,
 in R
esearch and 
Statistics
, who
™d been looking carefully at these data.  And the gist of the 
finding is, not only 
is it 
low, but 
also, basically
, it fell 
from
 2007 to 2009, and it really hasn™t 
recovered since.  Moreover, it™s not well explained by household characteristicsŠt
here™s a large 
negative residual there in a way that seems different from previous experience. 
In a similar vein 
but mu
ch less scientifically, I looked at a different survey, the Conference Board™s Consumer 
Confidence Index, which also fell in August.  Very much to your point, they do a breakdown of 

the index into views of the current situationŠ
a present situation in
dex
Šand a future 
expectations piece, and all of the drop was coming from the future expectations piece.  
So I was 

curious.  I went back and compared it 
with
 previous peaks of unemployment that we™ve had.  
The ones I looked at were May 1975 and December 1982.  W
hat you see is
, at those times when 
unemployment was also very high, if you ask
ed people about the present situation, it was dismal, 
but if you ask
ed them about future expectations, it was not nearly so bad as it is today.  These 
are 
just a couple of data points, but 
they™re 
consistent with what I take to be the spirit of Claudia™s 
                  
             
         
    
 work, which is, it™s as if, given where we are today and given the current situation, 
people feel 
the future is considerably more pessimistic
.  And again, I think this is pessimism as opposed to 
uncertainty, which has a slightly different implication because it™s less clear that, if the fiscal 

cliff resolves itself, this kind of thing gets fixed. 
Another survey on the business side
: I just yesterday got a s
urvey that Duke University 
does in conjunction with 
CFO 
magazine
, where they talk to 900 CFOs of U.S. firms.  One of the 
new questions in there this time
ŠI think, 
actually
, Steve Sharp
e helped them design this 
questionŠasked the firms if they would in any 
way change their capital spending plans for a 
given change in interest rates.
  Here
, it is strikingly like a large
-sample version of President 
Fisher™s CEO conversations, where only 3 percent of the firms say they would in any way 

change their capital spen
ding for a 50 basis point movement in rates.  
Now, I take Vice 
Chairman
 Dudley™s critique here.  First of all, in this one, unlike consumer confidence, we don™t 
have a benchmark
, so I don™t know what people would say in normal times
.  But as a Bayesian
, I™m inclined to think that there™s something going on here, even though I wouldn™t say it™s a huge 
thing. 
So, putting this together
Šnow, 
this part is very impressionistic, but I gue
ss the overall 
feeling I get 
from 
looking at these various pieces of survey e
vidence is the sense that when we 
make a policy move now, we™re playing more for whatever effect we can have on consumer and 

business confidence than for the normal hydraulic 
effe
ct we would have on financing conditions 
per se.  That is to say, we may know more about how to move interest rates than about how to 

influence confidence, but it™s the latter that, in some sense, is the dragging anchor.  This is not an 

ﬁalways
ﬂ situation.  I think it™s, in some 
respects, 
the opposite of where we were in 2009 at the 
                     
                    
  
  time of QE1
, when really the thing to do, the imperative, was to fix financing conditions, and 
people would figure it out one way or the other. 
I don™t know if this has any implications for policy. I
t strikes 
me that
, if this is right, it 
should color particularly how we think about the communications aspect.  I, 
like many others 
here
, believe
 that the need for action is clear, but I think, less so than usual, the bond market is 

not really our primary audience.
  So maybe when we think about policy, 
we want to worry less 
about putting together the biggest, most inclusive package that has the maximum bond market 

impact
, and worry more about, how do we deliver a simple and coherent message that normal 
humans can understand, as opposed to mainly Fed w
atchers
?  I think we™ll have a chance to talk 
about some of these issues.  I™m not sure if this concept is fully operational, but I have this 

conviction that we really have to think about our audience as being business m
anagers and 
householdsŠ
more so 
than at other times
.  There™s so much talk about, what are the Fed watchers 
expecting us to do
?  And I think we don™t want to get overly caught up in delivering just to them.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Than
k you.
  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
It does seem to me that there™s a decent 
degree of agreement
, or at least overlap
, about the status and outlook for the economy, and that 
the real question is, what can monetary policy do, 
and
 what should it do going forward?  And 
I™m going to defer that to tomorrow. 
In that spirit
, I propose to deprive the Committee of my 
detailed recitation of intermeeting events and proceed to 
the executive summary part of it
, which 
is, 
really
, that we™ve b
een on a round trip.  We had positive news early in the intermeeting 
period, which 
was a trip to hope and back, and it left me very much in the same place where I 
started
:  I see an economy with a substantial amount of slack that is growing at about 2 
percent
;          
                     
        
       inflation that is bouncing around just below 2 percent on commodity effects, 
but close to target
; and better financial conditions for now.  But as Europe improves, the fiscal cliff begins to 
approach in a serious way, and what I am hearing is that there is little to no hope of action in the 

lame duck.
  Of course, that depends on the arrangement of forces after the election, s
o it™s 
completely unknowable. 
Ultimately and most important
, there is little, if any, reason to expect 
significant improvement in job creation in the coming months. 
My conversations with a group of about 10 diverse industrial companiesŠ
this is not 
auto
s, so it™
s away from one of the real strengths
.  The other parts of the industrial sector, 
let me 
say
, are pretty weak
, and they s
trongly confirm that last point about employment.
  Outside of a 
couple of bright spots like housing and li
ght
 vehicles, it™s soft everywhere, especially in Europe.  
Big customers are postponing orders
; they™re not canceling them.  It™s nothing like from 2008 to 
2009, but the softness that began about six months ago is now the new normal for these 

companies.  The game is about share gain and taking out costs.  It™s 
a low
-growth environment.  
All new projects are on hold, and there is no hiring.  In fact, the 
entire goods
-producing sector of 
the economy lost 16,000 jobs in August.  If you look just at the manufacturing piece of that and 

go back over a quarter, there was a net creation of 15,000 jobs, and two-thirds of that is auto.  I 

want to say that you hear, 
ﬁUncertainty, uncertainty
,ﬂ 
from all 
of 
these people, but they™re really 
talking about two different things.  These are not people who roll over at 4:00 a.m. to check 

Twitter for the latest news from 
Karlsruhe
 on the German decision.  A 
particular compan
y in the 
beverage manufacturing business had a big order from a German OEM for a beverage line, and 

that order has been pushed out at least a quarter.  That™s uncertainty.  It™s about demand.  
As far 

as Europe relates to these companies
Šand 
these are pretty global companies
Šit™s really focused 
on demand.  The fiscal cliff is something different.  There™s a sick feeling in people™s stomachs 
                   
  
     
  
       
              
 that this is really bad, that this is our country not being able to function, and 
it™s like last August 
on steroidsŠnot that there™s anything wrong with steroids.  [Laughter]  They™ve been very 
helpful to me lately. 
Let me say where that leaves me
.  The question that looms isŠ
and I™m going to
, again
, leave aside monetary policy
Šwhen do we break out of this
?  And I really do believe that we 
will.  We always have. 
I can 
remember many of these cycles where you really wonder if this is it 
and we™re never going to get out. I really do feel that
 if you look at our own projections, 
essentially
, all of us project that we™re going to have those 3 
percent, 
4 percent catch
-up years.  
They™re now scheduled for 2014 and ™15, but really, there™s a ton of uncertainty around that.  So 

I™m going to share this highly anecdotal evidence in an effort to end on something of a high note. 
I talked to both private equity investors and hedge fund investors, and it™s always very 
interesting to compare the two of them.
  The hedge fund investors are in a really difficult 
environment.  They™re traders who get marked every quarter, 
and
, in a world that has very few 
ways for them to make money, they™re generally very conservatively positioned, and their 

investor base seems to be fine with that.  
Private equity firms are feeling quite differently about 

things.  They basically think about creat
ing value over a three
-to five
-year period, and many PE 
firms right now, large and small, think that this is a great time to buy. In fact, a str
ing of large 
industrial properties, which would ordinarily have been expected to trade to corporations, 
has 

trade
d to private equity.  T
here are three reasons why the private equity firms are feeling 
aggressive.  First, the
ir natural competitors
, these big companies
, are all frozen on the sideline
s, 
sitting on their cash, ruled by risk-averse public boards, and out of the game.  If anything, 
they™re 

going to wind up being net sellers as the recession goes on.  Second, leveraged 
finance markets, 
as Andreas was discussing this morning, are very attractive
, with low rates and issuer-
favorable 
            
                                    
      
   terms that are just about
 reminiscent of the bubble days, and all 
of 
that provides critical 
flexibility in case deals don™t go well. 
Third
Šand really the one that™s relevant for this policy 
exercise
Šprivate equity firms think about the medium term, and they see the future as bett
er. 
These large private equity firms 
are completely global; 
they 
each own hundreds of companies in 
every major economy and 
in 
every vertical
; and they systematically mine the data that they get 
and they™ve got the talent on board to do that.  This is not the private equity industry of 20 years 
ago.
  So they™re seeing something.  They really are.  It™s pretty consistent, and what™s holding 
back the volume of deals is only supply.  There was quite a similar pattern back in the early 

2000s after the dot-
com c
rash.  In that period, as many will recall, the S&P lost about half of its 
value.  We had a very soft economy in 2001 and 2002, a stri
ng of corporate accounting scandals 
leading to Sarbanes
ŒOxley, and a deflation scare in 2002.  Across the board, 
net sellers of 
businesses were
 on the sidelines, and the private equity firms were extremely aggressive during 
that period.  Those deals turned out to be, 
in many cases
, some of the best investments in the 
history of the industry.  It turned out to be a great time to buy.  I would also add that they were 

net sellers in 
2005 and 2006.  So the question is, 
why take any signal from this, right? I realize it 
doesn™t tell us anything at all about the next few quarters
.  B
ut I will say that it™s a bit of a sign
al to me because this is a group of investors with very successful and, in 
some cases
, long track 
records that were looking ahead to strong growth in the medium term, 
and they were willing to 

put more than just an opinion on the line in that belief.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Could I ask the Governor a question?  Geographically, 
do they express any preferences about where they want to have the business? 
MR. POWELL.  Yes.  T
he hedge funds are, as 
a staff mem
o from Matt and Fabio
 pointed 
out, unanimously not believing a long-run solution in Europe.  They™re just very pessimistic.  
I                  
            
       
          
would say the private equity firms are 
in the same place.  You see very little private equity 
interest in Europe.  There™s great uncertainty 
and
 that kind of thing.  
In t
he United States, you see 
a lot of activity
Šagain, restrained only by a lack of supply.  When there™s a good company 
that™s out there, the bidding is furious, and they™re all saying, 
ﬁThis is the time.
ﬂ  This happened 
10 years ago. 
And Asia
ŠI can™t really give you any call on that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  I see I have two hours now.  
[Laughter] Let me summarize and just make a few comments.
  Participants didn™t see much 
change in the o
utlook, on net, during 
the interme
eting period.  Economic grow
th is still sluggish. 
The near
-term growth outlook is modest, and the recovery is in a holding pattern.  Output and 
employment growth are falling short of levels needed to reduce unemployment.  Headwinds for 

recovery include fiscal policy, deleveraging, tight credit, and international factors, including not 

only Europe, but also slowing in China.  
Some felt that we risk a lost decade, but another view is 

that recovery has been consistent with previous experiences with banking and financial crises, à 

la Reinhart and Rogoff. 
Recent labor market reports have been weak, although unemployment has fallen in the 
past year.  Some decline in unemployment is due to reduced participation, and employment-
to-population ratios are at post-trough lows.  H
yste
resis is a risk and a possible rationale for action.  
Retail sales data were a bit better, and households continue to deleverage, but consum
er confidence is soft, and people are unusually pessimistic.  
Real 
estate activity is improving in a 
number of D
istricts.  Sales are up
, permits
 and 
prices are also rising
, inventories are low, and 
delinquencies are falling.  Rising prices may stimulate further sales.  There is some strength also 

in commercial real estate
.         
   
           
  
       
      With regard to measurements of slack, there was, again, discussion of the issue.  Staff 
analysis concludes that slack is high, and it was noted that inflationary pressures remain low.  
Some argued that measurements of slack should distinguish the long
er-run normal rate and the 
current equilibrium rate
, or natural rate, which varies over time.
  Discussion of the structure 
of 
the labor market noted that routine jobs are disappearing, but 
declining dynamism may be more 
chronic than cyclical, and the long-
term unemployed are not completely shut out of the labor 
market. 
Uncertainty remains an important issue for businesses, holding back investment and 
hiring.  Job growth is particularly weak.  Small businesses are concerned about taxes and 

regulation.  The fis
cal cliff is a particular risk, as is electoral uncertainty. Some research 
suggests that higher uncertainty acts like an aggregate demand shock.  Policy uncertainty is a 

headwind, but not the only one, as the Bloom index suggests.  
In agriculture
, the dro
ught will 
impede GDP growth over the next several quarters.  However, farm income has been supported 

by high prices and crop insurance.  Energy activity is expanding.  Manufacturing reports are 

mixed.  Auto sales are up.  Firms are focused on gaining market share, but among financial 

firms
, private equity is more optimistic and aggressive. 
In the financial sector, long-
term interest rates are very low
, with negative real yields, but 
it was noted that the equilibrium real yield in the economy may also be neg
ative.  Financial stress 

ind
exes are not particularly worrisome, and financial froth has not been reported.  
Firm balance 
sheets are strong
, and credit supply is available when loan demand strengthens.  The ECB™s 
actions have again helped calm Europe, but further progress requires action by governments.  

Risks remain serious, 
and economic 
growth on the Continent should remain weak. 
                    
  
   
   
          
         
              
  
 With respect to inflation, the outlook has not changed much.  Inflation seems likely to 
remain near or below 2 
percent in the m
edium term. Low inflation is also predicted by DSGE 
models.  Businesses are not particularly concerned about their costs.  Inflation expectations are 
stable, and there™s little evidence of disinflation. 
There was a good bit of premature discussion of mone
tary policy
, which covered, among 
other things, the effectiveness of possible actions, the risks and benefits of actions and inaction, 

and issues of communication. 
Any questions or comments? [No response] 
I come after Governor Powell
, so I have an 
even 
more difficult task. I™ll try to respond a little bit to some of the comments that were made 
today.  The basic outlook is, as everyone has pointed out, that we have an economy 
that 
is 
growing very slowly, at or below trend, and, by the usual Okun™s l
aw re
lationships, we™re not 
seeing very much progress in the labor market. 
Unemployment is about the same 
as in 
January, 
and I note that aggregate hours 
are 
also only about ½ percent higher than 
they 
were
 in January.  
President Bullard noted that there was a p
eriod of improvement in the unemployment rate around 
the turn of the year.  One interpretation of that is that it was a one-
time payback for the rapid 
drop in jobs during 
the recession. 
In any case, 
economic 
growth, if anything, is slowing relative to earl
ier in the recovery. 
Now, how do we explain, understand, and interpret the very slow growth we™ve been seeing? 

That was also 
discussed in the go-round.  One possibility is that there™s been a once-
and
-for
-all 
level shift, that we™ve dropped down to a lower level and 
are 
continuing a
t trend at about the 
earlier pace.  So the suggestion there is that we are close to potential and output 
growth going 
forward will remain trend
-like.
  This interpretation does not look implausible if you eyeball 
graphs for GDP or consumption growth.  It is consistent with some 
earlier episodes of financial 
      
               
        
           
     crisis, and
, among others, the IMF has given this perspective a little bit of support.  
The 
alternative interpretation held by others around the table is that we remain well b
elow potential.  
I think it™s perfectly possible to rationalize that.  First, there have been ongoing headwinds, both 
endogenous and exogenous.  The endogenous ones include 
financial balance sheet, financial 
accelerator type
s of 
effects 
and the exogenous ones include Europe, fiscal, and the like.  So 
there 
have been continuing headwinds, and, of course, 
sticky prices
Šas was pointed outŠ
are part of 
overlapping price-setting coordination issues and the like.  I think both of these interpretations 

are conceivable, and they probably both have some truth in them.  
As President Bullard 
mentioned, I don™t think it™s very likely that we™ll return to the pre-
crisis trend. 
Now, on the permanent drop in the level, I™m a 
little bit bemused by the appeal to 
Reinhart
ŒRogoff because the
irs is a strictly reduced
-form observation, 
it has no structural 
interpretation, and it could involve any number of reasons, including uncontrolled factors 
such as 
poor policymaking.  So I don™t take that as a very convincing answer unless I understand better 

what the rationale is that is explaining the slower growth.
  The second story does provide a 
rationale, does provide an explanation.  Notably, labor utilization does appear to be exception
ally 

low, and I won™t repeat Governor Tarullo™s comments, but Eddie Laz
ear, who I don™t think is 
necessarily inclined to find 
a cyclical source of unemployment
, is just the latest of the majority 
of studies in this area 
to find a significant cyclical compo
nent.  It™s true that the short-
term 
equilibrium unemployment rate can vary.  There™s no question about that.  S
taff 
members have 
tried to include some of that in their analysis.  B
ut we need 
a story.  It™s possible, based on that 
kind of analysis, 
that the equilibrium unemployment rate is 
above the long
er-term natural rate at 
this point.  We don™t know.  I want to emphasize that on all of these thingsŠon the economy, on 

the effects of policy
Šwe™re incredibly uncertain, and we have to make decisions under 
                 
   
            
      
    
       
   uncertainty.  We can™t let waiting for certainty be the condition for taking any action.  We have 
to make the best choices we can, given a very uncertain situation.  
So, in that kind of world, of 
course, there are 
type 
I and t
ype 
II errors.  This is similar
 to what 
the Vice Chairman was saying. 
We are close to our inflation objective.  We™re quite far from our unemployment objective, at 

least the long
er-run unemployment objective.  Arguments 
have been made that staying far away 
from the long
er-run unemployment level for a protracted period has its own costs 
besides the 
temporary costs of the cyclical unemployment. 
In terms of our policy tools, I do agree with President Plosser that having a good grip on 
the costs and the risks of those tools is very importan
t, and that™s one reason why we have been
, in some ways, not as quick to use the tools as we might have been if we were using short-
term 
interest rates as our policy tool.
  But I feel that I™d like to thank the staff for the work that™s been 
done over the last couple of interme
eting periods. I think the work on market functioning, the 
work on financial stabilityŠ
all 
of 
those things have made me more comfortable, 
at least
, that we 
can manage the costs of these 
unconventional policy tools. 
Now, I might as 
well take the advantage to talk a little bit about the policy tools and some 
of the issues that have been brought up.  I have great admiration for Michael Woodford.  I hired 

him, I coauthored with him, I was his colleague for many years, and I think he™s a 
terrific 
economist.  And I think a lot of what he said in his paper at Jackson Hole was very useful.  I do 

think that he understates the consensus in the literature about the impact of unconventional tools, 

particularly asset purchases, on the economy.  I won™t go through an extended discussion, but I™ll 

make just a couple of observations on the empirical side.  
He focused primarily on the event-
study evidence.  He came to that with a M
odigliani
ŒMiller type of financial markets perspective, 
which has a lot of theoretical appeal but obviously is not empirically very successful.  It doesn™t 
                  
    
    
                 
     explain a lot of premiums
, a lot of volatility
, in actual financial markets.  So
, using that 
perspective, he was inclined to dis
miss the results from the event
-study research. 
But this 
research does tend to find, 
almost uniformly
, that asset purchases do have effects on financial 
conditions, notwithstanding the fact that it™s very difficult to measure the surprise component of 
a change in asset purchase policy. I was very
 much involved in the literature on measuring the 
effects of surprises in the federal funds rate, and there at least you have a futures market that can 

tell you what was expected.  Obviously, 
that™s very difficult in the case of asset purchases, and 

theref
ore you w
ould expect the event
-study literature
, if anything
, to bias down the findings, the 
impact of asset purchases on financial conditions.  But beyond that, in looking at only the event 

studies, Woodford™s paper ignores two other major literatures.  O
ne is a substantial literature on 
the effects of relative supplies of 
Treasuries on term premiums.  I would cite, for example, 
Kutt
ner
 (2006) and Greenwood and V
aya
nos (2010), and this appears also in work by Ga
gnon, Hamilton and Wu, and others.  
And a sec
ond line of research is based on no-
arbitrage term 
structure models, such as the 
Li and Wei
 paper that has been used a lot here at the Board.  So 
there have been 
a number of different approaches, and again, I do think that the bulk of the 
evidence is that 
these tools do have effects on financial conditions.  Obviously, 
there are issues 
about the transmission to the real economy, and I take some of the points that have been made, 

but there are factors there working in both directions.  For example, to the ex
tent that credit 
markets are becoming less tight
Šstandards and terms are becoming less restrictiveŠl
ower 
interest rates will have more effect rather than less effect. 
The central message of Woodford™s paper, though, which I do agree with very much, is 
that expectations management is really critical to managing monetary policy at the zero bound. 

And I agree with Governor Stein that the language is very important.  How we present what 
         
    
              
         
      
   
           
  
    we™re doing is going to be very important.  I
n particular, 
and 
we™ll talk about this tomorrow, 
trying to signal that the Fed, rather than being pessimistic, is determined 
and 
that the Fed will be 
supporting the economy.  We™ll be there.  We™ll be a backstop.  We™ll provide confide
nce. I 
think that™s a very important part of what our communication should be about.  P
ersonally
, I™ve 
learned something from both Woodford™s discussion and th
at discussion around the table about 
how we should be talking to markets and to the public.  And a very small thing, but in my press 
conference statement tomorrow
, I™m going to try to talk a little bit more to the average person 
than I have been, and try to explain what we™re doing and why it™s helpful more broadly.  So I do 

expect the expectations c
hannel to be very important, but I think I disagree that by itself it™s 

sufficient
. The main problem is that we™ve already said that we™d keep rates low for three years. 
How much further out can we go? 
For example, 
Woodford argues that a nominal GDP targ
et, 
if 
adopted, would allow us essentially to make commitments many years in advance.  I™d like to 

actually raise the question once again to the group because we looked very carefully at nominal 

GDP targets more than a year ago now
, I think, and there was 
really no support at that time
.  The 
basic argument is that
, in order to work, people have to be persuaded that you™ll stick to this 
target for a very extended period, many years, even though a nominal GDP target may involve a 

period of inflation well above your normal range of inflation.  Moreover, of course, there™s also 

the risk that, if that happens, then inflation expectations will become unanchored.  So I think that 

was the case against nominal GDP targeting. A few people have talked about it. 
If I™
m missing 
something and you want me to hedge more when I™m asked about it tomorrow, which I™m sure I 

will be, I™d like to hear that tomorrow because, again, the take of this group a year ago was th
at nominal GDP targeting, price-
level targeting, and so on, 
while useful, are limited in 
that they 
             
                 
         
       
     
     require credibility very far in the future. 
And that™s why I think one of the benefits of asset 
purchases is that they can be used as a concrete action, as a commitment device
, to help 
strengthen the expectations ef
fect of announcements and communication so that they really are 
complementary
Šmore than we have given them credit 
for 
and more than I really said in my 
remarks at Jackson Hole. 
So there 
are
 a lot of interesting issues here.  I think what I™d like to end on 
is just to come 
back to the point that I know we™re all in debating mode.  We want to persuade our colleagues, 

and that™s certainly laudable, but the fact is that nobody really knows precisely what is holding 

back the economy, what the correct responses a
re, 
or 
how our tools will work.  A
nd I believe we 
all have to try to think hard about, 
in a Bayesian context
, using information that we have and 
thinking about both the risks of action and the risks of inaction, what the best choices are, 

acknowledging and
 understanding that whatever we do, it™s going to be a shot in the proverbial 
dark.  I think, 
really
, it™s going to be very important for us to pull together, 
in a sense
, to support 
whatever efforts that we make.
  Any questions or comments?  President 
Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thanks for those remarks.  I 
found them very useful in my own thinking.  I, too, thought the staff™s work on LSAPs over the 

last couple of inter
meet
ing periods has been really helpful, but even mor
e broadly, I certainly 
came to the question of the efficacy of the LSAPs from the same M
odiglianiŒ
Miller framework 
that Mike sketched, and I found the empirical work on the asset pricing side very informative.  It 

certainly shaped my thinking moving away from the Mo
digliani
ŒMiller framework. 
Our statements, 
alternative A and 
alternative B
, make reference to continuing to study the efficacy of 
the LSAPs.  Part of that will have to be ongoing work and ongoing study of that linkage between 
                               
        what™s going on in the financial markets and how that™s getting through to the real economy.  
At least for me
, that™s a major source of uncertainty still. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me make one comment on that, which is, 
you 
sometimes hear the following kind of statement:  
ﬁTight monetary policy is not causing the 
problem
; therefore, easing monetary policy won™t help.
ﬂ  That™s a non sequitur.  If, say, tight 
fiscal policy is the problem, if that™s the reason the economy is growing slowly, it doesn™t mean 

that 
monetary policy can
™t mitigate that.  So I think that kind of argument needs to be looked at 
very carefully.
  We are doing a lot.  We are absolutely doing a lot.  There™s no question about it.  
Nobody can blame the Federal Reserve fairly, in my opinion, for being tightfisted and stingy and 

not willing to take risks to try to support the economy.  
But the fact that it™s not our fault that the 
recovery is slow doesn™t mean that we can™t try to help if we think, in fact, that the benefitŒ
cost 

ratio is appropriate. 
What I™d like to do is let Bill English do his introductory remarks for tomorrow.  I™m in 
your hands.  The reception starts at 5:30.  Would people like to continue with the policy round, 

or should we just have Bill and then start fresh at 8:30? 
PARTICIPANT. 
Break
. PARTICIPANTS
.  Fresh. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fresh.  Okay. 

MR. 
FISHER
.  Governor Powell needs to take a nap. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  He™s not the only one.  [Laughter] 
All right.  We™ll ask Bill 
to make his opening presentation and take any questions, and then we™ll recess for reception and 

dinner.  
Bill. 
         
    
  
    
          
   
  
     
          
                                                                         MR. ENGLISH.
7  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think the policy 
alternatives are being handed around right now.  They are the same as the ones we 

distributed earlier this week. I guess I™ll wait just a mome
nt until everybody has 
them. 
The first page of the handout illustrates the effects of three different policy paths.  
The black
 solid lines in the charts depict the experimental consensus forecast, which 
is conditioned on unchanged policy.  The 
red
 dashed lines show the results of a more 
accommodative policy, one 
that™s 
consistent with an a
lternative B that shifts back the 
date in the forward guidance to mid-2015 and, in addition to $30 billion of MBS 

purchases a month and completion of the MEP this year, involves buying longer-
term 
securities at a rate of $75 billion a month through the middle of next year.  The 

balance sheet implications of this alternative are shown at the top right.  So long as 

the public correctly anticipates that the Committee will follow this policy, the result is 

a more rapid economic recovery that takes the unemployment rate to 
6.3 percent by 
the end of 2015, about ½ percentage point lower than in the consensus baseline; the 

inflation rate (shown at the bottom right) is a bit
 higher but remains near your 

2 percent longer
-run objective. 
The 
blue dotted lines show the results of an even more accommodative policy; 
this corresponds to alternative A and includes a new $1.25 trillion LSAP and a shift in 

the date in the forward guida
nce to mid
-2015.  
In this case, the unemployment rate 
falls to 
about 6.1 percent by the end of 2015, and inflation runs a little higher than 
under the other policies. 
If, in reviewing the outlook under 
the 
unchanged policy, the Committee views the 
likely outcomes for employment and inflation as inconsistent with its mandate, it 

might choose to ease policy by strengthening the forward guidance in the statement 

and engaging in additional asset purchases.  Alternative B
, on page 5, 
may offer the 
Committee an attractive approach to moving strongly in that direction at this meeting, 

but without committing now to a large, discrete purchase program.  Alternative B 

completes the MEP and starts buying additional MBS, with an explicit proviso that 

the Committee will c
losely monitor developments ﬁin coming monthsﬂ in deciding 
whether to continue the purchases and scale them up. 
The first paragraph of 
alternative B updates the description of the economy to 
reflect the mixed incoming information over the period.  The second paragraph 

differs from past statements by expressing the medium
-term outlook as a conditional 

forecast, noting that the Committee is concerned that ﬁwithout further policy 

accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained 

improvement in labor market conditions.ﬂ  Then the third paragraph announces that 

the Committee will complete the MEP as planned and will commence purchasing 

MBS each month.  The options you™re offered here are rates of $30 billion or 

$40 billion a month.  The higher rate of purchases would have the advantage of 

providing more impetus to growth, but some policymakers may prefer the lower rate, 
7 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
      
                          
             
      
      
    
              perhaps to allow for some future ramping-up in reaction to shocks, such as a full 

encounter with the fiscal cliff or
 a worsening of the problems in Europe.  Staff work 
suggests that purchases even 
at the higher pace would be unlikely to cause problems 
with market functioning. 
The fourth paragraph signals another decision point coming in the future.  It says 
that if, ﬁin
 coming months,ﬂ the ﬁoutlook for the labor market does not improve 
substantially,ﬂ the Committee will continue its MBS purchases 
and undertake 
additional asset purchases ﬁas appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a 

context of price stability.ﬂ
 The paragraph offers an option to include the possibility 
of employing other policy tools as well.  Participants may find that additional 

reference attractive if they think that changes in forward guidance, new lending 

programs, or a reduction in the inte
rest rate paid on reserves might also be appropriate 
in the future.  The paragraph concludes by noting that, as always, the likely efficacy 

and costs of asset purchases will be taken into account as the Comm
ittee calibrates its 
purchases. 
In paragraphs 5 and 5
, the statement offers two options for restating the forward 
guidance.  Both versions begin by putting the Committee™s decision with respect to 

the forward guidance in a more positive light and in the context of making progress 

toward its objectives by indicating that
, ﬁto support continued progress toward 

maximum employment and price stability, the Committee expects that exceptionally 

low levels of the federal funds rate will remain appropriate for a considerable time 

after the economic recovery stren
gthens.ﬂ  Paragraph 5 then continues by shifting 
the 
date of the expected commencement of policy firming out to mid-2015.  By contrast, 

paragraph 5
 replaces the calendar date with new conditional language that ties the 
timing of liftoff to the path of the
 unemployment rate, subject to constraints on 
inflation and inflation expectations.  Some participants may see this conditional 

language as preferable to offering a specific date because it will allow market 

participants to adjust their expectations for li
ftoff flexibly as information bearing on 

the economic outlook is received. 
The immediate market reaction to 
alternative B is hard to predict, in light of the 
policy expectations currently in the market and the decision point that would be 

highlighted in paragraph 4.  Primary dealers appear to place high odds on a new 

program of securities purchasesŠ
generally expected to increase Federal Reserve 
holdings by around $500 
billion 
to $600 billion by the end of 2013Š
and some see it 
as likely to be described in flow terms.  But it is not clear how they would gauge the 

likely scale of purchases under 
alternative B. An 
al
ternative B in which the 
Committee decided over coming months to purchase $75 billion in securities per 

month during the first half of next year would be roughly equivalent to the 

$500 billion 
to $600 billion now expected.  With most outside forecasts anti
cipating 
only slow improvement in labor market conditions over coming quarters, the market 

may come to expect the purchases to exceed this amount.  With regard to the forward 

guidance, ﬁmid
-2015ﬂ is in line with expectations, but the language in paragraph 5
 might be seen as pointing to even more accommodation.  On balance, a
lternative B 
might prompt a modest decline in longer-term interest rates, higher equity prices, and 
                          
              
                     
  
          
    
        a depreciation of the dollar.  However, the magnitude and persistence of the effects 

will depend importantly on what investors see as the implications of the statement for 

the ultimate size of the SOMA portfolio, as well as which version of the forward 

guidance the Committee chooses. 
Alternative A
, on page 3, 
may appeal to members who see 
the Committee as 
having persistently missed its dual objectives in the same direction and believe that, 

with the fiscal cliff looming and uncertainty about Europe unresolved, the downside 

risks to economic growth are very large.  They may believe that the 
Committee needs 
to send a clear signal that it is willing to substantially increase its holdings of 

securities and extend the forward guidance.  They may be concerned that the 

effectiveness of 
alternative B would be undermined by investor uncertainty about 
both the Committee™s decision to extend purchases beyond the next few months and 

the ul
timate size of such purchases. 
The first and second paragraphs of a
lternative A are close to those of 
alternative 
B.  The third paragraph of alternative A announces a new lump-
sum LSAP 
program, comprising $750 billion of longer-term Treasuries and $500 billion of MBS, 

at a combined pace of about $75 billion per month through early 2014.  The fourth 

paragraph clarifies that the new program replac
es the MEP and that the Committee™s 

reinvestment policy will continue.  The fifth paragraph, as in a
lternative 
B, extends 
the forward guidance to mid-2015.  Alternative A also provides possible language for 

a 10
 basis point reduction in the IOER rate. 
Beca
use $1.25 trillion lies well outside the range of most market forecasts 
for a 
new LSAP program, alternative A would likely lead to a notable drop in longer-
term 
interest rates, as well as higher equity prices and a lower foreign exchange value of 

the dolla
r.  These effects could be increased somewhat and accompanied by some 
decline in short-
term interest rates if a reduction i
n the IOER rate were included. 
Alternative C, 
on page 7, might appeal to policymakers who see the recent 
economic data as consistent 
with the view that the economic recovery is on a 
sustainable path and proceeding about as well as could be expected given the effects 

of the financial crisis.  They may see the elevated size of the Federal Reserve™s 

portfolio as well as the recent rise in 
oil and other key commodity prices as implying 
some upside risk to inflation.  As a result, they may judge that there is no need to ease 

policy through a change in the forward guidance or a new LSAP program, and they 

may even anticipate that the funds rate 
will need to be raised significantly earlier than 
markets anticipate. Other participants may have views that are shaped less by 

concerns about the outlook, but believe that the costs and risks associated with 

additional asset purchases are likely to exce
ed the benefits in terms of improved 

economic conditions. 
The first paragraph in a
lternative C is somewhat more positive about economic 
developments than in alternatives A and B.  The second paragraph is similar to the 

August statement but projects somewha
t stronger growth and higher inflation.  There 
are two versions of paragraph 3:  The first maintains the ﬁlate 2014ﬂ forward 
                                                    guidance, with an option to change the date to ﬁlate 2103ﬂ
; the second version, 

ate
-dependent forward gui
dance 
with language describing 
the factors the Committee would consider in determining the appropriate time to raise 

the target federal funds rate.  The fourth paragraph is similar to the August statement, 

except that it provides a more balanced outlook for policy. 
The markets would be greatly surprised by a statement along the lines of 
alternative C, especially if it signaled an earlier rise in the federal funds rate. Interest 
rates would likely jump higher, and stock prices could drop sharply. 
Draft dire
ctives for each of the alternatives are presented on pages 9 through 12 of 
your handout.  
Thank you
, Mr. Chairman.  That 
completes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there any questions for Bill? 
President Fisher. 
MR. FISHE
R.  Mr. Chairman, if I could ask Simon and the D
esk
Šagain, just to have a 
factual grip here
:  What kind of market penetration will we have on mortgage-
backed securities 
under the 
program of 
$30 and $40 billion per month?  You mentioned this earlier.  I apo
logize. 
MR. POTTER. 
That™s the flow rate relative to gross issuance. 
MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir. 
MR. POTTER. 
If we™re about one-third right now, if we added $30 billion, we™d be 
about 60 percent
; at 
$40 billion
, we™re about 70 percent.  
But i
n terms of the stock, I think that 
wouldŠ
what was that
, L
orie
? MS. LOGAN.  I don™t have the exact numbers for the particular scenarios, but the stock 
would be 25 percent under the $30-
billion
-per
-month pace, and it would be slightly higher under 
$40 billion per month
. I 
don™t have that exact number, and it depends on the length, but just for 
a maximum
, under the $2 trillion scenario that we had run, the maximum was 36 percent.  So 

that gives you the very upper bound. 
MR. FISHER.  And if w
e assume that we finish the MEP at 
year
-end, what will be our 
duration? 
       
      
     
    
        
     
                 
    
 MR. POTTER
.  The duration will be eight years, but we™ll own quite large amounts of 
some of the longer-duration securities.  T
hat™s 
in the Treasury part of the portfolio. 
MR. FISHER.  And of some of the particular issu
es, we have significant
Šabove 
70 percent
.  I
s that
 correct now? 
MS. LOGAN. 
We™ve a 70 percent per CUSIP cap.  So we can™t buy any
Š MR. FISHER.  That™s our cap per 
CUSIP? 
MS. LOGAN
.  That™s the c
ap. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 
MS. LOGAN
.  We™ve only hit the ca
p on ten issues, I thinkŠthe number that we™ve hit 
the 
maximum 
70 percent on
.  And most of those were old bonds in 
very small size. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you very much. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chai
rman. Bill, I just wanted to clarify since we have 
a few minutes here.  When we do this on page 1 here, there 
are 
three lines
, and then 
alternative 
B has a couple 
of 
options in it.  Are you saying that this is a rough guide to what 
alternative 
B would del
iver? 
MR. ENGLISH. Ye
s. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Or 
do you feel as though it wouldn™t make too much difference which 
option is chosen within the subgroups that are proposed?  O
r is it just 
that it™d get too cluttered
? MR. ENGLISH. 
What we tried to do here was write
 down something that seemed 
plausibly in line with 
alternative B. Alternative B has a couple of different choices that the 
Committee would have to make.  One is, 
later on
, what do you do in a few months after you™ve 
observed the economy?  Do you continue purchasing into next year? We™ve assumed that you 
                   
                
    continue purchasing for about, I think, seven months in this.  And then the other question is, 
what do you do with the forward guidance? 
We™ve assumed
, basically
, that the forward 
guidance goes out to mid-2015 and is compellingŠe
verybody believes 
it.  It™s possible, as I 
mentioned, that because market participants™ sense 
of 
the outlook is a bit weaker than our sense 

of the outlook, they may read that 6½ percent unemployment rate as pushing the liftoff even 

later
.  If that were picked up, then you™d get a little bit more impetus to the economy out of that, 
but we™ve not modeled that here. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  And the other thingŠI™ve been concerned about the withering 
of 
alternative C here.
  Alternative C isn™t mentioned in the graphs. 
MR. ENGLISH.  Alternative C would be, as long as you left the liftoff date unchanged, 
pretty similar to the consensus forecast.  What I™m taking out of that is the sense in the words in 

alternative C that mig
ht hint that things could move more quickly than that. 
So the straight 
consensus forecast is no change in the forward guidance, no additional purchases beyond the end 

of the year.  That broadly is consistent with a
lternative C but maybe doesn™t quite get 
the sense 
of what the words in a
lternative C could mean to market participants. 
MR. BULLARD.  Well, when you describe it, 
you say, ﬁ
Markets would be surprised
.ﬂ  
I think 
that™s 
accurate
Šthey
™d be very surprised by a statement like thatŠand that you proba
bly 
would have some 
effe
ct.  Plus, if we were going in that direction, which I guess we™re not, you™d 
have the possibility of moving up the date 
of liftoff
. MR. ENGLISH.  Right. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
One important point here
:  The black lineŠ
the consensus 
forecast
Šimplicitly has in it
 a significant disappointment 
for
 the market because they pull back 
      
           
       
     
               their expectations for liftoff to late 2014, and they 
remove 
their expectations of any furt
her 
expansion of the portfolio. 
MR. 
BULLARD
.  I see.  So I should read this as ﬁConsensus forecast/a
lternative C.ﬂ 
MR. ENGLISH.  Roughly. 
MR. BULLARD.  Roughly speaking.  Well, I guess, Mr. Chairman, 
I have a concern 
whether 
we have three options that are live options.  And I think it™s been hard while the 
Committee has been
 trying to think about ways to ease, and when the Committee shifts in the 
other direction, the same thing will happen.  But I think you want to have some things that are a 

little bit tighter, a little bit easier, and might actually have a chance of
Š CHAIRM
AN BERNANKE. 
We circulate this and ask whether it spans the range of 
views
 so, of course, we always welcome suggestions. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Well, it™s up to you.  But if you try to span the range of views, you 
might have to put something on the table that™s not going to be adopted.  But from my point of 

view, I
™d like to see three live things that we could do and things that we might be able to 
maneuver around. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The other way we
™ve used the alternatives
, of course, 
is to 
try out different lan
guage or alternative language. 
And in the past, 
we™ve co
mbined, mixed 
things together. 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  One is for you, Bill.  
I™d like your help 
with 
understanding the second sentence in B(4).  I™m having trouble with it.  I 
don™t think I understand it correctly, particularly the role of price stability.  So let me tell you 
      
   
     
      
    
                                 what I think it says, the way I read it. 
It says, ﬁIf the outlook for the labor m
arket does
 not improve substantiallyﬂ in coming monthsŠ
so, if that happensŠthen we™re going to do X.  So X, 
I think, 
is, as I read this, ﬁundertake additional asset purchases 
. . . as appropriate until 
such 
improvement is achieved in a context of price sta
bility.ﬂ
  As I think about that, if that 
improvement is achieved but it™
s not in a context of price stability, that seems to say to me that 
we™re going to still keep purchasing assets.  Have I got this wrong? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I want to defend Bill because he pointed out this problem. 
MR. LACKER.  I actually pointed it out to him yesterday. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You
 pointed it out to him.  Okay. 
MR. 
ENGLISH
.  You™re not 
the 
first
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
We have poetic license here. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  You 
don™t mean that literally, right? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It means that we
™re looking for improvement in a context of 
price stability. If we see improvement 
without price stability, that
™s not a good thing, and we 
won™t continue purchases. 
MR. LACKER.  But th
is says you
™re going to wait until you get im
provement with price 
stability. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it™s clear what
Š VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It™
s ﬁsubject to
.ﬂ That™s really what it means. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It
™s ﬁsubject to.ﬂ  W
hen we actually clari
fy this, assuming 
we go ahead and do more in January or whatever, we™
ll be a little clear
er in this kind of language 
here. 
                 
  
         
      
  
          
                 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  The second question I haveŠand I probably should have 
asked this during our first agenda item.  I™
ve asked t
his at times in the past
.  On the table is a 
flow of purchases of mortgage-backed securities.  I™
ve asked in the past 
about the thought 
experiment of buying mortgage
-backed securities versus buying an equivalent amount of 
U.S.
 Treasuries.
  What I
™ve asked 
about is, all right, comparing those two options, undoubtedly 
your forecast, as you™ve said, is that 
mortgage
-backed security yields 
will be lower with 
purchases of 
mortgage
-backed securities than 
with 
purchases of 
Treasuries, and that mortgage 
rates will 
be lower. 
Now, my gut instinct is that some other rates will be higher.  And I™
ve asked 
about this in the past, but did you do any work on that this time? 
MR. POTTER.  Which rates? 
MR. LACKER. 
Aren™t other rates going 
to be higher if we buy mortgage-
backeds rather 
than T
reasuries?  Because presumably
, that means 
Treasury rates will be higher than they 
otherwise would be.  Presumably, some other rates are linked to T
reasuries 
and not mortgage-
backed securities, and presumably, they™
re higher. Isn™t there some other rate that
™s going to go 
up if we buy mortgage-
backed
s rather than 
Treasuries? 
MR. ENGLISH. Not 
go up
, but go down by less. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Go down by less. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I think that™s right. 

MR. LACKER.  Oh, okay.  Well, noŠbut, see, I™m asking to compare buying X amount 
of T
reasuries 
with buying 
X amount 
of mortgage-
backed.  So rates 
go downŠ 
MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we are still buying Treasuries under the MEP in this 
program. 
       
           
           
                      
MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know.  But instead of buying $30 billion of mortgages, buy 
$30 billion of 
Treasuries. 
MR. ENGLISH.  I think the answer to your question is in table 1 in the options memo 
that we sent, which had an experiment where you do $500 billion of T
reasury purchases or 
$500 billion of MBSŠjust one or the other.  T
he term premium effects are a little bit smaller if 
you buy the MBS, so T
reasury yields decline by less.  They still decline. It
™s still a purchase of a 
longer-
term security and still taking duration out of the market and still p
utting downward 
pressure on longer-
term rates, but by less.
  The mortgage rate goes down by more if you buy 
MBS than if you buy T
reasuries, because you
™re pushing MBS down more and mortgage rates 
down by more.  And our estimate of the effects on inflation and output are similar in size.  
They
™re a little smaller for the MBS purchase
, based on our modeling and our assumptions, than 
for 
the 
Treasury purchase, but they™
re in the same ballpark. 
MR. LACKER.  So what other rates go down by less or are higher b
ecause you™
ve 
been 
tilting toward 
mortgage
-backeds
? MR. ENGLISH. 
In FRB
/USŠDave Reifschneider 
will tell me if I™m wrong
ŠI think, 
basically
, that 
other long-term rates, corporate rates or whatever, would go down by more if you 
bought Treasuries than if you bought MBS. 
MR. PLOSSER.  So the MBS would provide 
less pass
-through, in some sense, to 
corporates and other things.  Is that the idea? 
MR. ENGLISH
.  Yes. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Depends on what you think the 
degree of substitutability 
is between 
them. 
          
       
       
    
   
             
     MR.
 ENGLISH.  Yes.  And this really is pushing pretty hard on our ability to model this 
stuff, but that™s what our modeling 
says
. MR. LACKER.  So that takes away some stimulus, right? 
MR. ENGLISH. Ye
s, that™s right. 
MR. LACKER. 
And the MBS, on netŠ 
MR. POTT
ER.  Well, not overall, 
necessarily. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Well, it doesn™t take away stimulus relative to doing nothing.  
It takes away stimulus relative to
Š  MR. ENGLISH. 
Buying
 an equivalent amount of T
reasuries
. MR. LACKER. 
Right. 
MR. POTTER.  On thoseŠ 

MR. 
LACKER
.  In that sector. 
MR. POTTER.  Not necessarily for the economy as a whole. 

MR. LACKER. 
Right.  So the rationale for MBSŠ
is it that
, on net, 
real outcomes are 
better?  Or is it more of a sectoral argument? 
MR. ENGLISH.  The argument we gave in the memo was that you want to have a 
balance across the two so that you can ramp up or ramp down.  We know from the capacity 

memo that we sent the Committee before the last meeting that there
™s a maximum amount
, roughly, 
that we 
were comfortable saying 
we could buy over the next couple of years.  That 
maximum amount 
has a ratio of 
Treasuries to MBS, 
and 
we™ve roughly maintained that ratio in 
these purchase programs. 
MR. LACKER.  I understand.  Thank you. 
                              
                   
      MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
That
™s the main argument.  
There
™s a second argument, which 
is not in the model sims we
™ve run, but a lot of people believe that MBS could have effects that 
the model isn™t picking upŠ
say, large
r effects on house prices
, bigger effects on mortgage 
refinancing, 
or 
something like that
. CHA
IRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart has a two-
hander. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Is there a connection or correlation between lowering mortgage-
backed rates and other securitization vehicles such as auto, student loan, credit card? 
MR. ENGLISH.  There might be in practice, but we™re not picking that up in the 
modeling that we
™re doing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just one observation.  Presumably, the reason why you 
also might want to split it is a market functioning issue. 
You can go 
bigger if you split it 
between two markets than if you conce
ntrate all on one market. 
MR. POTTER.  We are still buying in the 
Treasury market. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
That was just a comment, but I have a question.  It 
seems to me 
as though the key money line in B is, ﬁIf the outlook for the labor market does not 

improve substantially, the Committee will continue its 
purchases of agency 
mortgage-backed 
securities and undertake additional asset purchases.
ﬂ  That
™s the key money line.  
Now, I
™d like 
to get st
aff members™ 
views of what they think people are going to interpret that line to mean in 
light of, say, the SEPs that are going to be put out 
and the Chairman™s press conference 
statement.  How do we think people are going to interpret that line?  That™s c
ritical
Šyou have to 
have a view on that to know what you™re really voting for, in some fundamental sense.  I know 

it™s judgment, but I™d love to 
hear your view. 
                  
    
   
  
     
      
          MR. ENGLISH. 
We™re not sure.  
I think we argued in our memos that it might be 
something like a
 ½ percent
age point 
decline in the unemployment rate that
™s sustained. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, I don™t mean the effects on the macroeconomy.  I 
mean, when people write the articles at the end of the day, what are 
they going to think about 
how big this is likely to be? 
MR. POTTER.  I don™t think it will showŠ 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They
™re going to have our SEPs, and they™
re going to 
have this information that shows that this unemployment rate trajectory
Š MR. 
KOCHERLAKO
TA.  You mean the purchase program itself? 
MR. POTTER.  The total amount forŠthey™re going to try 
to work out an expected date. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  And so I guess I™m asking, what kind of expected 
date do we think they can work out? 
MR. POTTER. 
The SEP will give them some information.  I don™t believe that shows a 
substantial improvement in the labor market for quite some time.  So that means that they
™ll probably be looking for sometime in 2013.  That™
s the way we
™ve been modeling this, I think.  
And the assumption you had, Bill, was something like $600 billion of total purchasesŠi
s that 
right? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Including purchases under the MEP, it was $750 
billion
.  But
, as I said 
in my remarks, it could easily be more.  P
eople might see that the e
conomy is expected to be 
weak for quite a while
; they might carry it out further into 2013 and get a bigger amount. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
For me, the obvious question to you, Mr. Chairman, at 
the press conference might be
, given the SEP and your views, wh
at does the SEP forecast imply 

in terms 
of ﬁi
mprove 
substantially
ﬂ?       
                
                              
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  My answer will be that 
we want to see
Šnot what we saw 
last 
Friday
.  We want to see increases in payrolls.  We want to see some progress
Šnot sh
arp 
progress, but some pro
gress
Šin the unemployment rate
.  And we want to have a sense that the 
economy is moving in a 
direction that will help labor markets get better. 
We used the word 
ﬁoutlook.ﬂ  So a pickup in GDP growth would certainly be a factor in the outlook for labor 
markets, for example. I think we have a fail
-safe here
, which is that if it doesn™t have any effect, 
then we have the efficacy clause here as well.
  But the idea would be that we want to see 
something different from the current 
waiting
-in-place kind of situation where there™s no 
progress, 
the 
unemployment rate stays about the same, and monthly payrolls are 100,000 and 

less. 
And I will emphasize that it
™s not a single indicator or a single trigger number; 
we™re 
looking holistically at the labor market indi
cators and, in fact, more broadly because it™
s the 
outlook for the labor market that matters, not just the current number. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you
™d have to see improvement in the labor market 
that you thought would be sustained in the future. 
CHAIRM
AN BERNANKE.  Right. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
For what it™s worth, the B
lue 
Chip forecasts 
for the 
unemployment rate going into the middle of 2013 are very flat
.  Then, in the second half of 2013, 
they™
re expecting to see a more noticeable downtilt in the unemp
loyment rate.  So that™s another 
way of 
looking at it. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So the market would presumably put in nine months 
or 
more
Šthat
 would be a reasonable guesstimate, 
I guess. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Again, it™s
 the outlook and not the actual. 
VICE CH
AIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Yes. 
                         
                    MR. PLOSSER.  I just want some interpretation of the word ﬁsubstantiallyﬂ here because 
the market is going to ask you that as well.  What constitutes substantial progress? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Substantial progress means that we are seei
ng ongoing 
progress in the direction of improved labor market conditions. 
MR. PLOSSER.  So it
™s not something about 
the magnitude of the rate of change. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It
™s not the magnitude, but really a 
movement in that 
direction 
that 
is, I m
ight 
say, persuasive or indicative that there is now progress in the right 
direction
, as opposed to simply remaining static or 
getting 
worse.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  This is on the same point. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  David Wilcox showed us employment in his forecast summary, and 
when they do all of the seasonal adjustment right, it looks as though half of the improvement we 

got in the labor markets this past winter or the winter before, was spurious, seasonal stuff.  

Would what we saw last w
inter suffice? Would we stop after that? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would think so.  It dropped 1 percentage point between 
August and 
April. 
MR. LACKER. I
™d be on board with that.  But his 
analysis suggests that 
that 
would be 
like another seasonal head fake. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we
™d look at a range of variables.  O
f course, there™s 
nothing that says if you stop, you can™t start again. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No
, but l
ast winter, though, it wasn™t really that 
convincing because, remember, payrolls were strong but GDP was weak, and we had this riddle. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We had this riddle.  Yes, that™s right. 
                    
          
     
             
     
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And so you could argue that you wouldn™t necessarily 
stop 
last winter
, because 
you didn™t have the GDP growth to support the 
labor market. 
MR. POTTER.  I don™t think our outlook changed that much.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We basically want to see progress in terms of the key macro 
labor market variables. 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  Well, let me ask Bill Dudley™s question again.  What do you 
want the 
USA 
Today
 headline to be? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
ﬁBernanke, 
the Hero
ﬂ? [Laughter] 
ﬁFederal Reserve 
Says 
It Will Support Economy.ﬂ 
MR. 
FISHER
.  That™s the 
sports section, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. 
PLOSSER
.  ﬁFederal Reserve All In.ﬂ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
ﬁFederal Reserve Will 
Provide Support to Labor M
arket.
ﬂ MR. 
LACKER
.  By buying 
MBS? 
MS. 
DUKE.  And housing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Housing.
  People understand that. 
MR. 
LACKER
.  Okay. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  D
id you have a question, 
President 
Pianalto? 
MS. PIANALTO.  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, you made some comments about the 
6½ percent unemployment trigger in 
alternative B, paragraph 5
. You said that some forecasters 
have slower progress on the unemployment rate, so they may view 
what is in alternative B 
as more accommodation than markets expect.  If you look at your page 1, 
ﬁAlternat
ive Monetary 
Policy 
Scenarios,
ﬂ that 6
½ percent rate, as you mentioned, is about mid-2015.  I know we™
re 
            
      
         
                      trying to get away from the date, but you made those points.  You didn™t say very much about the 
inflation rate, because here it says ﬁ
no more than a half percentage point above the Committee™s 

2 percent objective.ﬂ  When you look at those scenarios, with alternative B, we don™t get 

anywhere close to 2
½.  We™re just slightly above the 2.  At one point, we looked at some 
language that said ﬁclose to the Committee™s 2 
percent objective.ﬂ  And I see that 
alternative 
B, 
and even a
lternative A, is 
close to our objective.  What are some of your thoughts
?  J
ust as you 
had
 some thoughts about the 6½ percent being interpreted by some as being more aggressive, 
would that 2½ percent objective be viewed as, again, more aggressive, and is it necessary given 

the scenarios that you™ve laid out here? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLE
Y.  It™s not an objective, though, right? 
GOVERNOR YELLEN
.  It™s not an objective. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It™s not an objective.  
It™s just a tolerance level.  That™s 
quite different. 
MS. PIANALTO.  But it™s 
a matter of
 perceptions also.  We™
re talking 
about 
communications.  And we™ve made a lot of progress and laid out a 2 
percent objective.  What are 

the advantages? 
Using
 ﬁclose to 2 percentﬂ 
would still 
give
 us the 
flexibility that
™s laid out in 
these scenarios
, but we
™re not communicating to the pub
lic that we
™re throwing out ½ 
percentage 
point.  I
t seems 
as though 
we™re throwing out a number, 
whereas
, ﬁclose toﬂ gives us some of 
that flexibility. 
MR. ENGLISH.  I think the ½ percentage point buffer was intended just for clarity.  If 
you said ﬁclose t
o,ﬂ everybody would ask the Chairman at his press conference, ﬁWhat do you 
mean by 
‚close to
™?
ﬂ and t
ry to extract that information.
  People will be looking at the SEP, and 
the SEP shows inflation below 2 or at 2, roughly, but not going above.  So I don™t think they™d 
                                      
    misread the 
½ percentage point buffer as suggesting an intention to set out to push inflation 
above 2.  It would simply be seen as a buffer.  There could be transitory shocks that would 

change the inflation outlook for a time, and the Committee could look through those and say, 

ﬁOkay.  We™re going to go up as high as maybe 2½ 
for a little while, but after that
, we think 

inflation is going to come back.  In the end, we™re getting to our objective, and that™s okay.ﬂ 
But 
whether you want to say e
xplicitly ﬁ
½ percentage pointﬂ or ﬁclose toﬂ is a question of 
communications.  It™
s a little clearer to say the number and not use ﬁclose to.ﬂ  But this is a 
communications issue for the Committee. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Can I ask one more press conference 
question?  Suppose somebody says, ﬁWe get to the end of 2013, it™s December 2013, and we™
re 
exactly where we are today.
  So 
the 
unemployment rate, job growthŠeverything is pretty much 
exactly where we are today. 
Do you envision that we™
ll still be continuing asset purchases at that 
point?ﬂ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  As we go through time, as the balance sheet grows, as we 
observe the effects on the economy, we™
ll be 
continually reevaluating the efficacy of the program 
and the costs that it is imposing.  And if we feel that we
™ve 
reached that point and the program is 
not being effective, then we w
ill have to stop.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes. I
™ll just add on to what you said, Mr. Chairman.  This 
question is an important one, but I think there 
are 
just 
two ways you could end up being in the 
same place.  It could be that there were a lot of bad shocks and the asset purchases helped you 

stop that, or maybe not.  We™
ll have to make that call at that time. 
                                 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
We have overnight
.  If any genius around the table would 
like to come up with better language, I would be more than happy. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I counsel you against 
offering 
that
.  [L
aughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  Are we all set?  [No response] 
Bill, 
what do you want us to do with these handouts? Do you want us to take them home and bring 
them back? 
MR. ENGLISH.  You have lots of Class 
I informat
ion in your Tealbook, so you 
can 
keep 
them. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right. 

MR. ENGLISH.  But please don™t leave them on the subway.  [L
aughter]. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Don™t leave them on the subway.  So 8:30 tomorrow 
morning.  T
he reception is available at 5
:00 p.m. 
[Meeting recessed] 
        
    
           
     
      
           September 13 Session 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We should have a reasonable 
amount of time.  We need to get the statement in by 11:30 and close the meeting by noon.  But 
first
, to get started
, why don™t we begin our policy go-round
? I have President Williams first on 
the list. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B with the forward 
guidance on the funds rate in paragraph 5
.  The case for further action is clear. In the absence of 
significant additional monetary stimulus, progress toward our policy goals would remain stalled.  

Such an outcome is simply inconsistent with the notion of appropriate monetary policy and, in 

my view
, is unacceptable. 
We must aim for a
 path that brings us measurably closer to our goals 
over the forecast horizon, and we must take concrete actions that get us on that path.  
Open
-ended purchases of MBS represent a substantial step in that direction.  With this action, 

unemployment will fall more quickly and inflation will return toward 
2 percent faster than under 
the status quo. 
The flow-
oriented asset purchases in 
alternative B also provide flexibility that™s 
particularly valuable, given all the uncertainties of the economy, the fiscal cliff, and Europe.  

They serve as a useful automatic stabilizer as market expectations about the ultimate size of the 
program adjust in response to changes in economic conditions 
and
 the outlook.  
If the 
labor 
market shows signs of substantial improvement sooner than expected, the program can be 

curtailed.  In contrast, if the recovery falters, the program can provide additional needed support. 
There would be similar benefits from incorporating such an automatic stabilizer into our 
forward guidance of the future path of the funds rate.  The language in p
aragraph 5
 does just 
that.  Incorporating this language into our statement would allow us to finally get the calendar
-                   
                        
 date monkey off our back and provide better guidance on our policy reaction functionŠ 
importantly, at least, on economic conditionsŠ
for funds rate liftoff that 
is both clear and 
consistent with our dual-mandate objectives.  It™s also flexible enough to handle a variety of 

future paths for the economy and inflation.  Indeed, the beauty of this approach is it provides 

guidance for contingencies where our forecasts go wrong, which they inevitably do. 
Finally, I continue to favor lowering the interest on excess reserve
s rate, the IOER rate, to 
15 basis points.  We should be using all of our tools in the same direction.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
.  Thank you very much.  
President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support 
alternative 
B with the 
$40 billion per month mortgage purchase program and prefer option 5
 which moves us away 
from dates and fo
cuses on the economic outcomes we seek to achieve. 
Inflation is quite low, and 
unemployment is quite high, and most of our forecasts for the past nine months have 

overestimated how quickly we would see improvements in 
either element of our mandate. 
Altern
ative B embraces the sense of doing what it takes to move the economy at an 
acceptable pace toward full employment with stable prices. 
Alternative 
B continues to take out 
duration, provides some direct support to housing, which is just beginning to recover, and 

extends guidance on the funds rate liftoff, which, given our lack of progress toward our mandate, 

seems appropriate. 
I strongly support the $40 billion rather than the $30 billion monthly 
mortgage purchase program. 
I would also prefer to include economic targets rather than date targets in our guidance.  
Thus, I would prefer the conditionality language in 5
. The language has two advantages.  
First, 
the conditions for changing our policy stance are clear and observable to the general public.  

Second, 
date
-conditional language can be subsequently undercut by Committee members™ 
                 
                       
   
 comments that suggest a different date may be appropriate, thus altering the effect of policy 
relative to the intent of the consensus reached 
by the Committee. 
Because 5
 conditions the 
policy on observable outcomes, the public can adjust its expectations automatically to changing 

economic circumstances, and there is less likelihood of perhaps inadvertently diminishing our 

policies™ effectivene
ss due to Committee disagreement. 
There seem to be two arguments against taking action at least as strong as B at this 
meeting
.  F
irst, that it would be ineffective.  Estimates in Boston are that following 
option A 
would reduce unemployment by approximatel
y 0.8 percent by the end of 2015.  This is roughly 
in line with the Board staff memos and the consensus policy submissions from three other banks 

that reported a preferred policy that was close to A.  
If accurate, this implies creating more than 
1 million jobs relative to doing nothing at this meeting. I do not view that as de minimis. 
The second argument against more aggressive action is that it will cause inflation.  Again, 
the consensus forecast exercise is instructive.  Among banks that provided numeric submissions, 

those that assumed further easing assume underlying inflation will remain well anchored.  This 

assumption is consistent with the Boston forecasting model.  Two of the Banks that provided 

numbers and assumed earlier tightening than we do have 
virtually identical unemployment rates 
with and without tightening, but a dramatically higher inflation rate under the baseline policy.  

This is markedly different than the staff forecast, the DSG
E models that we have seen, 
and the 
models used by B
anks as
suming the need for easing.  It would be interesting to discuss the 
theoretical basis and empirical evidence for such an inflationary process, which I presume is tied 

to dislodging of inflation expectations.  However, absent a strong empirical basis for su
ch an 

inflation process and with inflation tracking below our target and roughly consistent with the 

staff forecast in models that assume expectations remain well anchored, I view the risks of 
                      
     
    
           
 inflation as being well contained through 2015, even with a more aggressive policy than in 
alternative 
B.  Thus, I support B but would strongly prefer the forward guidance in the language 
of 5
 and the larger mortgage purchase amount.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the Committee™s outlook 
and overall assessment of the economy, I would say that additional accommodation is 

appropriate.  I think the question then becomes what form that accommodation should take. 
Alternati
ve A and 
alternative 
B offer 
the Committee the opportunity to do large-
scale 
asset purchases.  As you said in your Jackson Hole speech, Mr. Chairman, and 
as the staff 

analysis indicates, the benefits of large-
scale asset purchases are still under study and 
still 
uncertain.
  And the question is, how do we deal with that?  How do we deal with the 
issue that 
we don™t know exactly how much the benefits are, even though we might feel confident about 

the sign?  Governor Yellen and the Vice Chair
man
 said the right things yesterday about this, 
which is to act forcefully 
and
 to enhance the benefits of our large-
scale asset purchases as much 
as possible. 
How do we enhance our purchases as much as possible?  Well, the stimulus from our 
purchases hinges critically on th
e forward guidance.  They work together.  If you buy assets and 
hold them for one day and then sell them the next day, they are providing no stimulus.  If you 

buy assets and hold them for 10 years, they™re providing a lot of stimulus.  T
he stimulus 
that 
the asset purchases are providing the economy depends on the timing of exit.  T
o enhance the benefit 
of our large-
scale asset purchase
s as much as possible, 
we need the best possible forward 
guidance, and I would say that B(5
) as opposed to B(5) provides that forward guidance. 
                 
  
              
       
  
      
         
 I talked yesterday about the ambiguities that come 
by trying to communicate our reaction 
function with a date.  Today I™ll focus only on the economic aspects of B(5
. One, 
it provides 
an automatic stabilizer against macro shocks.
  Two, 
it offers protection against inflation.
  And, 
three, I want to talk about the mechanism through which it™s offering stimulus. 
The automatic stabilizer feature of B(5
 is relatively clear.  We talk a lot about downside 
risks in this room.  We have a bad shockŠ
and there 
are 
many possibilities out there
, I won™t go 
through them all.  If unemployment goes up 
and we have B(5) in place, which is date guidance, 
people 
will
 wonder
:  What is the Fed going to do?  How are they going to respond to that shock? 
With B
(5
 in place, 
if 
unemployment goes up
, it means automatically it™s going to take us longer 
to get back to the 6½ percent.  That means that people know th
at interest rates are going to be 

low for longer, andŠ
this is important because the extra accommo
dation that™s going to be 
provided at this meeting is likely to take the form of asset purchasesŠ
the assets that are being 

bought are being held for longer.  So a bad shock automatically translates into more stimulus 

because of the explicit numerical marke
rs being provided in the guidance. 
I™ve painted this as an ex post story of why B(5
 is preferred, but it actually has an ex 
ante component to it.  Essentially we™re offering insurance to the economy against bad shocks, 

and that means that people have less need for saving 
to deal with those bad shocks, and that 
stimulates spending.
  We™ve talked a lot about uncertainty.  H
aving the Fed have a reaction 
function in place that 
it has 
communicated clearly helps reduce uncertainty because people know 
how the Fed is going to react to those disturbances.  That™s the kind of stabilizer property that™s 

in B(5. Let me talk a little bit about inflation protection.  It™s a part that matters a great deal to 
me.  I™ve been and remain concerned about the possibility tha
t the long
-run natural rate of 
            
     
   
                          unemployment may well exceed our current estimates.  Here™s how I™ve been thinking about this 
issue.
  Suppose we only had one mandateŠprice stability.  How would we go about 
operationalizing that goal?  Well, presumably we would choose monetary policy so as to keep 

the medium-term outlook for inflation close to 2 
percent. 
Now, we have to struggle a little about 
what ﬁclose toﬂ means, and I™ll talk a little bit more about this later, but for me I™m willing to say 

that 50 basis points is close enough.  I would say that if you had a price-
stability mandate, 
then 
promoting price stability means keeping the medium
-term outlook for inflation within 50 basis 

points of target, 50 basis points below or 50 basis points above.  
This is 
only the price-
stability 
mandate, and this is exactly the language about inflation in B.  In other words, the way I read 

alternative 
B(5
) is 
it™s saying that the Committee has the option of raising the fed funds rate if it 
ever perceives that it is not satisfying its price
-stability mandate because inflation exceeds 
2½ percent. 
Now, this is not a trigger, to be clear.  And we should be clear when we talk about this 
that it 
is not a trigger.  It™s a threshold, and it™s a threshold for conversation.  At that point, 
the 

forward
-guidance commitment is no longer operational.  In some sense, we™d be back to business 
as usual in this Committee.  The Committee would have to weigh the cost of violating its price
-stability mandate against whatever performance it™s ac
hieving on the employment mandate and 

decide what to do.  And those conversations would inevitably be interesting ones.  
I actually 
think that B slices through what might appear to be a very challenging problem.  It provides 

valuable accommodation while al
lowing the Committee to be able to protect its price
-stability 
mandate. 
Let me turn now to how it does that.  What™s the magic behind B(5
) that allows it to give 
us this protection against inflation as well as providing the accommodation? It comes from t
he 
                 
    
    
       
    
       
   
      
           fact that a lot of our estimated rules of past behavior, like a Taylor rule, have us raising interest 
rates just because unemployment is too low.  The mechanism behind B(5
 is to say we don™t 
want to raise interest rates just because unemployment is to
o low, w
e want to raise interest rates 
because we™re worried about inflation.  If it turns out that unemployment is low but inflation is 

under control in the sense that our medium-term outlook is within 50 basis points of 2 
percent
, there™s no reason to raise interest rates just because unemployment is too low.  The way B(5
) is 
providing stimulus is by saying 
the 
FOMC will tolerate low unemployment. 
There™s a lot of talk about how we should stimulate the economy by having high 
inflation.  That is not what™s going on in B(5
. What™s going on instead is 
that 
the FOMC is 
going to hold off on raising rates until unemployment is lower, and that provides stimulus 

because people know that we won™t be choking 
off 
the party
, as it were
, before it™s really under 
way.  This willingness to tolerate low unemployment is exactly how the optimal
 control 
exercise 
works in FRB/
US. 
If you look at 
the o
ptimal 
control exercise 
in 
FRB
/US, in the fourth quarter 
of 2015, unemployment is 5¼ 
percent
, the outlook for inflation is 2.3 percentŠthat™s not what™s 
providing the stimulusŠ
and you get liftoff at that time. The Committee in that FRB
/US simulation is holding off on raising rates, and that stimulates a faster return to low 

unemployment, 
to the natural rate. 
For those of you who are suspicious about FRB/
US, it™s 
obviously just one of many models, but you get exactly the same mechanism in a N
ew Keynesian model.  
Iván Werning 
has a great paper along these lines.  High future output after 
you leave the zero lower bound stimulates high output at the 
zero 
lower bound.  
There™s no extra 
inflation at all in 
Werning™s paper because actually prices are fixed. 
It™s all about the 
commitment to deliver on lower unemployment and higher output than you would otherwise 

think. 
               
       
        
                      
  If you™re liste
ning to me about the mechanism, you should be thinking
: If you™ve got 
such great inflation protection and low unemployment provides good stimulus, why not have a 
lower unemployment threshold than 6½?  I would agree with that.  I think we should be willing 

to consider that.  President Pianalto raised a concern that maybe 50 basis points was too large a 

spread.  As I said, I™m willing to go that far out, 50 basis points, but maybe one way of shaping a 

compromise along those lines is to have a lower unemployment threshold.  That™s a good thing
; it provides stimulus.  And then have a tighter inflationŠnot even tighter, j
ust say 
ﬁclose to
ﬂ 2 percent, which actually
 is vague enough 
that
 it could allow for 50 basis points.  But I put that 
on the table as possibly one way to shape a compromise.  I think B(5
 is very valuable in this 
context. 
Alternative 
B(5
 provides an economic stabilizer, it provides inflation protection, and 
it™s a credible mechanism. It™s a way to provide a credible mechanism to say we™re go
ing to be 
willing to tolerate low unemployment. 
Yesterday Governors Raskin and Stein talked about low expectations in the economy, 
that really what we have to be thinking about is ways to bolster expectations.  Communication 

along the lines of B(5
 is goi
ng to be very helpful 
in that regard
.  We often pay a lot of attention 
to the words in this room, and the words are important in what we say, but in something like 

B(5
 the numbers 
appropriately are 
going to be the main focus.  How do we explain these 
numbers to the public?  I certainly have thought about this.  I
t™s very easy to communicate the 
idea that we have a target, 
2 percent, but we need a tolerance around that target.  I think every 
businessperson, 
at least
, will understand you have targets for 
performance, but there™s some 
tolerance that you have around that as well.
  Some people are going to say 50 basis points is too 
large, but we should be able to make a case about why we feel 50 basis points is appropriate, 
                             
   
                   
 given the kinds of shocks that could hit the economy on an ongoing basis, but the idea of having 
a tolerance is a very reasonable one. 
Why 6
½ percent? 
As I™ve suggested, we could go lower, but I think 6½ 
percent says 
we™re trying to minimize the possibility of being in breach of our tole
rance range.  We have a 
tolerance range
Šit doesn™t mean we want to exceed it.  We™re very prudent about minimizing 

the possibility of any breach of that. 
I will wrap up at this point.  We™ll hear, I™m sure, from others that the LSAPs have costs, 
and 
I shar
e some of those concerns about those costs.  I think the response to that is to try to 
make the benefits as big as possible, and the language of B(5
 is the way to go along those lines.  
I offered a suggestion for changing B(5
 yesterday. I™ll offer tha
t up for the Committee™s 
consideration.  I do worry, 
as written in the draft statement that the staff circulated yesterday
, that t
he last sentence is a little confusing.  At least I found it so, but if we feel we could go out 

and explain it to people, I™m happy to live with that; however, I hope people are willing to 

consider my suggested alterations.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
We™re going through at a rapid pace. 
We™
re going to be done within the hour here, I think. 
MR. TARULLO.  Don™t bet on it.  [Laughter] 

MR. BULLARD.  I have just a few comments here on policy, so I just wanted to follow 
up on my comments from yesterday a little bit. I do not think that this is the right juncture to 

unveil a large and aggressive easing program.  I think the road ahead this fall and winter could be 

rocky.  We would be better served to take a more opportune time to take such an action.  
We are 

looking at economic data that 
are 
middli
ng.  We™ve got financial stress, which is relatively low, 
             
               
       
     
        
         
   at least for now.  Our counterparts in Europe, not us, are the ones in recession, and, in my view, 
should be the ones that are easing aggressively.  U.S. equity markets suggest continuing faith in 

U.S. expansion.  Long-
term rates are exceptionally low. 
We may also be playing down the costs around the table here of walking farther into the 
woods than we already have on balance sheet policy.  President Plosser has emphasized those 

costs, and I think rightly so, and he has done a good service to the Committee in emphasizing 

those costs.  One thing that hasn™t been mentioned very much 
is that there is a distinct possibility 

that we would be feeding into commodity price increases, which is part of what happened during 

the QE2 episode and was a bit counterproductive.  We could argue about that.  We haven™t 

talked about it a lot, but I am a little bit concerned about that based on the action that we are 

likely to take today. 
I am not one that buys into the critique that monetary policy has been a long ways off 
target in the 
past five years. It is true that the economy is not performing as well as we would 
like.  There is a clear hypothesis for that based on the fact that we are dealing with a collapsed 

housing bubble and the aftermath of a financial crisis.  
But the Committee, by all accounts, has 

done a lot.  Much of it has been quite innovative, and the call of the Committee and of the 

Chairman has been essentially correct during the 
past several years.  So 
I am not one that thinks 
that we are 90 degrees off from where we should be or could be at this juncture. 
For our action today, as encapsulated in option B, we can cite two things that do make 
some sense and that I am sympathetic with as a rationale.  One is that we do have a global 

slowdown.  I am concerned about it.  I think it is very legitimate to worry that that slowdown is 

going to 
affect the U
nited State more than it has so far, and that that is a compelling argument for 
getting ahead of that and tak
ing aggressive action here.  T
hat is one reasonable rationale. 
And I 
                           
     
                        also think we have some room to maneuver on the inflation front, but only some.  I think 
it is nothing like 2010 when all measures of expected inflation were down a lot and trending down 

further. 
We can cite these factors.  I don™t think we have as good a rationale as I would like to 
see for a move of this magnitude. 
Within alternative
 B, I do think it is a good moment to adopt a meeting-
by-meeting 
approach to balance sheet policy that I have been advocating for a long time.  I hope that this will 

put us more into a mode that is similar to the one we are in under normal interest rate policy 

where we
 can sensibly adjust the policy at each meeting, given the change in the outlook and the 

change in the economic situation.  T
his will likely serve the Committee pretty well going 
forward, and I appreciate that 
alternative B has that feature. I am satisfie
d with the formulation 
in B with respect to that dimension. 
On paragraph 5, I definitely support 5 and not 5
. As many of you know, I have argued 
that explicit mention of an unemployment number is a tactical mistake
 that may not serve the 
Committee very well.
  As Governor Yellen remarked yesterday, hysteresis in unemployment 
cannot be ruled out in the U.S.  And I might remind the Committee again that Europe has not 

seen 6
½ percent unemployment for a couple of decades.  Today it is over 11 percent in Europe, 
despite some major countries undergoing structural labor market reforms. 
I am concerned that 
we are telling the public that we can do more about unemployment than we really can.  It is more 

labor market policy than it is monetary policy, and it could possibly throw monetary policy off 

for a generation to tie explicitly to unemployment and to promise that monetary policy can do a 

lot about unemployment. 
The story in Europe is exactly that there are structural problems that 
developed over time.  Unemploym
ent 
has remained very high for a very long time, and the 
structural reforms have not been undertaken by the various governments across Europe.  It is one 
                 
      
                         
    thing to have bad labor market policy.  It is another thing to have bad monetary policy because 
you ha
ve bad
 labor market policy.  I am concerned about this, and I™d advise against going in 
that direction. 
In addition, I think there are hazards of tying to any particular measure of economic 
performance because all of our metrics have clear deficiencies, and many of them are mentioned 

around the table here.  One of the 
deficiencies 
for unemployment is that unemployment can fall 
for the wrong reasons.  W
e were just citing yesterday that the unemployment rate did fall, but it 
didn™t fall in a way that we thoug
ht was indicative of better labor market performance.  So you 
could have a situation where you feel like unemployment has gone down to 
a relatively low 
level, but you are not very satisfied with labor market outcomes, 
and you still feel like the 

Committee 
should be aggressive in that circumstance.  T
his is a problem that we have with all of 
the economic data that we look atŠ
that each piece of dat
a only tells a part of the story about the 
overall economic performance. 
We would be better off to preserve the 
Committee™s judgment 
on economic performance. 
Outside of the statement it™s fine for various members to say, ﬁI™d really like to see 
unemployment come to here,ﬂ or ﬁI™d like to see labor force participation come to here,ﬂ or 

whatever other metrics 
that you
™d like to see certain types of labor market measures hit certain 
thresholds.  But I™m not sure that you want to tie the Committee™s hands in making a judgment 

about overall economic performance.  So I™d have no problem beefing up the language on labor 

markets, if people feel like we maybe have been insufficiently attentive to this and saying that 

we are going to pay more attention.  That™s fine with me.  But I™m counseling against putting an 

explicit number on this or really any other data, to the extent w
e can avoid it, in the statement. 
         
                     
    
       
                   And, finally, on this paragraph 5
Šand then I have a few more comments
ŠI think 
thresholds or triggers like this draw lines in the sand that we may not want to be drawing.  W
e are all in agreement that if we are inside the 
boundsŠ
say, 2
½ percent and 6
½ percent
Šthat we 
are not going to raise rates.  But if you cross the bound, you are implicitly sending a signal that 
you are going to do something.  I™m not sure the Committee has really decided that we would 

actually do someth
ing in that circumstance.
  Putting on my dovish 
hat for a minute, you are 
creating this thing where you are saying you will act if the triggers are violated. I don™t think we 

have really discussed that or really think that that™s what we would do.  If inf
lation is at target, 
and unemployment comes downŠand President Kocherlakota was at least in part touching on 

this
Šthe Committee may not want to tighten at that juncture.  What if you don™t want to tighten 
at that juncture?  Then why are you giving that 
as the trigger? 
That part to me has not 
been 
formulated
 in a way that I can get my head around. 
Let me comment just for a few minutes on Mike Woodford™s Jackson Hole paper, which 
I do think was a seminal survey of monetary policy at the zero lower bound.  If you haven™t 

looked at itŠand I know many of you haveŠthe paper is divided into 
just 
two parts.  There is 

balance sheet polic
y, and there is policy 
to commit to stay at the zero interest rate for longer. 
If you know Mike, you know that he is very pessi
mistic about balance sheet policy, being an anti
-monetarist kind of guy.  He does not think balance sheet policy is very effective, except to the 

extent that it has a signaling effect and that the Committee is better served by doing something 

rather than j
ust promising to do something. 
I agree with the Chairman™s assessment that Professor Woodford is underestimating the 
effects of balance sheet policy.  I do think QE2 did have a significant influence on the United 

States and especially on expected inflation
 and actual inflation.  The effects to the real economy 
      
           
  
     
         
      
      
           
   are harder to trace out, but those are always hard to trace out.  So I think today™s 
alternative 
B action is a sensible way to manage the balance sheet policy going forward and that policy does 
have s
ome prospect of being effective, so I™m not going to argue against the efficacy of the 
policy. 
Professor Woodford thinks that the only way to provide accommodation, in large part, is 
to commit to stay at the zero lower bound for longer.  I agree also with 
the Chairman that the 

length of time that this Committee may be able to commit to stay at zero gets less and less 

credible as you go farther out in the future.  That is something that is not well captured by the 

model.  If you start going out many years, so many things can happen over that period, in reality, 

that it is not clear that you are communicating anything.
  But the main message I took from the 
paper, and an effective message, was this: 
If you are trying to make this commitment to stay 
lower for l
onger, it is a very subtle matter to get it right.  And he reviews a lot of central banks 
and a lot of central bank actions, some of which he characterized as counterproductive in terms 

of trying to get the right type of commitment from the perspective of 
the model on staying lower 
for longer.  
In fact, 
what 
I took away 
from it 
was
, the main danger is that continuing to commit 
to later and later liftoff could be sending this pessimistic signal
Šif we don™t do it correctlyŠ
that 

the reason we are staying lower
 for longer is not that we are trying to make up for the fact that 
we have been stuck at the zero lower bound, but instead it is that the outlook is deteriorating and 

is continuing to deteriorate in a very negative way.  And 
I think we have to be careful a
bout that, 
and that 
maybe
 we have sent that signal, unwittingly perhaps, in some of our actions. 
I am going to give a suggestion, not a policy suggestion, but a suggestion about the 
proper way to think about this from Professor Woodford™s perspective 
in my interpretation.  T
he 
whole point is you are constrained by the zero lower bound for a period of time.  Then, after you 
               
           
       
                    would otherwise raise interest rates, you stay at the zero lower bound for a time to make up for 
the fact that you were constrained duri
ng the earlier period of time.
  My example about how we 
should think about this is as follows.  Suppose the Committee was committed to a Taylor r
ule the 
way John Taylor likes to use itŠhis is a much more aggressive and 
hawkish 
Taylor 
rule, which 
would even 
call for raising rates today.
  And suppose everyone agreed on that.  This is just 
hypothetical, obviously.  And that rule would call for us to raise rates today, but we would say, 

ﬁWe are not raising rates today.  We are staying at zero today.ﬂ  The reason we are staying at 

zero today is exactly the Woodford reason, which is that we were constrained by the zero bound 

for a couple of years.  T
herefore, we have to stay at zero for a while
.  And it is exactly at that 
point that you gain credibility for the po
licy
.  You are trying to make up for the zero bound 
constraint by st
aying at zero
 even though the data are telling you, according to the standard 
Taylor rule or other Taylor
-type rules
, to be more aggressive at this juncture.  Y
ou are staying at 
zero 
because you need to make up for the fact that you were at the zero lower bound for some 
time. 
I do not agree with Professor Woodford that the nominal GDP targeting approach would 
do this.  My main complaint about nominal GDP targeting is that it ignores th
e possibility of 
what is likely an altered real GDP growth path.  And certainly, if you look at the data, as the 

Chairman was saying yesterday, on levels of real GDP or consumption, it looks like we are on a 

different path than we were. 
So to commit us to
 get back to the previous real GDP trend, which 
is partly driven by 
the 
bubble economy in the mid-2000s, I think would be a mistake. 
However
, for 
price
-level targeting
, I have looked at graphs and tried to get an analysis of 
where we are with respect to th
e price level.  If you look at the price-
level path established 
during the period from 1995 to 2005, which was a relatively successful monetary policy era for 
             
      
    
     
   
       
   
            
the Committee in terms of hitting our inflation target, we are actually very close 
to or right on 
that price
-level path.  And in that sense, that has been a great success of the Fed during this 
episode.  Unlike the U.S. in the 1930s, w
hen policymakers allowed the price
-level path to 
deviate from the previously established path, or Japan in the 1990s, in which, again, they allowed 
the price
-level path to deviate from the one that had been established, we did not do that.  We are 

right on the 1995 to 2005 price-
level path. 
In that sense, policy has been successful, and we have 
not committed the mistakes
 of the past.  That is also one reason why I think we have made 
essentially the right call over the 
past several years. 
I am going to stop there.  Those are my 
thoughts on monetary policy.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes, just a point of clarification.  I view the language of 5
 as a 
threshold, not a trigger.  Threshold language would be, 
ﬁlow rates appropriate, at least as long as 

the unemployment rate exceeds 6
½ percent.ﬂ  A tri
gger would be, ﬁA low rate is appropriate 
only as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6
½ percent.ﬂ  So I think it is written as a 
threshold, not a trigger. 
MR. BULLARD.  Can I respond to that?  I agree that that is the language in there, but I 
think mark
ets will interpret it as a 
trigger.  
Or let me say, as a fair
 way, I think there is a danger 
that markets will interpret that as 
a line in the sand or a t
rigger
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it™s pretty easy for the Chairman in the press 
conference
Šif we
 were to go this routeŠto explain what a threshold means.  I don™t think it is 
that complicated. 
MR BULLARD. If it™s not a t
rigger
, why put the number in? Put a lower number in. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s okay, too. 
       
                
           
               
     
   
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President 
Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to support 
alternative 
B. Having said that, I have some reservations about going down the path of a new LSAP, 
particularly the whole-hog approach that™s in a
lternative A. I am reticent on two
 counts. 
First, I remain unconvinced about the likely efficacy of expanding our asset purchases.  
As I said in the economy round, I think the conditions that made the first two LSAP programs 

successful
Ša lack of liquidity in MBS markets in the case of LSAP1 and elevated concerns 
about outright deflation in the case of LSAP2Šare not present in the current environment.  
This 

time around, it seems to me that we face a more conventional problem of inadequate demand, 

and I am not convinced that lowering general 
market rates will stimulate much credit expansion 
and spending.  
Furthermore, it is not clear to me that credit conditions in mortgage markets have 

eased quite enough to the point that more MBS purchases w
ill have a significant impact. 
Second, I have learn
ed to be humble as regards outlook certainty.  I have not completely 
abandoned the hypothesis that the willingness of businesses to hire and businesses and 

consumers to spend will improve on the other side of the election and fiscal cliff negotiations.  

As I commented yesterday, I believe there is some upside risk.  Though the European situation is 
not rapidly converging to a truly comprehensive resolution, I see some hope that the process of 

incremental steps may cumulatively lead to a large leap in overall confidence. 
I don™t have a 
whole lot of conviction that these optimistic outcome
s will be realized, so I accept the case for 
some policy response to current circumstances 
in the Committee™s outlook. That said, I will 
support 
alternative 
B™s modest pace 
of 
$30 billion per month.  That would be my preference 
for 
expansion of our MBS portfolio. 
      
     
                        
   
          
   
   With respect to the choice between paragraph 5 and 5
, I am sympathetic to the idea of 
replacing calendar dates with economic conditionality.  I have said that in e
arlier meetings. But I 
am not in favor of the formulation in 5
, at least today. 
I have views 
similar to 
President 
Bullard
™s.  The unemployment rate is a partial and potentially misleading indicator of labor 
market performance.  The pace of employment gr
owth needed to attain a given unemployment 
rate can be very sensitive to changes in the participation rate. For example, at current 
participation rates, it will take just over 200,000 jobs a month to get to a 7 percent 

unemployment rate by the end of next year.  I would consider 200,000 jobs a month over the 

next 16 months to be consistent with sustained significant improvement in the labor market. 
But the Board staff, and many on the Committee, have noted that labor force participation 
rates appear to be 
well below the levels that can be explained by demographic trends.  My own 
staff estimates that only 40 percent of the drop in participation rates since the beginning of the 

recession is due to labor force aging.  
If the participation rate were to revert t
o the level it was 
just last September, job gains of 200,000 per month would, everything else being equal, yield an 

unemployment rate that would be barely below 8 percent by the end of 2013.  And I would not 

be willing to say that such an outcome would con
stitute a lack of progress in meeting our 

employment mandate. 
Paragraph 5
, as it is written, contains no reference to broader labor market conditions.  I 
believe there was a reference in an earlier version, but it is has been removed.  I think that this i
s a significant omission, particularly with an unemployment threshold as ambitious as 6
½ percent
.  I™m not comfortable with a number that low, combined with a lack of any reference at all to our 

broader employment objectives.  T
here are enough facets of the 6
½ percent decision to consider 
that it feels a little rushed to me at this meeting. 
      
          
    
      
      
    
             
 As regards paragraph 4, I would include the reference to other policy tools. I think the 
meaning of this paragraph should be that if conditions don™t improve, the Commi
ttee will 
continue the MBS purchase program and may undertake additional asset purchases, 
employ 
other policy tools, or both.  If I misunderstand the meaning of that paragraph, then I would ask 
for a little bit more work on this paragraph and further clarification this morning.  
Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart, in 5
, the very last sentence does 
reference labor market conditions.  Did you note that? 
MR. LOCKHART.  Let me look at that.  I stand corrected.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Resource slack is large, labor market 
conditions lack momentum toward improvement, and the inflation profile in our projections is 

slightly below our long
er-run objective for the most 
part. 
I support strong and meaningful policy 
actions today to address these deficiencies. I accept that 
alternative 
B delivers on these 
requirements.  I think that the $40 billion of MBS and 5
 are very helpful in delivering 
that. I 
will simply note th
at the formulation of forward guidance in 5
 is not quite as strong as I have 
preferred in the past, but I do think that it is a good, careful approach that will in fact boost 

monetary policy accommodation, and I can certainly support that, if it is adopted. 
I think that the wording paragraph 2 is extremely important. It states the monetary policy 
concern 
as follows:  ﬁ
The Committee is concerned that
, without further policy accommodation, 
economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained improvement in labor market 

conditions.ﬂ  That is very important.  It follows through on the minutes from our July meeting, as 

well as your grave concerns
 and 
remarks expressed at Jackson Ho
le, so I favor that. 
                         
         
  
       
    I favor this combination of essentially open-
ended asset purchases, which are flexible 
when you put paragraphs 3 and 4 together, plus the enhanced 
state
-contingent 
forward guidance 
in paragraph 4.  
President Bullard went through this rationale a little bit. Let me just summarize 
and say I put a lot of weight on the research literature that Mike Woodford described.  I thought 

he did a terrific job.  In Woodford™s formulation, clear expectations of forward guidance are 

important and effe
ctive for delivering policy accommodation. 
In fact, I held my breath when I 
read the page where he described when I had talked about the 7
/3 thresholds, and I thought that 
Mike was kind and gentle in criticizing but saying that that type of forward guidan
ce did deliver 
more accommodation than what his best choice was.  In that sense, the language in 5
 would 
indeed be helpful.  The evidence for LSAPs that you mentioned yesterday, 
Mr. 
Chairman
, was 
very important.  The two reinforce each other very well. 
In paragraph 3, as I mentioned, I favor the stronger pace of MBS at $40 billion.  I think 
that paragraph 4 makes this essentially open-ended by conditioning further LSAPs on substantial 

improvement in labor conditions, joint with price stability, and 
with
 policy effectiveness, as you 
mentioned yesterday.  So there are important safeguards there.  It can be flexible and can turn 

around if in fact it is not working as best we would hope. 
In terms of labor market improvement, it would be unambiguously an improve
ment if we 
got something on the order of payroll employment increasing 200,000 per month for several 

months.  If the unemployment rate declined either with momentum or continuous improvement, 

and, indeed, we got 
GDP growth above trend, those would be all of the markers that we would 
expect for a strong recovery that would be associated with an 
improving labor market.  We may 
well not be lucky enough to see all three of those at the same time, so we will have to pay 

attention t
o that. 
       
   
                 
   
             
   
        
      
      
As you mentioned, the l
ast sen
tence
 in 
paragraph 
5 gets at this larger characterization of 
labor market improvement beyond just the unemployment rate, but the unemployment rate is a 
very important marker.  I think that 
the 
paragraph 5
 forward guidance is explicit
ly state 
contingent, and it allows us to remove the calendar date.  I
t is very easy for us to be against 
calendar dates.  I think that most of us are uncomfortable with this formulation, that policy can 

remain low until late 2014 or beyond.  But we are uncomfortable because of the ambiguous 

nature. Is it a forecast?  Is it commitment? It is easy to be against that, but you have to be in 

favor of something in order to actually take it out.  The state contingency in 5
 is very useful.  So 
the 6
½ unemployment rate marker, 
with the 2 plus ½ percentage point on inflation, is a useful 
safeguard.
  Presidents Williams, Rosengren, and Kocherlakota spoke well about how this works, 
and that it is critical to describe our attitudes about inflation above our goal of 2.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by saying something positive 
about alternative B.  [Laughter] I very much like the idea in paragraph 5
of replacing our 
problematic calendar
-based guidan
ce with language that is conditional on future economic 
conditions.  I think this is much needed change.  It focuses our communication, our forward 

guidance, on a reaction function, and reduces the danger that Michael Woodford very eloquently 

laid out that our forward guidance is actually just making people gloomier about the economic 

fundamentals. It™s a very real danger, and I think there is a very real possibility that that is 
the 
effect our forward guidance has been having over the course of the last y
ear. 
Okay.  That was my positive remark.  I would like to move on now to some improvement 
opportunities I see.  [Laughter] I think in 5
 that it would be better if we avoided using a specific 
numerical value for the unemployment rate as a threshold or tri
gger, whatever we are going to 
         
     
            
              
           
   
    do. I took a step back.  T
his is a large change in our statement.  This is a fairly dramatic change 
in the set of language we use 
to characterize our forward guidance. It™s an ambitious statement. 
In view of our experience with the forward guidance earlier this year, where we got 
boxed in for something that in hindsight we could have anticipated, I tried to think of ways in 
which this language could unexpectedly box us in or tie our hands in ways that we don™t 

anticipate now.  I think this numerical unemployment rate is one of them. 
President Lockhart 
was very eloquent about this.  This makes us hostage to labor force participation rates.  W
e would be vulnerable to a scenarioŠhe sketched it outŠin which employment picks up, and that 

starts drawing people into the labor force.  This is not an unfamiliar phenomenon historically, in 

which labor force growth that 
tails off 
and turns negative when the unemployment rate goes up, 
then picks up when employment growth starts rising.  Given the behavior of the labor force over 
the 
past several years, I don™t think we should have a lot of confidence in our ability to project 

how the unemployment rate would behave in a scenario in which employment growth picked up 

a lot.  I think this is a really serious risk.  I
t would be better to write the statement in terms of the 
qualitative language used earlier that President Lockhart was referring to. For example, we 

could say, 
ﬁThis exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least 
until the Committee has seen substantial ongoing improvement in labor market conditions.ﬂ 
I think that formulation would be preferable to the language that uses a specific numerical target. 
The s
econd opportunity I see has to do with the inflation language in the same statement.  
We used the phrase that 
ﬁthis 
exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate 
will be 
appropriate at least as long as
ﬂ blah, blah, blah, ﬁprovided that inflation at a one-
to two
-year 
horizon is projected to be no more than 
a half
 percentage point above the Committee™s 2 
percent 
objective and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.
ﬂ  So the logic is 
                
  
              
      
          
     clear, to give ourselves an out if the inflation picture deteriorates substantially.  Personally, I 
think the ﬁclose to 2 percentﬂ language would be better.  That™s more consistent with the kind of 

standard we described in our consensus statement.  Proliferating conditionality language can be 

confusing.  But there is a deeper problem with this language.  My sense is that it has been true 

for the 
past 20 years in which we have achieved price stability
ŠI believe it has been true
Šthat 
inflation over the medium term, the next couple of years, was projected to be close to 2 percent 

or below that.  I haven™t gone and checked, but I am virtually sure that™s true.  T
his was a period 
during which we achieved and maintained price stability.  I
t is essential to maintain that 
credibility because it can be co
stly to re
gain, but we started this period by moving preemptively, 
before the forecast of inflation moved away from that low rate.  And in the future, 
it is going to 

be important for us to be able to move preemptively. I
f this condition is violated, it is
 in some 
sense too late. 
It
™s not like we are going to go back to the 1970s right away if this condition is 
violated, but I think this sets too low a bar.  T
here is a way to word this that tightens this. 
We 
can say, instead of ﬁprovided that inflation at a one-
to two
-year horizon,ﬂ we could say, ﬁunless 
inflation, at a one-
to two
-year horizon, would be projected to be more than ½ percentage point 
above the Committee™s 2 percent objective.ﬂ  S
omething lik
e that makes clear that we would 
move to keep this condition true, that we are not going to wait until this condition is violated in 

order to move. 
The t
hird suggestion I have for improvement in B(5) 
concerns the last sentence. I suggest 
we delete it. I think it is quite confusing.  This represents the fifth different statement of 

conditionality on the second page, in two paragraphs. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Are you saying the last sentence in 5
?            
          
                                        MR. 
LACKER. 
Yes, , the last sentence. 
It is not clear if it only applies after we get to 
6½. Does it apply before or after that?  It is tempting to think, well, the second sentence is pretty 
strongŠthat must trump it.  But it™s not obvious.  And then, it
™s expressed in terms of the pace, 
and the rest of the conditionality is about the level of the unemployment rate.  So does this mean 

that if we get to 6
½ percent 
but unemployment is not continuing to fall rapidly enough, we are 
going to keep tightening po
licy
? I don™t think you mean that.  I
t just seems unnecessary and 
confusing to me. 
The f
inal suggestion I will make
 is, 
again, the lack of grammatical accuracy in the way 
inflation is referred to in 4 is unbecoming to 
the Committee.  We take a lot of care
 to 

communicate precisely. In something so critical, it is a little disturbing. It just seems like a limp 

and tepid sort of boilerplate reference to inflation.  ﬁ
In the context of price stability
ﬂ has always 
struck me as a little bit vague. 
Why not say 
ﬁunless doing so would compromise 
price stabilityﬂ? 
We are committed to price stability. It™s in the mandate. I would prefer to see something 
stronger like that. 
Let me take a step back here. 
If you look at this language, it™
s complicated.  The 
conditionality is expressed in four or five different ways in various parts of these two paragraphs.  

Just in terms of complexity, I think it™s going to be hard to boil it down and simplify.  
ﬁUntil 
labor market conditions get better
ﬂ is probably going to be the 
headline, but the nuances are 
going to be hard to parse out for people just reading it.  Your press conference is going to be 

really critical here. 
The broad thrust of the language of this thing is to very significantly intensify our focus 
on unemployment.  We have been moving in that direction for some time, but I view this as 

implicitly weakening our commitment to price stability
.  Taking this statement as a whole
, that™s 
        
              
                  
     how I view this.  I know the worry about price stability seems like a remote and distant concern 
right now.  I know that it looks like it is under control.  It looks like we have things covered, 

looks like we are far from breaking out, looks like we have gotten away with it 
the 
past couple of 
years.  We™ve seen inflation rise up and not have it trigger any erosion of expectations.  But the 

potential, if we lose it, is for far more costly effects on the economy than the incremental impact 

of the 1 
million jobs that the staff 
has shown might be associated with today™s actions.  I think 
that shift in focus represents a broad overconfidence about our models; a broad overfocus on 

point forecasts
, forecast means, mean forecast paths
, and their analytics as well as a lack of 
humilit
y that would be appropriate here. 
As for the deeper issues of the day, I cannot support a new asset purchase program.  W
e are fluctuating around a sluggish growth path, and I don™t think we should react to the downside 

wiggles that are of this magnitude.  F
urther stimulus at this time is unlikely to improve 
economic 
growth much without causing an unwanted increase in inflation.  I have talked about that before.  

This will complicate risks, 
creating 
greater complications in our exit strategy. 
The larger we 
make the balance sheet, the more vulnerable we are to small miscalculations in policy along the 

exit.  It just provides so much scope for expansion in bank lending and deposits that it makes us 

very vulnerable.  And the larger we make it, the more vulnerab
le 
we are
. I strongly oppose purchasing more mortgage-backed securities.  Central banks should not 
choose which economic sectors to support.  Doing so, if it has any effect at all, restricts credit 

access in other sectors. And I don™t see how we can defen
d that.  Such allocational initiatives go 
far beyond our mandate.  They undermine our claim to deserve independence for the conduct of 

monetary policy, and threats to our independence have been growing recently.  I think these are 
                                 
    
     
             just going to heighten th
ose threats. 
Buying MBS is bad policy and bad politics.  The only 
circumstance in which I
™d support it is if there weren™t enough T
reasuries out there to buy.
 One final comment.  T
here was some discussion at the last meeting of the slogan ﬁWe™ll 
do what it takes.ﬂ I think we haven™t given enough thought to the possibility that what it takes is 
patience.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I want to comment on one of your observations, 
President 
Lacker, about the last sentence of 5
. I read it slightly differently than you do, and I 
don™t know how 
other people read it. I read the sentence preceding it 
as saying 
that we currently 
anticipate that th
ese are 
the right metrics, but then the last sent
ence says that that current 
anticipation 
could be modified by what we see over time.
  You are basically saying that you are 
not completely locked into the first thing, regardless of what economic information you see in 

the future.  So I think the sentences 
actually do work together in a reasonable way. 
MR. LACKER
.  So the policy we™re adopting here is that an exceptionally low rate for 
the funds rate is going to be appropriate as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6½ percent, 

inflation is well contained,
 or we decide that some other indicator of labor market conditions 
is more appropriate. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We currently anticipate that this is the right range, but 
our view is going to be modified by future information about a broad range of indicators.  
That is 

how I read it.  T
hat seems to be more intelligent than saying we are locked into this, regardless of 
what happens, regardless of what we see, and we are not allowed to learn about anything as the 

economy evolves.  I
t creates a little nuance, 
which is reasonable in terms of how one would 
expect the Committee to operate. 
                 
    
    
     
    
       
         
        MR. LACKER.  Well, then, why not soften the 6½ and use 
more general 
labor market 
conditions. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Because 
you are trying to give guidance about what the 
Commit
tee
 thinks 
at the time, what we think today that might be modified 
or might not be 
modified by future information.  But clearly it would be unintelligent not to modify your view if 
the information strongly contradicted your prior view.  That™s how I read i
t. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Despite massive monetary policy 
accommodation over the past four years, a stronger recovery has not yet materialized, and last 

week™s labor market report was a frustrating remi
nder of this long slog.  Like others, my forecast 
accounts for any number of risks related to Europe, the U.S. fiscal cliff, and 
the 
regulatory 
environment, and does recognize that policy accommodation may need to remain in place for 

some time in order to 
support the recovery.  I understand the case for taking action in order to 
spur the recovery and bring down unemployment faster.  To that end, the Committee agreed to 

undertake additional balance sheet actions only a few months ago.  Today, we contemplate doing 

more.
  Certainly, the data flow since the last meeting was a bit softer than I had expected, but not 
sufficiently so to warrant a further expansion of our balance sheet.  In that regard, I note that the 

Tealbook had pulled forward the timing of the f
irst rate increase since our last meeting. 
As I weigh the cost of action versus 
the 
status quo, I have appreciated the thoughtful 
analysis of Board staff and a number of my colleagues around this table about the effects of 

another asset purchase.  Unfortun
ately, I find 
that the risk
s associated with further action carry 
less precise measurement, but, to the extent they are possible, pose significant cost if realized.  

Impairing market functioning in certain financial markets, the potential for the Federal R
eserve 
                 
             
               
      to experience financial losses in the future, and risk
s to financial stability 
due to the extended 
low rate environment all strike me as significant when weighed against potential benefits.  A 
larger balance sheet also has the potential to further c
omplicate an exit strategy. 
Another LSAP also may have near-term adverse consequences.  Given the recent rise in 
gasoline prices, additional asset purchases could generate a further rise in oil and gasoline prices, 

which would weigh on middle- and lower-
income households and, thus, partially offset 
estimated benefits. 
I also remain concerned that a balance sheet expansion could at some point raise inflation 
expectations.  Longer-
term measures of inflation expectations
, or breakeven inflation, 
appeared 
to re
spond strongly to past LSAP announcements.  Given that current longer-
term breakeven 
inflation measures are consistent with our stated goal, I am concerned that another LSAP 

program could push longer-term expectations above a level consistent with our obje
ctives. 
If this were to occur, we would face a difficult tradeoff between allowing longer
-term expectations 
to drift higher or reversing course by reducing the size of the balance sheet.  Either option strikes 

me as damaging to both the real economy and o
ur credibility. 
In terms of the forward guidance, I agree with those who note the time-contingent 
guidance has been problematic.  And so conceptually I agree that the state
-contingent guidance is 

preferable as long as we can articulate this guidance in a m
anner that is fully consistent with our 
January 2012 strategy statement, including our assessment of risk to the financial system.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 
         
    
  
                 
   
    
        
          MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I mentioned yesterday when I made very 
short comments about the economy, 
I would interlocutate today at greater length 
[laughter], 
so I 
ask you to bear with me. 
We seem to be mesmerized by the siren call of LSAPs. I can™t sing like Orpheus, and I 
know I will have no success in tying you to the mast or stuffing wax in our crew™s ears.  So what 
I am going to do is simply give my very best advice as a loyal officer on your ship.  I believe we 

are getting further off course. I believe we were misled by our navigati
on equipment.  
We have 
very sophisticated models, and we have a superb crew of analysts but, as you yourself said 

yesterday
Šand I quoteŠﬁnobody really knows what is holding back the economy, and nobody 
really knows what really works.ﬂ 
One thing I learned as a midshipman at the Naval Academy was that great battles at sea 
or on land are fought with modern tools, but they are decided ultimately by judgment.  AndŠ 

always
Šone listens to and respects the elements. I think everybody agrees at t
he table that 
inflation is not an immediate or presently foreseeable threat.
  Our desired port, given our 
mandate, is increased employment. I happen to believe personally we are way off course. I 

believe we are ignoring, at our peril, the elements. I ha
ve reported from my watch station again 

and again that the very people we wish to stoke consumption and follow demand by creating jobs 

and expanding business fixed investment are not influenced by our policy initiativesŠ
that is, by 

our LSAPs. 
Small and med
ium-sized businesses are job creators, and yet the soundings, as mentioned 
yesterday by President George, 
of the 
National 
Federation of Independent Business
™ s
urveys and 
others, tell us that over 90 percent of those businesses are either not interested in borrowing or, 

as I mentioned yesterday, 
have no problem accessing cheap financing.
  Monetary policy is not on 
           
            
  
     
    
   
   
        
      
        
 their radar as a concern, except that it raises fears among some 
of future inflationary 
consequences.  Their principal concern, as President Georg
e mentioned yesterday, is with fiscal 
and regulatory uncertainty. 
With regard to fixed investment and job creating 
cap
-ex, as I said yesterday, the math is 
pretty straightforward.  Big businesses dominate that theater, and again and again I have reported 
to this Committee that with some exception
ŠDisney, for example, being one led by a very 
clever contrarian CEO
Š90 percent or so of those I survey will simply not be motivated by 
further cuts in the cost of capital to invest in job-
creating cap
-ex beyond their maintenance needs.  
And 
this 
is 
due to 
the uncertainty of taxes and final deman
d and federal spending prospects. 
This time, as I mentioned yesterday, I asked my CEO contacts if 
their 
cost of borrowing 
were to decrease by some 25 basis points or more, how 
they would 
react. 
Would this induce 
them
 to spend more on expanding payroll or job-
creating cap
-ex?  And the answer 
from
 9 out of 
10 was, you could cut the cost of borrowing by 1 full percentage point 
and 
we™ll use it to buy 
back stock.  That™s what we™r
e being directed 
to do by our board.  Governor Stein mentioned the 
Duke™s Fuqua School survey yesterday, which is even more comprehensive. 
But one of my CEO contacts, by the way, reminded me of the work I used to do for him 
and the company he then managed 
going back to 1975, and our recommendations for strategic or 
green
 field investments.  We focused on ROI:  As long as you get paid back and as long as you 
earn a profit
, you can justify it to your shareholders.  And presentlyŠ
and perhaps because of 
what we 
have already initiated
Šthe cost of capital, as President Dudley mentioned earlier, 
unlike the conditions of 1975, 
is just not part of the calculation.  And if they are going to be 
buying 
back stock, as they are being directed 
to by their boards, there is, 
to be sure, a wealth 
effect.  But 
based on 
the people I talked to, it just does very little to result in
 job creation sooner 
        
        
  
   
   
                       
      rather than later. I™ll give you a specific example. 
This is inside information and off the record.  
A company that ordinarily h
as cap
-ex expenditures between $15 
billion 
and $20 billion a year 
and has the option presently to either lay cable and facilities that would expand their 4G network 
to 90 percent of the country or buy more stock has been directed by their b
oard of 
director
s to 
buy more stock because of the economics that these low interest rates make possible.  Even 

though it strengthens 
their balance sheet, it defers their 
job-
creation capacity. 
Again, I am suggesting, as one of your loyal crew, respectfully, that the effi
cacy of the 
course you are leading us upon is questionable.  M
y best guess is that we will end up this 
program, if we proceed with B, with excess reserves that exceed $2 trillion and money lying 

fallow, unused, and underutilized toward achieving our goal o
f increased employment. 
When we last talked, it was suggested that perhaps my interlocutors were unsophisticated 
and didn™t see the whole picture.  I note now that some sophisticates have come to question the 

efficacy of this LSAP cruise, among them Mr. Woodford, who has been talked about excessively 

at this meeting [
laughter], and my friend and respected economist Bill White, who has not been 
mentioned whatsoever.  Using monetary policy to overcome bad fiscal and regulatory policy is, 

to my mind, not only faulty but a 
pyrrhic
 strategy. It won™t work, and it may be used against us 
in a backlash and lead us onto the rocks. 
Now, all of that said, Mr. Chairman, you™re the captain of the ship.  It appears that you 
and many of our colleagues wish to now plot a course with coordinates outlined in B.  We have 

decided to proceed, and we have instructed our boiler room, 
as we say in the 
navy
, to pour out 
another $750 billion or so in steam, and the boiler room has replied, ﬁ
Aye
, aye.ﬂ
  This is doable, 
and 
the staff h
as indicated that 
ﬁt
he challenges posed by exit remain manageable
,ﬂ though I do 
sense some timidity in their confidence.  There are warnings in the 
memos on LSAPs that exit 
                
    
  
            
      
  
                 following an even larger pro
gram
 can probably not be accomplished without violating what the 
Committee has heretofore said is our exit strategy principle. 
The engine room has replied, ﬁYes, 
we can do it.ﬂ  But there are murmurs among the crew that their conclusions are subject to
Šand 
I am taking words out of the LSAP 
memos
Šﬁsubstantial uncertainty,ﬂ and they c
ouch their 
responses with qualifying phrases like ﬁcurrently judgesﬂ and ﬁwould likelyﬂ and ﬁseems 
plausible.ﬂ  And as I said, listening to Seth very carefully yesterday, his qualifications or his 

disclaimers sounded very much like an Allegra commercial.  But, again, you™re captain of the 

ship; you™ve decided to proceed on a course.  The course is outlined in B.  Bill tells us that it may 

aggregate to another $750 billion or so depending on how much time we let this run.  
I am a 
member of your loyal officer corps.  And even though I doubt the efficacy of what we wish to 

do, and in fact feel that this is most definitely not the right course, and feel that this course may, 

as President 
Lacker just said, compromise the Fed™s security with regard to its independence, m
y job is to give you the best advice I am capable of rendering.  Your decision is to steer us along a 

course outlined in B.  I would say that the least worse of the options in Tealbook 
B is alternative 

B, 
reg
ular B, the first paragraph 5. 
I sent around a memo earlier in preparation for this meeting, and I argued that one could 
make the case that this could help offset the drag from higher GSE fees, 
lower 

mortgage
Treasury spre
ads, even though they are quite low, and help one of the three positive 
durable goods sectors that is assisting the recovery, the others 
being aircraft and motor vehicles
.  It is still operating below long
-run potential, so there is very little danger, in my view, of 
inducing cyclical mal
-investment. 
In addition, the general effects of inducing more refinancing 
may aid housing and households in ways that we can™t quite quantify. 
          
       
          
    
         
  
            
   
 may be laudable in the minds of some at this table.  We™ve heard good 
arguments for it.  But I agree with President Lockhart, andŠ
I believe
ŠPresident Lacker, that it 
is going too far too fast, that we are rushing it, and I would recommend against it.  I am referring 
specifically to the 6
½ percent unemployment rate 
and 2½ percent inflation cap over the one- to 
two
-year horizon
.  You have the phrase that ﬁlong
er-term inflation expectations 
continue to 
remain well anchored
ﬂ attached to that, but my guess is just ooching the now commonly 
accepted medium
-term or longer
-term t
arget of 2 percent 
by o
ne-half percent
age point would 
raise eyebrows and doubts amongst our skeptics, and some question marks, no matter how we 

state it
, in the marketplace. 
If you wish to proceed on this course, Mr. Chairman, my advice is to go with 
the 
Tealbook™s alternative B, not B
. Specifically, I would go with $30 billion, the lesser number.  
As Bill English said yesterday, it allows some ramping up in case the Committee decides, against 

my adviceŠand others™ 
like me
Što do more.  A $30 billion program, if I understood the Desk 
yesterday, 
on a flow rate basis means we are already taking down 60 percent of supply. 
I would edit paragraph 4 to take out reference to ﬁadditional asset purchases.ﬂ I would 
leave it more vague by simply referring to employi
ng 
ﬁits other policy tools as appropriate.ﬂ 

And after the phrase ﬁin the context of price stability,ﬂ I would add ﬁand well anchored,ﬂ another 

great naval term, ﬁand well anchored inflation expectations.ﬂ We have it in B
. I don™t see why 
we don™t have 
it in B
.  This is enough, in my mind, to bind the hands for some time to come for 
all of those who are with you in the wheelhouse of the ship we™re steering.  It is going to make it 

very hard to raise short-
term rates, as I mentioned yesterday, even if we 
end up with a stronger 
recovery 
than we currently foresee or imagine. 
       
     
       
     
   
         
                    
   
      I would recommend, as I suggested in my memo of last week 
and 
discussed yesterday, 
that in your press conference you emphasize that this is to help along the recovery in housing.  I 
would advise that you say that the majority of the Committee concurs, but emphasize that the 

Committee, as you said yesterday you would, will be constantly scrutinizing the efficacy and 

costs of the program.  In other words, Mr. Chairman, I would take ownership of this issue.  It is 

one of the distinct areas of recovery. It is an area where I believe we have had impact. I did 

support the MBS program when it was originally announced.  I think it is vital for regular 

people, not just for economists. 
The headlin
e you should be seeking in 
USA Today
 should be ﬁBernanke Acts to Support 
Continued Housing Recovery.ﬂ  You mentioned yesterday you plan to speak in different terms 

than usual, making it more simple and directed to what you refer
red to as the ﬁaverage perso
n.ﬂ 
I think that™s good.  You™re a great teacher.  I saw you do that most forcefully and effectively 

when you visited Fort Bliss.  And as I mentioned in our phone conversations last week, your 

objective should not be to communicate to a few dozen sophisti
cated economists 
about 
this 
model or that model.  It should be to convinceŠ
what was referred to in the last meeting
Šthe 
unsophisticated interlocutors who run America™s businesses, and the consumers who buy the 

goods and services produced by those businesses, and the press, particularly 
what
 the consumers 
read as opposed to 
the reference literature. 
So, in summary, Mr. Chairman, I disagree with this course.  I think it is a mistake.  I
t steers us closer to the rocks.  But I have offered you my best advice un
der the circumstances. 
I wish you luck.  I will do my very, very best in my public appearances in the upcoming week to 

support what we are going to announce, even if I have to take Allegra to do it.  [Laughter] 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
         
            
   
        
     
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
  Thank you.  President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There are two policy actions under 
consideration today.  One is additional asset purchases, the other is an effort to extend and 
strengthen our forward guidance.  I would like to make 
a few comments about each of these. 
As I explained in the earlier go
-round, I am not in favor of undertaking a new round of 
asset purchases today.  In my view, the forecast has not changed enough to warrant further 

action.  Indeed, many of the Tealbook™s simple rules on page 2, Tealbook B, including the 

outcome-
based rule, suggest that policy is approximately well calibrated. 
Just like President 
Bullard, I do not see the urg
ency 
for large, aggressive actions at this time.  I™ll remind the 
Committee, we didn™t move earlier this year 
as the economy brightened and the outlook looked 
better
.  We did not take action.  We were patient.  
It t
urned out to be the right decision.  The 
econ
omy then weakened.  But we seem to be anxious to do further accommodation every time 
we see weakness and not do the reverse as the economy strengthens.  The message I take from 

that is that 
we 
need to be patient, that we need to not react to short-
run fluc
tuations. 
The recovery is frustratingly slow.  
The u
nemployment rate is uncomfortably and 
tragically high.  But, again, we have been told and we understand there is reason to expect this, 

given the size and nature of the economic shocks that have hit the economy.  The slow recovery, 

in my mind, is not evidence that our monetary policy stance is inappropriate.  The benefits of 

further asset purchase
s in curing what ails the economy are imprecise and tenuous at best.  
Indeed, the Board staff memo lays out numerous caveats and assumptions necessary in assessing 

the possible benefits of further asset purchases. 
While financial participants may be chomping at the bit for a new program, many 
economists throughout this country have raised doubts about the efficacy of such a policy 
       
                     
         
              strategy.  Despite sizable purchases and zero interest rates for four years, unemployment remains 
elevated.  But rather than question the efficacy of the policies, which would seem natural, our 

strategy seems to be to double down.  Now, th
e further sizable expansion of the balance sheet 

carries costs and will greatly exacerbate the challenges we face when it comes time to exit, as I 

talked about yesterday. 
In my view, embarking on another asset purchase program at this time is 
a highly risky strategy.  The consequences may prove very disruptive to the U.S. economy and 

harmful to the reputation and credibility of this institution for years to come.  We should not 

ignore these risks, even for the 
best
-guess outcomeŠa 50 basis point drop in the unemployment 
rate over two years. 
The proposal in 
alternative 
B is for a flow
-based program.  But to me, this seems to run 
counter to the theory of how such purchases are purported to work in the first place and the logic 

we have used in the past. If we 
believe that the effects of purchases are through a 
portfolio 
balance channel, then the public needs to understand the stock of securities the Fed intends to 

buy.
  The Board staff memo on the flow-
based balance sheet policy says
 that the conclusion of 
the 
simulation exercises
, and I quote, ﬁreflects the strong assumptions that investors, price-
setters, 
and 
wage
-setters all understand the Committee™s goals and its
 stopping rule for the flow 
LSAP
.ﬂ  How do we communicate that when we ourselves don™t even know what that stopping 
rule will be? It is remarkable to me that the Committee has not been able to communicate to the 

public our reaction function for setting the funds rate even in normal times.  And now it seems 

we expect the public to believe and unders
tand what our reaction function will be for LSAPs and 
balance sheet rules
.  LSAPs are not a nimble instrument.  If this program doesn™t produce the 
desired results or the predicted outcomes for 
the 
unemployment rate, what will we do? 
I would 
predict that with a 
flow
-based program, if we don™t get the results, we won™t stop.  We will 
            
                
   
        
     
   
   continue.  How will we know when to stop? W
e seem to have convinced ourselves that such a 
policy is effective and important.  Maybe so.  If it proves not to be, and we don™t g
et the desired 
results, will we just keep on buying assets, reevaluating, and say, ﬁOh, yes, it™s going to work.  
We just have to do some more.ﬂ I am not terribly confident of our ability to manage that 

effectiveness and give us a stopping rule. 
If we get
 the reaction function wrong, and we find ourselves with ever-
more larger 
balance sheets, the Fed may face balance sheet losses, no returns, no flows to the Treasury, or 

unacceptably large losses of some kind or another.  This could undermine our ability to 

implement an appropriate monetary policy in the future, to the detriment of both households and 

businesses.  Now, 
if the purpose of the balance sheet expansion 
is as a commitment 
device to 
keep rates low for longer precisely because it makes it harder to exit, then we need to be 

explaining this.  
We don™t tell this to the public.  We need to be more communicative about what 
we expect our policy to achieve and why 
we are 
doing it, and we™re not doing 
that
.  How do we 
expect the markets to understand this 
when we are reluctant to say so directly
 ourselves? 
This leads me to the issue of forward guidance, the other policy tool under consideration, 
either in conjunction or separately.  The intent of our forward guidance is for the Committee to 

commit to holdin
g interest rates lower longer than it normally would after the economy begins to 
recover.  The idea, as President Kocherlakota said, is 
that 
the commitment to do this is supposed 
to signal to households that the future is going to be brighter.  The future is going to be more 

economic 
growth, higher spending than they otherwise might anticipate.  And this helps 
stimulate less saving and more spending today.  The strategy works well in many of our models.  

Agents are completely forward
-looking.  Many of those 
have expectations that are right. 
But 
implementation, in my view, is very tricky. One needs to get the expectations right. 
                   
  
                   
                      We wouldn™t want the public to believe that we will let inflation run away from us, of 
course.  Michael Woodford has argued that t
here are 
way
s to implement this strategy
.  He has 
given us two examplesŠ
an earlier 
one is 
a price
-level
-targeting strateg
y and, of course, recently 
at Jackson Hole, 
nominal GDP targeting. I see the problem with this strategy in implementation, 
not the conceptual idea.  First, it presumes that households and businesses will correctly inter
pret 
our guidance and what it means, and that it means future growth will be higher.  
But it seems just 

as reasonable to assume, and perhaps so far that has been the react
ion, 
that 
they will read our 
actions as a signal that we believe the economic outlook is going to be a lot worse for longer.  

The public does not have that positive outlook, and if we don™t convey that to them in very 

strong language, the strategy won™t work.  It will not bring spending forward. 
This strategy requires us to manipulate the public™s expectations in a very particular way. 
That
™s the communication challenge with this strategy.  To follow th
e strategy requires placing a 
lot of weight on our abi
lity to communicate. You will recall that this Committee decided not to 
adopt price-level targeting not too long ago and did not adopt nominal GDP targeting when we 

had the opportunity to do so.  And we rejected those for a variety of reasons, one was 

com
munication and, of course, 
with nominal GDP targeting
, one of the major issues was 
defining what the right level of real GDP needed to be.  We found those both either risky or 

diff
icult communication strategies. 
What do we think that we have done now that will overcome those problems? Why do 
we think that the thresholds w
ill overcome those difficulties? We seem to be willing to 
implement the strategy in a half
-hearted way.  I™d note that I have been a strong advocate, and 
continue to be a strong advocate, 
for systematic reaction functions. It is very important to this 

Committee. 
But 5
 is not a reaction function.  

 says nothing about what happens, for 
              
          
      
       
   
        
                example, after we pass one of the thresholds.  And this is very important, 
because the 
public 
doesn™t understand what our reaction function is in normal timesŠor we don™t know what they 
perceive it to be necessarily
Šand we are not telling them what it is going to be afterwards
.  L
et™s 
suppose, for example, that the public believes that after 
we reach the 6
½ percent threshold, and 
we say nothing about what we will do after that, they presume we may go back to the Taylor 

rule.
  Well, if that™s what they expect to happen, it would lead perhaps to a view of 
very fast 
tightening of policy after we get to the 6
½ percent unemployment rate.  That would undo some 
of the positive effects that we are trying to gain by this forward guidance.  If that turned out to be 

the case, then this strategy won™t work.  How do we make that commitment?  The public has to 

believe, beyond just the thresholds, how we are going to conduct policy, and as 
of 
now we 
haven™t explained 
that. 
I don™t think we agree amongst ourselves enough about what our policy 
reaction function is, and as much as I desire a more contingent eco
nomic-
based reaction 
function, I don™t think the thresholds help us very much there.  
The language in 
alternative B
(5

 again, says nothing about 
how we will behave afterwards. 
In the end, I agree with Woodford that LSAPs are perhaps ineffective.  But if 
we are 
going to adopt forward guidance and use that as our powerful tool, we need a much more 

deliberate and extended communication strategy to lay the groundwork to explain how our 

reaction function and how our policy strategy 
are 
going to work, and a com
munication strategy 
that convinces the public that we are serious about it, so that they understand how it works, 
if we 

are to get the outcomes that we want. 
Obviously, I am not in favor of B.  But if I had to choose, at this point I would choose 
5 over 5, not because I don™t like the direction that 5
 is headed, I™m just not sure it is ready for 
prime time yet. 
I™ve never 
been in favor of the calendar date.  It has created many problems for 
      
   
          
           
           
           
   us over the last year, and I am anxious to get rid of it.  But we need to get rid of it not by a one-
time change in a statement. 
It is going to take more preparation and more analysis. 
Thank you, 
Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Unlike some of my colleagues, my policy 
statements have usually been on the shorter side because I have generally been supportive of the 

version of the policy alternative that the Committee has eventually adopted.  I™m finding today™s 

policy decision much more of a strug
gle.  So I™m going to take a little more time than usual to 

explain my policy position and to share my views on the benefits and risks of additional policy 

action
s. 
With the unemployment rate at 8.1 percent and the August employment report as 
disappointing as it was, I would like to see the expansion proceed at a faster pace.  I know that 

we all would.  So the question on the table is:  Can additional monetary policy accommodation 

spur economic growth and improve labor market conditions?  And if so, which actions would be 

most beneficial and pose the least risk? 
I agree with the staff assessment that large
-scale asset purchases have been effective. 
Our first LSAP program was effective at the early stages of the financial crisis when financial 

markets were i
n severe distress.
  Our second LSAP program was effective when it was launched 
in 2010, a time when financial stress was still significant, the risk of falling back into a recession 

was high, and the risk of an outright deflation was very real.  
Our LSAP p
rograms provided 
strong support to financial markets and helped to appropriately realign inflation expectations.  In 

today™s circumstances, I see the benefits of another LSAP program as being far more limited. 
                    
       
                       The circumstances that prevailed when we init
iated our previous LSAPs are not evident today.  
Financial markets are not in disarray, and deflation is not a serious risk. 
I also worry that another large
-scale asset purchase program carries the risk of 
complicating our ability to withdraw policy 
accommodation smoothly and in a timely manner, as 
well as the risk of exposing us to reputation risk in the event that we incur large financial losses. 
I commend the staff for doing yeoman™s work to develop exit tools, to identify some of 
the potential 
complications of operating with a very large balance sheet, and to simulate our 
balance sheet under various assumptions.  I know that we™ve taken precautions, but it is 

impossible to be fully prepared for the environment that we might actually face three y
ears from 
now.  So after putting together my thoughts about the benefits and risks associated with the 

available tools and considering my economic outlook, I was not in favor of launching another 

large round of asset purchases along the lines of 
alternativ
e B as it was originally proposed in the 
Tealbook.  That option called for the immediate launch of an asset purchase program until labor 

market conditions substantially improved, and the purchase program was committed to run at 

least through mid
-2013.  That option also called for an extension of the forward guidance on the 
fed funds rate through mid-2015. 
I recognize that the strategy behind this policy option is predicated on the theory that 
additional monetary policy accommodation will only reduce the une
mployment rate substantially 
if this Committee actually commits to act aggressively and persistently until that goal is 

achieved.  I understand why the commitment strategy works so well in theory, but we have not 

had much practical experience to learn from
.  I understand the value of commitment, but 
commitment can take many forms. I think there™s value in waiting a little while longer before 

deciding to initiate another large
-scale asset purchase program. 
The Committee™s better choice 
                  
           
      
   
  
    
           at this juncture is 
to find a way to commit through forward guidance about the federal funds rate 
liftoff and not to launch a significant asset purchase program.  
I™m of 
the 
view that easing 
monetary policy through forward guidance has also been a powerful tool for reducing long-
term 
interest rates. 
As I noted, I think that our first two LSAP programs were successful in countering 
financial market stress and deflationary pressure
s. We may yet encounter a crisis
Šeither from 
the fiscal cliff or from Europe
Šthat once again 
cause
s serious financial market distress or 
deflationary pressures.  We would be better served by using asset purchases in response to these 
kinds of threats or the threat of a recession than to try to eke out a little more 
economic 
growth in 
the current circumstance. 
In coming months we may know more about the prospects for fiscal 
policy and for Europe and about the outlook.  It™s valuable to have the option to respond directly 

to these situations
, and launching a full-blown LSAP program today reduces our flex
ibility. 
For all of th
ese reasons I have preferred to wait for the completion of our maturity 
extension program at the end of the year before deciding whether to purchase more long-
term 
assets.  However, it was clear at our last meeting that many other Com
mittee members judge that 
additional policy accommodation might likely be warranted even sooner, and last week™s 

disappointing employment report seems to have been the decisive piece of evidence for some 

members who have been waiting for more proof of the economy™s lethargic condition. 
While I still have reservations about some of the specifics of the proposal, the version of 
alternative 
B that is now under discussion offers the possibility of an acceptable way forward.  
For one thing, even though 
alternati
ve B does call for expanding our holdings of long-
term 
securities in the next several months, it does so through the acquisition of MBS
.  Because some 
research does suggest the MBS purchases can be more impactful than Treasury purchases, I like 
        
     
                     
    
     
           
this aspect 
of 
alternative B.
  But I would also prefer the smaller amount of MBS purchasesŠ
that 
is, the $30 billion per month. 
One option in 
alternative B also allows for the possibility that the Committee might 
deploy tools other than, 
or at least in addition to
, large
-scale asset purchases if in coming months 
we conclude that additional easing steps are warranted. I was going to suggest some changes to 
the second sentence in paragraph 4.  I preferred that we delete the mention of ﬁ
additional asset 
purchases
ﬂ and in
stead state that 
ﬁthe Committee will continue its purchase
s of agency 
mortgage-
backed securities
ﬂ and is prepared to ﬁemploy its other tools as appropriate until such 
improvement is achieved in a 
context of price stability.
ﬂ  But I do like President Lockha
rt™s 
suggestion that we insert ﬁmayﬂ in front of ﬁundertake additional 
asset purchases and employ 
its other policy tools.ﬂ I think this flexibility of phasing in more accommodation in various ways as 

needed could prove to be helpful. 
In addition to beginning MBS purchases, 
alternative
 B eases policy through forward 
guidance. I like, as many others have already indicated, the state
-contingent concept in 

paragraph 5
, but I regard the 6½ unemployment rate and the 2½ inflation rate to be much too 
aggressive and risky.  If 
the natural
 rate of unemployment turns out to be 6 
percent or larger, I 
think that not lifting the fed funds rate until the unemployment rate falls to 6
½ percent risks some 
build-up of unacceptable inflationary pressures.  I know there 
are safeguards built into the 
forward guidance to prevent 
an unacceptable increase in inflation expectations, but we should be 
more humble about our ability to forecast these conditions with much precision.  
Presidents 

Lockhart and Lacker both laid out so
me risk
s to
 using a number for the unemployment rate, and I 
agree with their thoughts.  But if we decide that we have to include a number, a better approach 

is to set the unemployment rate to 
ﬁat least as low as 
7 percent
ﬂ and to keep inflation at ﬁ
close t
o                                   
  
     
    
    2 percent.
ﬂ  T
hese settings give us more flexibility.  Without that extra flexibility, I do not 
support p
aragraph 5
 and instead I support the language in paragraph 5. 
In conclusion, even though my preference is to wait, I can support a
lternative B with 
paragraph 5 today.  Even though some MBS purchases would begin right away, expanding the 
scope of policy accommodation even further is going to require the Committee to vote once 

again in coming months on the size and the structure of the policy change.  This buys us some 

time to determine exactly what the Committee means when we say 
that we want 
ﬁthe outlook for 
labor market conditions to significantly improve.ﬂ It also buys us some time if the outlook does 

not significantly improve to decide whether additional asset purchases would then be the best 

course of action.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B.  My preference is for 
purchases of 
$40 billion MBS a month, and with respect to forward guidance, my preference is 
for 5
. The data we have received since our August meeting provides yet further confirmation 
that 
economic 
growth is proceeding near or slightly below the economy™s potential, and 
downside risks continue to be substantial.  For quite some time, the Committee has been in 

watch
-and
-wait mode.  We™ve patiently monitored the economy to see whether the MEP 
and
 our forward guidance would be sufficient to produce a stronger recovery.  The verdict now seems 

clear.  Absent further policy action, I see little chance that unemployment will decline in the 

foreseeable future.  We should not delay action any further.  Indeed, I hope we will send the 

message loud and clear that we intend to provide additional accommodation through new asset 
            
                                
   purchases until we observe substantial and sustained improvement in labor market conditions, 
and will maintain policy accommodation for an extended period as the recovery strengthens. 
I support the open-
ended 
and conditional nature of the asset purchase program in 
alternative B. I think it™s very helpful to spell out the goal of the program and to articulate the 
economic conditions we™ll need to observe before halting those purchases.  
In particular, we 
should promise to add accommodation through asset purchases until the outlook for labor market 

conditions has improved substantially, and we would stop doing so only if our outlook for 

inflation or assessment of the efficacy and costs of the program change
s sig
nificant
ly.  The 
challenge with such an open
-ended program is that its effectiveness will depend on market 
expectations of the ultimate size of our asset purchases, and we™re offering no clear guidance on 

how long we expect them to continue.  
In addition, 
we™ve included some escape clauses relating 
to efficacy and costs.  I, therefore, think it™s important that our public communications, including 

the Chairman™s press conference, emphasize our commitment to continue the program until we 

have seen ongoing and sustained improvement in labor market conditions. 
Even though the open-
ended nature of the program creates challenges in shaping 
expectations
, it also has the very desirable property that market participants should adjust their 
expectations about the size of the program in response to changing economic conditions.  And 

this means that the program should induce stabilizing movements in financial conditions as 

expectations adjust automatically to incoming data indicating a stronger or weaker economic 

outlook. 
There™s been quite a bit of debate both inside and outside the Fed about the likely 
economic impact of asset purchases, and there is sizable uncertainty about the effects of LSAPs. 

I appreciate ongoing staff e
fforts 
to refine our estimates of these effects.
  Nonetheless, in light of 
       
     
   
  
              
              the evidence that I™ve seen, I™m persuaded that this program can be a 
helpful 
tool 
for achieving 
our objectives.  And while I™m mindful of the implications of further asset purchases for capital 
losses and remittances down t
he road, these concerns pale in comparison to what I view 
as the 
potential economic and human costs of failing to reduce the unemployment rate as aggressively 

as we can. 
I™m hopeful that a determined commitment to continue providing accommodation 
until we
 achieve more rapid and durable progress in attaining our employment goal may bolster 
household and business confidence 
and
 spending.  Any stimulus provided through this channel 
will boost its 
effe
ct relative to the staff™s estimates. 
I think it makes sense to direct our new purchases to MBS to provide additional support 
to the housing market, and I support purchases at the higher rate of $40 billion per month, which 

is a rate that in the 
Desk™s assessment could be sustained for the next year or two.  Consi
stent 
with the open-ended approach, I™d be prepared to scale the flow of these purchases up or down as 

the economic outlook evolves.  If this flow of purchases is maintained through the middle of next 

year, our holdings of longer-
term securities would incr
ease by about 
$800 billion, which I think 
is large enough to have a substantial economic effect. 
Paragraph 4 of the statement spell
s out the conditions under which we will provide 
additional accommodation through asset purchases.  Paragraph 5, in contrast, 
concerns the 

conditions under which we will maintain the level of accommodation that™s reached when our 

asset purchases end. 
If we end up adopting 5 
rather than 5
, I consider it critical to make clear 
that an extension of the expected calendar date to m
id-2015 is intended as a policy shift to 
improve the economic outlook, and that it does not convey a downgrading 
of our outlook in the 
face of disappointing new data.  Whereas our previous language tied exceptionally low levels of 
               
    
   
      
          
    
 the funds rate to economic weakness, the new language incorporated into the beginning of B(5) 
is much more positive, and I think it™s a very significant improvement. 
As between the alternative versions of 
paragraph B
(5), while I can support B(5) today, 
I strongly 
prefer 
version 5
. We contemplated a formulation along these lines when we introduced 
calendar
-date guidance in August of last year, and we have discussed this formulation 
extensively for many months now.  President Evans, 
in his speeches
, and Presidents 
Kocherlakota, 
Williams
, and Rosengren have explained in detail and very persuasively why a 
formulation like this makes sense.  I don™t want to go over the arguments again that they have set 

before the Committee. I simply think that clarifying the economic conditionalit
y of the funds 
rate path is useful for precisely the same reasons that it™s useful to tie our asset purchases to 

economic conditions.  
And I also think
Ša point that President Kocherlakota emphasizedŠ
that 

the language has the possibility of bolstering household and business expectations about their 

future incomes, and this would be a very important mechanism potentially for supporting 

additional spending. 
In summary, I support the provision of additional monetary accommodation.  I anticipate 
that continuing our additional purchases w
ill be warranted
 well into 2013.  I also support 5
 today 
and hope that if we end up going with 5, 
we will make further progress in future meetings on 

refining our forward guidance. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I prefer 
alternative B.  As I™ve been saying for 
some time now, I believe it™s important for us to take stock of our remaining tools and make sure 

that they™re used to maximum effect.  I do not view reducing the IOER or any sort of discount 
         
    
   
     
           
        window program to promote lending to be viable options.  So for me, 
that leave
s us at asset 
purchases and future guidance about the fed funds rate. 
I find the idea 
that the MEP has just as much efficacy as the LSAPs to be plausible, an
d I 
supported both the original program as well as its extension through the end of this year as an 
accommodation move.  If the MEP does the job on long-
term rates
, without increasing the size of 
our balance sheet or drawing the same criticism as LSAP
s, so much the better.  But in not 
drawing criticism, the MEP might also be less visible and thus less likely to engender a 

confidence effect.  So it™s important to not only use the tool, but to be quite vocal about our 

estimates of its potency. 
In addition to continuing the MEP, I™m in favor of adding purchases of MBS.  There have 
been many discussions in this building about how LSAPs work and the extent to which long-

term rates affect equity prices.  I™m not, frankly, quite sure about the equity effect, but I™
m 100 percent certain that interest rates have a direct effect on real estate prices, and house prices 

are important components of household wealth.  They 
affect the 
number of households 
underwater on their mortgage, 
and, most important, rising prices help
 instill the confidence to 
buy a house either to live in or as an investment. 
Reductions in the yield on mortgage-
backed securities have not necessarily translated to a 
one-
for
-one reduction in home mortgage rates, 
as the primary
Œsecondary rate spread rema
ins 
unusually wide.  So our purchases of MBS could very well translate into additional profit to 

lenders rather than cost reductions to homeowners, but ultimately, 
that addition
al profit should 
entice additional capacity and competition into the market tha
t will reduce the cost and increase 
the availability of mortgage credit.
  And while much has been made of the benefit to the 
economy as homeowners refinance into lower payments and free up cash flow for spending, that 
          
   
          
             
   
       
       
   
 reduced payment for the homeowner translates into reduced income for an investor, and it takes 
some pretty heroic assumptions about the differences in propensity to spend for that channel to 

make a big impact on consumer spending.  Still, I think the confidence 
and wealth effects
, along 
with t
he incentive for increasing capacity
, make this a step worth taking.  I confess that I might 
have been on the fence with this if the employment numbers had been better, but given their 

weakness, it™s hard to argue that we™ve been watching closely and still haven™t seen any reason 

to take action. 
For m
y policy preference, 
I start with the desire to finish out the MEP rather than throw it 
overboard and replace it with something else.  Although it™s something of a coincidence that the 

MEP runs out as we approach the fiscal cliff, it™s also something of an advantage.  It gives us a 

logical point to take stock of 
the consequences of reaching the cliff and its resolution.
  To be 
clear, I don™t view it as a potential stopping point.  On the contrary, I think it hig
hly likely that it 
will need to be a point of escalation, 
and I want to make sure that we have some additional fire 

power left
.  I know this goes against the grain for those of you who believe we should launch 
everything we have as early as possible in ord
er to strengthen the economy enough so 
it can 
withstand potential shocks, but those who subscribe to that idea are probably a lot more 

convinced than I am about the actual power of our tools.  I, frankly, don™t believe these tools are 

powerful enough by themselves to strengthen the economy enough so that it will withstand those 

shocks, but I do believe that, 
in announcing their use, there™s a confidence effect that can change 

expectations and halt or slow a downward slide. 
I a
m willing to entertain the possibility that we are approaching the point where we 
resemble the wizard behind the curtain.  [L
aughter] 
If so, I want us to continue to appear great 
and powerful in the face of economic weakness for as long as possible.  
That
 is, I believe that our 
        
                   
   
     
               
 actions still have the potential to inspire confidence over and above any other possible channel 
through which they can work.  But if confidence is the most potent channel, 
the when
 and how of 
new announcements becomes a tool in its
elf. 
The Chairman was telling us at dinner last night that he had the opportunity to go and 
visit the Washington Nationals
™ batting practice and meet the players, and one of the players 
came up and
, upon finding that he was the Chairman of the Fed, said, ﬁHey, how about that QE3, 
man?ﬂ  [Laughter] 
I think this is evidence that there™s a whole world of people out there who 
have no idea what QE3 actually means or what monetary policy is.  They don™t know the Taylor 

rule, and they haven™t spent much time thinking about the Woodford paper.  [Laughter]  They 

won™t read the whole statement or tune into the press conference, but they will likely know that 

the Fed did something and that that something should help the economy. 
In the spirit of conserving some fire p
ower for what I view as a potential two
-step action, 
I prefer to add only $30 billion per month in MBS purchases.  It establishes the 60Œ
40 split that 

was assumed in the capacity memos and leaves room to escalate the amount of MBS, add 

Treasury purchases, 
or commit to a $1 trillion program as levers to be pulled if conditions 
deteriorate, as I fear they might in coming months. 
My own judgment is that a commitment to a 
large program will prove to be a stronger action, but that we can always change from open
-ended 
to a stock commitment.  It would be much tougher to try to go in the other direction. 
In paragraph 4, I prefer to exclude the mention of other policy tools, as those other policy 
tools could be interpreted as an intent to use the IOER or a lending p
rogram, 
neither of which I 
support. 
I prefer 
paragraph 5 over 5
, especially at this meeting.
  The action of adding MBS 
purchases to the MEP is already going to be a little complicated to communicate.  Have we or 
         
     
     
      
                  
  have we not launched QE3?  So our communication focus should certainly be on that action in 
this meeting. 
Use of a date 
in the forward guidance is familiar and it™s expected.  While I™m sure 
there™s going to be an ongoing discussion, I would still continue to use the date, but over time, 

explain t
hat it represents a departure from our standard policy rules and our own historic reaction 
function.  I found the memos about delaying liftoff until there was a greater certainty about the 

likelihood of return to the zero bound to be very reasonable and explainable, and it would be 

helpful to convey that we are also anxious to get back into a more normal environment. 
I have real concerns about expressing our policy in terms of specific triggers.  We worked 
hard on the statement that put the 2 
percent target out there, and I™d hate to create an impression 

that we™re now raising it. I™m especially reluctant to specify the unemployment rate 
as the single 
employment data point guiding our actions.  First, there™s always the risk that it™s perceiv
ed as 
too high or too low, and one has only to look at the most recent employment report that clearly 

showed weakness, even though the unemployment rate dropped 
two
-tenths, 
to get a little nervous 
about tying fed funds expectations to that single number.  
Indeed, last year as we saw a full 
percentage point decline in the unemployment rate, we were only kind of pleased about it, 

because it didn™t happen in the way we expected. 
Someone commented yesterday that we should begin to focus on how the general publi
c receives our messages, and this is a really important point.  I question whether the public will use 

this guidance formulation to adjust their expectations about policy.  I think they™ll hear these 

numbers as our targets.  But if the consensus is to move to conditioning on economic outcomes, 

we should, 
at a minimum
, take some time to set the table for its introduction. In addition, we 

should agree to leave this set-up task to the Chairman, and the rest of us should refrain from 

taking our own disagreements on the finer points public.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
                 
   
    
   
         
   
                  
  
   
      
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and I™d like to point out 
that 
the 
player™s 
financial portfolio is probably bigger than anybody at this table.  
[Laughter]
  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My reaction when you told me about the 
player in question was he has an awfully good financial advisor.  [Laughter] L
et me begin by 
saying that some people have basically asked the question, why act now? For my own 
perspective, I don™t think there is a particularly compelling reason to act at this moment, but that 

is only because I would have thought that action at any of the p
ast several meetings would have 

been equally appropriate.
  Charlie, in response to your questions, why wasn™t I or why weren™t 
others inclined to act earlier in the year when there was a trio of pretty good employment 

numbers? 
The answer 
is that
 they didn™t seem sustainable, 
just as the little bursts in the last 
couple of years hadn™t 
seemed sustainable. 
If they had been sustainable, that would have called 
for some action.  But here I think we are all seeing that the basic diagnosis of a bogged-
down 
economy over the p
ast few years has become a pretty persuasive one. 
The second thing I would say is I don™t think it is reasonable to oppose further action on 
the grounds that action taken in the past has not produced the complete, 
fast recovery that 

everyone would like to see.  T
he real question is the counterfactual one
: In the absence o
f action, 
in the absence of the LSAPs, what would be the situation now?  And there I think, 

notwithstanding 
the efforts of some to deny that there has been any effect
ŠI am not talking 
about people in this roomŠ
while one can debate reasonably and at length 
the actual amount of 
effect of the last couple of LSAP exercises, it is really hard not to see that there has been an 

effect
, and the 
disagreement seems to be 
over how much. 
Of course, we would all be happier if there had been a more aggressive set of poli
cies to 
deal with underwater mortgages and housing a couple of years ago.  I think in retrospect, as 
         
          
      
   
              
  
           people write the history of the Great Recession following the financial crisis, the failure to 
move 
more aggressively on housing is going to be seen as the biggest of the policy mistakes, even 
bigger than maybe not going for a larger stimulus package.  
But
 it is not up to us to determine 
what everybody else does.  We have to take the world as it is presented to us, and then balance 

the costs and benefits of the actions we can take in light of the good and bad decisions that other 

parts of the government and consumers and firms are themselves taking. 
As Jeremy was suggesting yesterday, there is in any set of LSAP proposals an anticipated 
combination of what he 
termed the ﬁhydraulic
ﬂ effects and some confidence or quasi
-commitment effect. 
I think it is hard to disentangle the two, even as we look retrospectively at 
the first couple of LSAPs.  T
here is some case to be made, as some of the skeptics have 
suggested
, that the conditions 
that obtained at the times of the LSAPs made what I have termed a 
confidence or quasi-
commitment effect particularly salient at those moments.  And th
at may not 
be quite as powerful right now. 
But, again, in the face of all of this uncertainty, which the Chairman alluded to yesterday, 
we do have to make a choice.  And it does seem to me that the costs suggested to date, while 

nontrivial, don™t seem overwhelming.  That is, they are a little bit more speculative than they are 

concrete. 
People are saying
, ﬁwe worry that there may be some effect on market functioning
,ﬂ without specifying exactly what that effect would be, or 
ﬁwe worry that there may at some point 
be some effect on inflation or on our exit capacities,ﬂ 
without telling a somewhat more filled
-out 
story as to what they think those might be.  While I would be shocked if there are not some 

unintended consequences, even of the LSAPs we™ve done to date, that is part of policymaking.  

There are always going to be some unanticipated 
consequences, and the best you can do is try to 
dig in as deeply as possible to spin out as many plausible outcomes as possible, and then make 
         
   
                
      
            
   
  
           that balance. 
Obviously, from what I™ve said here, that balance is in favor of taking further 
action
, as it has been before
.  And so I support 
alternative B.  But I just want to make clear to 
those who have questionsŠSandy and Dennis and othersŠthat I share a lot of the uncertainty, 
and I don™t have enormous conviction that anything we do now is going to be, as Eric put it, a 

game
-changer. 
It is going to be something 
that
 helps, not something 
that
 resolves all problems. 
On the 5 versus 5
 issue, Narayana laid out the two key considerations extremely well.  
First, that the use of the more-
specified forward guidance could maximize the effect of LSAPs. 
That is a very important consideration.  Second, and this was an extremely important point, he 

pointed out that 2½ 
could easily be consistent with a price
-stability
-only mandate just because of 
having toleranc
e around any goal that one is ever trying to achieve.
  To me, that might have 
suggested that perhaps, 
because we do have a dual mandate, there might be a different set of 

targets that would be adopted.  But it seems to me, 
at the very least
, Narayana™s rea
soning 
suggests why 
2½ shouldn™t be problematic. 
I don™t find the potential h
yste
resis argument or the potential rise in labor 
force 
participation to be dispositive here.  I don™t think Janet actually disagreed with me yesterday 

when I said that I had been
 surprised that we haven™t seen h
yster
esis.  And given that we haven™t, 
it™s probably less likely than we all thought.  But even if you thought it was, how would it 

manifest itself? Presumably, it would manifest itself in tightness in the labor market and rising 

wages, which are going to pass through into our inflation projections.  At that point, you™d say, 

ﬁOkay.  We are now seeing that the trigger or threshold has been breached.ﬂ 
There is something to what Charlie Plosser said about the market™s anticip
ation of what 
happens as we approach the thresholds.  When Charlie Evans was talking about this publicly, a 

very acute market observer commented offhandedly to me that he was somewhat sympathetic to 
              
                  
            this approach, but his concern was that there may be some expectation of pent-up and rapid 
increases, which markets would think would be coming depending on 
the circumstances as we 

approached
ŠI think, 
at that time
, Charlie™s numbers w
ere
 7 and 3.  I don™t think that is 
something to disregard.  It is probably something to take into account. 
These are all good arguments piled onto the ﬁwhy we all hate the dateﬂ argument for 
trying to develop something like what is in 5
. Having said that, I would remind all of you of the 
fact that I was initially
Šlate last year an
d early this past year
Šhesitant to move in that direction 
for a couple of reasons.  One, the communications issues, which severalŠ
most recently Betsy
Š have alluded to, are significant here.  But I thought they were significant last spring, even in the 

absence of an LSAP initiative
, which is going to take a little nimbleness to explain. 
The 
confusion with the policy statementŠ
what do these numbers actually mean
Šis a real 
consideration.  T
hough I should say
, at the time, I had some hopes that a revised S
EP could fill a 
good bit of the role of these thresholds or targets.  Those hopes have subsequently been dashed.  

[Laughter] I now see the costŒbenefit calculus somewhat differently, which is to say that the 

available alternative may not be as much of a s
ubstitute as I had hoped.  I would say that, 
notwithstanding my strong 
sense that 
this 
is 
the right direction for us to goŠfor the reasons 
Narayana stated
Šand that optimally we would have been prepared to go that way right now, 
I don™t really think the groundwork has been laid.  C
ertainly not externally
ŠI do think some 
underestimate the communications challenge that will exist. 
Second, I™m not totally positive that we have laid the groundwork internally
.  Maybe we 
did eight months ago, but all of those memos and things are in the archives instead of right in the 

front of our computer screens.  It would be a tougher case for me if everybody had converged 

around 6½ and 2½ 
because in those circumstances I might be inclined to say, ﬁAll right. 
         
       
    
         
           
          Communications ch
allenge
ŠMichelle is going to have a tough week, but let™s take the 6½, 2½, 
which is probably, in the end, right, but that™s not where we are.  I would say that not taking an 

employment number means that you are not actually communicating very effectively a
t all 
because otherwise it is just qualitative verbiage. 
You don™t really achieve what you are trying to 
achieve. 
In addition, 
saying a little bit over 2 is going to create even more communication 
problems because everybody is going to 
ask
,  ﬁWell, how much over?ﬂ I
t doesn™t really solve 
much, if anything at all. 
There is not agreement on these propositions right now.  
It is clear that we don™t have a 
consensus even among those who are going to vote in favor of a
lternative 
B on the numbers 
themselves
, so we are probably not prepared to move in that direction.  But I don™t think that 
should dissuade us from doing a lot of memo writing and communicating over the course of the 

next couple of meetings to see if we can move in that direction together.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Incoming data have been consistent with my 
expectations, reinforcing my view that additional policy stimulus is needed.  The inflation 

outlook is subdued, and the employment outlook is unsatisfactory, so a balanced approach 

requires the providing of significant additional stimulus. 
My comments will, again, focus on the communication channel.  First, I think that some 
marginal monetary stimulus could be 
delivered
, without incurring the costs associated with an 
LSAP
, through the use of forward guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook.  
While I 
appreciate the fact that an asset purchase program and forward guidance are not perfect 

substitutes, I 
like 5
 because it is close to a costless way of providing some accommodation. 
          
      
                    
   But even if we were not in agreement that more accommodation is necessary, I see little 
downside in shedding our adherence to a calendar date.  The calendar date, as we have heard, is 
working against us.  It is communicating that we are continuously downgrading our assessment 

of the future.  Why not, instead, show households, businesses, and markets what we are looking 

for in terms of particular economic outcomes?  Why not offer 
a sneak preview of what we need 
to see before we begin contracting?
  With such a preview and credible delivery, households and 
businesses and markets figure out how we are going to react.  Providing that window, and 

keeping the panes of that window clean, 
reduces volatility and pessimism about our commitment 
to support a recovery.  I
n mitigating this volatility and pessimism, as argued by President 
Kocherlakota and others, we maximize the effectiveness of the oth
er actions being contemplated. 
But we have be
en down this road before, so we ask, why now?  Why move to forward 
guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later? We should 

consider forward guidance 
that is 
dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later 
because 
there could be costs to putting this off.  The primary cost is the permanent downward 

shift in expectations that becomes more probable the longer we wait.  The longer we put off 

these contentious decisions, the greater the probability that we let stand the 
perception that there 
is a new
, lower, slower trajectory of economic growth that we are comfortable with; the greater 
the probability we let stand the perception that the FOMC doesn™t adhere to the statutory 

directive of a dual mandate; the greater the pr
obability we let stand the perception that we act 
forcefully when we are off the price
-stability mandate but not when we are off the 
maximum
-employment 
mandate; and the greater the probability we let stand the perception that 2 percent is 

a ceiling. 
      
           
                               Forwar
d guidance that is dependent on an economic outlook counters these otherwise 
pervasive and erroneous interpretations and perceptions.  The longer we postpone correcting 
such interpretations and perceptions, the more pervasive, credible, and intractable the
y become. 
In short, we want to oxygenate the forward guidance before households and businesses 

permanently harden their expectations about both the future path of the economy and our future 

reaction to it.  All of this argues for moving away from a calend
ar date sooner rather than later. 
We still may not know what the right numbers are for insertion into a formulation like 5
, but we have all seen that in optimal control simulations under commitment in the FRB
/US model, the unemployment rate is around 6 pe
rcent at the time of liftoff, and inflation never rises 
above 2½ percent.  We have seen justification for these particular thresholds.  Moreover, 

6½ percent is still above the Committee™s view of the long
-run rate of unemployment.  The 
forward guidance in 5
 has come a long way since we discussed it in August of 2011.  It now 
contains a firm, definitive, non-vague inflation proviso.  A problem 
we 
debated in the August 
2011 meeting was the risk that moving the forward guidance from a calendar date to one bas
ed on economic conditions would dislodge inflationary expectations.  In the current version of 5
, that possibility seems extremely unlikely. Instead, if inflation at a one
-to two
-year horizon were 
above the small 
½ percentage point threshold of 2 percent, the Committee would be required to 
reengage on the federal funds rate debate, even if unemployment still exceeds 6
½ percent. 
It is, 
to use President Kocherlakota™s phrase, a threshold for conversation.  These are hardly putting in 

place conditions by which inflation can brew silently, unchecked, and unaddressed. 
At the end of this round, there are still some who say that the egg hasn™t been cooked 
long enough.  I might have to disagree, noting that I am not sure what we are waiting for.  


 could be in a form close enough to convince the public that the FOMC is following 
                
       
     
      
      
  
    
  
       
 a different strategy; one that tries to achieve its employment mandate more forcefully than the 
public has perceived thus far; one that more credibly delivers accommodation and, at the right 

time, contraction, than the markets have understood thus far; one that has none, if any, of the 

costs associated with an LSAP; and one that may be necessary now to make the MBS purchases 

in 
alternative 
B more effective. 
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B. I will just comment on 
a few of the specifics.  First of all, in terms of the flow rate of purchases of MBS, I would go 

with 
$40 billion per month, though I can™t say I have a particularly strong view on this. 
With respect to the trigger
- or threshold-
base
d policy described in paragraph 5
, I am 
quite sympathetic to the strategy. 
It has the potential to be of significant help.  I appreciate and 
find quite compelling the arguments that President Kocherlakota and a number of others have 

made. 
There is really quite an appealing intellectual case to be made. 
Now, having said this, I find myself in very close agreement with Governor Tarullo in 
terms 
of whether now is the right time to move forward.  As he pointed out, there 
are
 two issues.  
There is the internal issue.  We have to get this right internally.  We have to really agree on the 

design and on the parameters.  T
he numbers really matter here. 
If we don™t coalesce around a 
reasonably strong version, one in which we make it clear that we have, as President 

Kocherlakota suggested, an ambitious unemployment threshold and some tolerance for a 

symmetric loss function on inflation, the intellectual c
ase for it in some sense starts to disappear.  
That™s one issueŠwe have to get that right. 
Second, the external issue is also challenging, and the communication here is crucial. 
To 
give one example, something that is not clear in
 my own mind is, how would we respond to the 
                       
     
            
     following question?  Have we really deviated from our previous forward guidance in the sense 
that now we are making more of what is really a commitment
, in the spirit of optimal control
, to 

do something that we would stick with, even if 
it™s, in a sense, time inconsistent?  Or
, is it just a 
statement, well, that we™ve introspected, we have thought about our reaction function, and we 

have discovered in our souls that we have a different reaction function than we previously knew 

ourselves to have? 
These are challenging things to explain, and it™s absolutely important to get it right. 
The 
concern, then, would be that if we throw something this consequential and tricky into what is 

already a hard
-to-parse statement in other areas,
 it could end up being somewhat 
counterproductive.  Again, I very much have sympathy for the underlying idea and the 

principles, and I would hope that we could further develop and do more work on it.  My own 

preference would be not to push it out the door in the next hour or two. 
With respect to paragraph 4, this is the part I had in mind when I said it was already a 
little bit hard to parse. 
You get a flavor of this in some of the comments that have already gone 
around.  In other words, it seems like it is really open to different interpretations.  Some of you 

have, as I hear it, read paragraph 4 as a quite strong and open-ended commitment to continue 

doing asset purchases as long as it takes until the labor market improves.  
At the other extreme, 
the way I heard Pres
ident Bullard reading the paragraph was, ﬁWell, it doesn™t really say much 
more than that we will do this for several months and then reassess where we are.ﬂ  Y
ou can 
certainly point to various forms of wiggle room in the phrasing.  I suppose the truth is sort of in 

between and a little b
it in the eye of the beholder. 
For my part, I would align myself quite closely with President Pianalto.  I appreciate the 
commitment arguments. I like the idea of having wiggle room, and that is 
because of
 my own 
        
         
        
    
                    understanding of the costs and the benefits, and that in spite of the fact that I do believe the 
benefits of past programs have been significant, I sense that we are verging into diminishing 

returns territory. 
Moreover, flexibility may be particularly warranted with MBS because there is 
a particular kind of market feedback that we might get reasonably quickly, which is to sayŠand 

Governor Duke mentioned thisŠthere is this issue about the pass-through from MBS spreads to 

primary mortgage rates. 
We will see
, presumably in a few months, whether that pass-through i
s weak or strong
, and one might want to update one™s policy based on that. 
In any event, as we talked about yesterday, given the language in paragraph 4, this makes 
the press conference important.  F
or what it™s worth, Mr. Chairman, I thought that the trial 
balloon answers that you were floating yesterday struck a good balance here, so I was certainly 

comfortable in that dimension. 
Given these two 
earlier
 points, one being that I think it is worth giving serious further 
thought to 5
, and the second being that there is some virtue to not getting overly locked in on 
asset purchases, I also
Švery similar to President Lockhart and to President Pianalto
Šwas 
thinking about whether 
there 
is 
an alternative fra
ming that would work here?  And my thought 
was maybe we can lean just as far forward, or even a little bit further, on the general principle of 

giving accommodation if the economy doesn™t strengthen but be more open as to whether that 

accommodation would t
ake the form of asset purchases or a change in our guidance. 
This could be done, in principle, either by rewording paragraph 4 of the statement or 
simply by
 the way the press conference is handled.  In the former case, if it™s done via the 
statement, you c
ould rewrite the two key sentencesŠ
it™s just a suggestion
Šas follows: 
ﬁIf the 
outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue to add 

further accommodation as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a 
context of price 
               
      
                       
   stability. In determining the nature of such accommodation, the Committee will, as always, take 
appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of the tools at its disposal.ﬂ I
t is less precise
, and I take that to be in the spirit 
of what you 
all 
were thinking as well.
  The intent is not to back 
away from being supportive but to be a little bit more flexible in the tools that are used to 

provide that support.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will vote in favor of 
alternative 
B.  My 
support for 
alternative
 B leans heavily on the language in paragraph 4 requiring us to consider 
the likely efficacy and cost of further actions when and if they are proposed and considered, and 

I join strongly Governor Stein and Presidents Pianalto and Lockhart in an editing of paragraph 4 

that moves very much in the direction that Governor Stein just read. 
I am a supporter of paragraph 5.  I think that the arguments that have already been 
raised 
and vetted about 5
 are dispositive at this time.  I will say that the two things that need to be 
doneŠthe good news is there are only two things.  The bad news is those two things are, first, 

the Committee has got to reach agreement on the desirab
ility of moving to a state
-contingent 
forward guidance. I™m very open to the intellectual appeal of that, but going around the table, 

it™s quite obvious that we don™t fully have that, particularly around the levels in the language and 

the conditionality. 
The second is clearly the public communication aspect.  There™s nothing about it in the 
Jackson Hole speech.  There really hasn™t been any supportive discussion of it by the Chairman 

lately that I™ve seen. 
We could get ourselves to a place where this could be announced.  I
t would 
be the work of some months both internally and externally, in particular explaining how it does 
          
         
     
   
   
  
                   
 fit in with the principles that we adopted in January
.  I
t™s 
not something that 
can happen in the 
next 45 minutes. 
I will also vote in
 favor of extending the guidance to mid-2015 as proposed.  My own 
view of this is that the market moves the estimate of the liftoff date every day, and our proposed 
guidance doesn™t contain any surprise element. 
The idea that the date can contain a negati
ve, 
contractionary aspect is certainly
 plausible in a different setting, but not on the facts we face 
today. 
Let me say a couple of comments
 about LSAPs.  As I look back on the use of LSAPs so 
far, I too believe that the evidence supports the view that the 
effects of any LSAP are highly 
dependent not only on some mechanics, but also on the setting in which it is launched.  The main 

driver of real effects is probably that of enhancing confidence, confidence that bad outcomes will 

be avoided, and that there is reason to hope for good outcomes. 
In this view, it is really our credibility, the design of the program, 
and the setting that 
make it work.  For me, an argument in favor of 
alternative 
B is that it is limited to MBS at a time 
when the housing market is consistently surprising on the upside.  This alternative can be well 

explained and understood by the public as welcome support for housing as well as for the 

broader economy.  
So presented, it stands a decent chance 
to actually be noticed and appreciated 
by people who are neither Fed watchers nor professional market participants nor economics 
bloggers.  I encourage an emphasis on support for housing in our public communications around 

this action. 
My view is that alternative 
B can have positive effects on the 
economy but 
that these 
effects are likely to be quite modest, and I do come to that view without a great deal of certainty.  

It does seem clear to me that LSAPs have affected asset prices, and to deny that does call for
Šas          
                   
                 
   was done in a certain well
-ment
ioned Jackson Hole paperŠ
that most hackneyed of all economist 
jokes that while it may be observed in reality, it will simply never work in theory.  [Laughter] 
But of course, affecting MBS and Treasury prices is just the beginning.  We need translation to 

rates that actually matter for private economic activity and then translation to the real economy. 
Looking at the channels through which we believe our policies operate and 
the caveats, 
confidence intervals, headwinds, 
and multiple uncertainties that surround the estimates so well 

addressed in yesterday™s meeting, my strong sense is that the 
real effects will be quite modest, 
and it is all too easy these days to find credible private forecasts that agree. 
The last two 
forecasts that I™ve seen both from well known, credible sources who happened to be broadly 

supportive of accommodation, point to estimates of unemployment effects of around 20 or 

30 basis points for a program the size of QE2Šuse that as a rough proxy for this.  That would be 

300,000 to 450,000 jobs under those forecasts.  That might be equivalent to bringing the 

recovery forward by a couple of months. 
As far as the costs, I certainly agree that they appear manageable in the near term. 
There™s enough risk and uncertainty about the medium and long term that if the view of the 

likely benefits is right, one 
would have to believe further that the likely costs are close to nil to 
want to proceed with a large LSAP.  I also agree with President Bullard™s point earl
ier in the 
meeting that the problem has not been the lack of aggressive monetary policy.  As a separate 

matter, taking the Chairman™s points from yesterday, I do not feel that additional aggressive 

monetary policy is likely to provide much of a solution. 
I know that every member of the Committee struggles to balance these highly uncertain 
costs and benefits.  I™m supporting 
alternative 
B with a certain lack of enthusiasm, and I am 
somewhat uncomfortable with the road that we are on.  As others have mentioned, this is not 
      
            
          
       
        
  
   
   
          2008, 2009, or 
2010.  We™re now using LSAPs as a straightforward jobs program.  There is no 
credible threat of deflation, recession
, or financial crisis
, any of which could present a 
compelling case for action and the use of all of our tools, including LSAPs if appropriate.  Again, 

these are concerns about the medium and the long term, not the next six months.  My concern is 

that for very modest benefits, we are piling up risks for the future and that it could become habit-

forming. 
Thank you
, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  My preference would be to act forcefully at 
this meeting.  I™d favor a
lternative B, 
paragraph 4 as written, p
aragraph 5
, and $40 billion per 
month of agency 
MBS.  Let me just talk about each of these a little bit. 
With respect to the thresholds, what I hear around the table is that there™s really a strong 
sentiment that thresholds can trump date guidance, and the thresholds that we even have today in 

5 in my 
mind
, trump date guidance. But I do accept the view that maybe we can even do better, 
and so in my mind the tradeoff is really between is it better to do something today to have a 

bigger package or is it better to keep working on 5
 to try to improve the communication and 
have it come later
? I would prefer to do it all today as a pack
age
 because if you do it as a package, it™s going 
to have more force in terms of its impact, but I accept the fact that the Committee is not really 

quite there yet.  I would 
hope that at least that the Committee would commit that we™re going to 

bring 5
 home in the next one or two meetings.  It would be very disappointing if we didn™t do 
that because I think most people around the table view the date as really quite problemati
c. The thresholds, 
as President
s Williams and Kocherlakota pointed out, 
are 
more powerful 
than a date.  The date creates a lot of uncertainty. When are we going to move it?  Why are we 
                     
                             
           
going to move it? When we move it, why did we move it?  Thresholds provide more 
information.  The date implicitly rests on some unobserved variables, and so people essentially 

have to look at the date and then infer what the things 
are 
that lie behind the date.  Why not just 
tell them what those variables are? 
Some of the problem 
with
 the thresholds 
is the limits of the statement.  The statement can 
only carry so much water, and we can™t specify all the parameters that would go into our 

decisionmaking as the economy actually evolves.  W
e have to recognize we™re not going to 
get 
to a perfect 5
 because the statement just can™t carry that water. 
We need to do the best we can 
and see what we can come up with.
  Then lastly, the dynamic nature of the thresholds far trumps 
the date guidance.  The market will adjust automatically, 
and as people have said, that™s an 
automatic stabilizer.
  So I™m reluctant to abandon 5
 at this meeting because it would make the 
action more forceful, but I do accept the pretty strong sense that a lot of people who don™t want 

to do it this meeting would
 actually be pretty inclined to do it subsequently once the work on the 
communication was complete and once they were convinced that they got the best 5
 version that 
they could possibly get.  I think we should keep going on that. 
With respect to the rest of the statement, I would not want to alter 
paragraph 4 because 
it™s critical to 
ensure the paragraph is forward leaning and implies the 
commencement of a new 
LSAP program should the economic situation not improve in a meaningful way. 
As I see it, we need 
to decide now what we will do if the economy continues to 
disappoint.  We™ll do more and how we™ll do more, and communicate this decision now because 

that will reduce uncertainty and support confidence, and that will support the recovery.  In my 

view, if we postpone those decisions about what we™ll do in the future if the economy 

disappoints, we just create more uncertainty about what our future policy actions are going to be, 
                  
   
         
       
            
   
   
   
  and that really undercuts the efficacy of the policy choices.  Deciding today so that people know 
that there™s more coming will actually create greater confidence about the Fed™s willingness to 

support the economy.  That reduces the downside risk and actually means, at the end of the day, 

the prospect i
s that 
we™ll
 have to do less rather than more because we™ll be acting today and 
supporting confidence today by communicating what our future actions will be. 
All that said, I am very sympathetic with a number of people™s remarks that don™t put a 
very high weight on the power of additional LSAPs.  I think L
SAPs have modest effects o
n the 
level of long-term rates, and the drop in long-term rates does feed through partially to the equity 

market and the foreign exchange market but not one-
for
-one as in the staff projections because 
that would contradict the whole portfolio balance framework, which is the basis for LSAPs. 
In assessing the 
effe
ct of past LSAPs, I™m not particularly a big fan of event studies.  I 
think the event studies are too focused on the reaction on 
particular days
.  T
he expe
ctation of 
LSAPs evolves more slowly, and it™s very hard to disentangle all the factors that affect financial 

asset prices.
  When we say that we™re going to do an LSAP, that not only affects people™s views 
of what™s going to happen in terms of financial 
markets,
 but also signals a view about our view 
of the economy, and both 
of 
those things affect financial asset prices.  So trying to disentangle 
what the effect 
is 
of the LSAP from what the effect is of our judgment that we need an LSAP is 
very difficult to determine. 
I also agree with Governor Stein and others that probably one of the more powerful 
aspects of LSAPs is the confidence channel and the signal that we™re willing to do as much as it 

takes.  During the heat of the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009 when we were rolling out all of 

these special liquidity facilities, I was very impressed by how much our policy actions supported 

confidence in market function just because we were showing up, just because the fire trucks were 
       
        
                 
  
    
            
    rolling.
  People, as I think Governor Duke noted, don™t necessarily understand exactly why we™re 
doing what we™re doing, but they feel more confident when they know that we™re acting. 
Some around the table have argued that our tools are not very effective and the core 
problems lie el
sewhere
Šin fiscal, the household balance sheet, housing problemsŠand so we 
shouldn™t act because by acting we™re somehow removing responsibility from others where the 

responsibility more rightly sits, and I think there is some truth to 
that argument. 
In an ideal 
world, other things that are outside our purview would happen that would help the economy.  But 

I don™t think that argument carries the day for arguing against action for two reasons. 
First, nothing in our mandate says that if our tools aren™t powerful, don™t use them; defer 
to others.  There™s nothing in our mandate that says that.  It just says this is your mandate.  Use 

your tools to try to achieve your mandate the best you can.  And second, if we don™t act, it™s not 

as if
 that somehow is going to cause others to act. I really don™t accept the premise that 
somehow our inaction would spur action by others.  If you really believe that, then maybe you 

could actually advance this argument.  But I don™t think many people around the table believe 

that our inaction will somehow spur action by others that will improve the economic outlook. 
On the agency MBS, I strongly favor the $40 billion per month over the $30 billion.  
Being more forceful makes sense. 
At the end of the day the staff has concluded that we have the 
room to do $40 billion rather than $30 billion without i
mpairing market function
, so I don™t 
really see the reason for holding back.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you, and thank you all very much, as always, 
for your good advice. 
Let me make a couple
 of comments.  I think that action is needed.  I don™t think we™re 
being precipitous.  We extended the guidance in January.  In June, we extended the MEP.  Both 
       
                     
     
              
    of those things were viewed essentially as temporizing moves and were discussed in that way 
around 
this table.
  The evidence is that while we are not necessarily facing recession or crisis, it™s 
also true that we seem to have stalled
, and that very serious problems with unemployment are not 
improving.  Given our mandate, I think that requires at least a consideration of action. 
The action that
 is proposed here, and it should be very clear, is a cautious action.  
Governor Duke was very helpful in helping me think about this.  What this a
lternative B actually 
does is make a down payment of X per month of MBS for the rest of the year, and then three or 

four job market reports from now we will consider at that point what the job market outlook 

looks like, and then respond appropriately.  
So it is
, in that respect, emphasizing the 
conditionality of the progra
m and the fact that we will be looking
Šin a way that wasn™t 
conveyed adequately by our fixed-
size LSAP programs
Šat what™s happening in the data and 
what™s happening in the economy.  But I do think there is a basis for expressing our support for 

the economy at this point, to help support confidence and to help give the economy a bit more 

strength in case we do face shocks from Europe or from the fiscal cliff. 
So, again, obviously I propose a
lternative B. I™ll come back to the body of it in a 
moment.
  On 5 v
ersus 5
, there was a pretty clear consensus around the table that there™s a lot of 
hunger for moving away from the date toward some kind of state-contingent guidance.  I think 

one of the lessons of the paper whose author™s name will not be mentioned was t
hat clarity about 
future rate policy is a very powerful tool and one that we should make use of.  I would advocate 

that we continue to work on this because the other part of the consensus today was that we™re not 

quite ready for prime time on this issue. 
So I would propose for now that we retain paragraph 5, 
but with a very strong injunction to the staff and to colleagues that we work to figure out how we 

can put language like 5
 in soon. 
        
              
       
              
              In paragraph 3, I™d like to make the following proposal.  I™d like to propose that we do 
$40 billion a month, but I™d like to add the words ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ 
where it says 
$85 billion a month three lines from the bottom.  T
he 
$85 billion, which is the MEP plus the 
$40 billion
Šof course the MEP runs out at the end of the year, and that™s about the time we™ll be 
looking at how we™re going to proceed from here. The advantage of doing $40 
billion
 is, 
first of 
all, that 
$30 billion 
feels a little underwhelming to me in terms of what we announce today, but 
also it s
eems to me that one of the options we might have in January, 
if we are looking at it
, would be just to continue the $40 
billion
.  To me, $40 
billion 
seems like a more plausible number 
there.
  And we have talked about it with the D
esk
, and the
ir view is that it™s consistent with both 
our operational capacity and with market functioning even if extended for a long period, longer 
than I expect 
that
 we would actually do it. 
In paragraph 4, I would proposeŠand there were views on different sid
es here
Šwe use 
the 
second language, ﬁundertake additional asset purchases and employ its other policy tools.ﬂ 

Governor Duke spoke against this because she mentioned IOER and discount window lending.  

Of course, those are Board tools, but the other tools 
that the FOMC has 
are the statement 
language and the guidance, and certainly that could be part of additional steps that we take in 

January or whenever it is that we begin to review the situation.  If no one has too strong an 

objection, I™d like to use that second phrase 
with
 the understanding, which I will make clear if 
asked, that what we mean by that is communicationŠwhich is the other topic I talked about in 

Jackson Hole.  I don™t want to make any other changes.  We do have the phrase ﬁas appropriate.ﬂ 

That already convey
s the notion of conditionality, the fact that we may or may not take action.  It 
depends on what the economic outlook is, and I think that™s very important. 
           
                
          
         I forgot to say, by the way, on 5Ša point that Governor Raskin madeŠ
that I think the 
reason that there has been in the SEP, as well as in th
e guidance, a fairly sharp movement into 
the future of the expected takeoff date is not really because there™s been a massive deterioration 
in the outlook, but 
that 
the Committee has come to the view that a somewhat 
more extended 
period of low ratesŠfor reasons articulated by the artist formerly known as Michael Woodford 

[l
aughter]
Šcan be helpful in a zero lower bound situation, and I will try to make that point also 
in the press conference. 
To summarize
Šand I look 
around the table, if there are any voters who are extremely 
bothered, please let me knowŠI would propose to choose $40 billion and $85 billion from the 

third line from the bottom, propose to insert the phrase ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ after ﬁeach 

month,ﬂ and then in paragraph 4, I propose to take the second option, ﬁunder
take additional asset 
purchases, 
and employ its other policy tools as appropriate.ﬂ 
Are there any comments? 
President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  May I just ask a question? When we say ﬁin a 
context of price stability,
ﬂ we also mean well
-anchored inflation expectations
, is that correct? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We do.  That™s the phrase.  I recognize it™s not completely 
grammatical as President Lacker pointed out, but the implication is that, of course, at all times 

we™ll maintain that conditionality as we undertake our policy. 
MR. FISHER.  And you will work that into your press conference if it™s appropriate. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, yes.  Absolutely. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  P
resident Lockhart. 
                      
   
                          
         MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
In paragraph 4, just a thought to throw 
on the table, and that is take the last sentence of 5
, inject it after the word
s ﬁprice stability,ﬂ so 
that the effect of the last two sentences would be t
o frame this whole question of continuing 
accommodation
Šin effect, framing the way we™re going to deliberate over this over the next few 
weeks. 
It seems to me comprehensive.  It refers to improvement in labor market conditions 
generally, and also of cours
e, efficacy and cost and all of that.  I can see combining those two 
sentences.  Each begins, for what it™s worth, with ﬁIn determining, –
ﬂ and that might make that 
paragraph a good set-up. I
™ll
 also point out that in all likelihood, the 
minutes 
are going
 to portray 
that we have given some consideration to threshold thinking, and so this would serve to frame 

that for the market reaction over the next few weeks.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Because 
it refers to the time horizon, wouldn™t th
at kind of 
language be more appropriate as we look toward the language of 
5?  In other words, I thought for 
a moment you were suggesting taking that and putting it at the end of 5. 
MR. LOCKHART. I™m actually thinking it might fit in 
4.  I put this on the 
table a little 
bit off the top of my head.  T
he Committee will continue its purchases, undertake additional asset 
purchases
, and employ its other tools until such improvement is achieved in the context of price 
stability.  In determining how long we™re going to do that, we™d take into account the pace of 

labor market conditions and so forth.  In determining the size, pace, and composition, as always, 

we™d 
take into account efficacy and cost.  I just saw that as a boxing of all of the things we would 
take in
to consideration if we go to essentially an open-ended kind of approach. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
In my press conference I™m going to be very clear that 
obviously this is not a numeric objective, and we™ll be looking at a range of employment and 

output indicato
rs, which all bear on the outlook for sustained improvement in labor market 
       
         
  
           
     
     
        conditions and declining unemployment, and I™d rather convey that breadth verbally.  I™m afraid 
we™re getting a little complicated. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Fair enough. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Ye
s, I had the same reaction that you had. I didn™t see 
how it would fit in 4 because you hadn™t really explained the forward guidance yet.  One could 

take the last sentence 
of 
4 and the last sentence
 of 5
 and make a new 
paragraph 6 and sum up.  
Then you™d have the statement about asset purchases, the statement about forward guidance, and 

a summary paragraph that said
, ﬁin determining both these things.ﬂ  That would be more logical. 
MR. LACKER.  A paragraph full of escape clauses, in other words. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Essentially. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I was going to ask a question about something else. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead. 

MR. LACKER. 
In the forward
-guidance lan
guage, we deleted the economic conditions 
clause there.  We™ve had a lot of discussion of Professor Woodford™s paper.  We™ve talked  a lot 

about that in the context of 5
 and that language, but I™m thinking that what you had in mind by 
deleting the economi
c conditions clause was in part motivated by his critique as well, the idea 
that by saying it™s conditions that are pushing the time horizon out, we were focusing on how bad 

things 
are
.  The intention, as I read you, is for us to be communicating more about our reaction 
function. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s right. 
      
    
      
          
         
        
    
     MR. LACKER.  I want to re-
ask a question I asked earlier this year.  When
 we adopted 
this 
language
, we never really got clear on whether it™s a commitment or not.  W
e wrestled with 
different versio
ns of what that meant.  Is this signaling that we™re going to pursue an action that 
later on we would not want to pursue then? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it™s still conditional because it obviously depends on 
the timing of the recovery and so on. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  So it™s contingent. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I mentioned the SEP changes and so on
.  I think we 
around this table have moved to the view that communicating low rates for longer 
in a way that 
may require some credibility is an approach to dealing with the zero lower bound, not in an 

extreme way, but I think there is some of that now in the statement. 
MR. LACKER. 
We have a statement
, and we can walk away from this and each interpret 
it in our own way, 
or we can have a Committee sense of what 
we™re doing. Is policy in the 
future to be conditioned on this?  In other words, as Woodford suggests, is policy going to be 

history-dependent? 
Is t
he fact that we said 
this going to alter future policy
? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In my Jackson Hole remarks, 
I talked about the guidance.  I 
said it was conditional, dependent on the state of the economy.  B
ut in explaining the time, I said 
we look at rules and optimal control and those sorts of things, but we also take into account some 
other factors such as downs
ide risks, the effects of the 
zero lower bound, and implicitly I said the 
possibility that the equilibrium real rate of interest is lower than normal
Šthat is,
 headwinds.  So 
I am conveying, I think, some sense that in order to achieve more stimulus today, 
there™s a bit of 

a commitment element there
ŠI don™t think we™ve gone too far out on a limb on this. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 
              
   
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
                      
                                                              CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Can we go ahead? 
MS. DANKER.  This vote is on alternative B, as amended by the Chairman, and the 
associated 
directive. 
Chairman Bernanke 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
Governor Duke 
Yes 
President Lacker 
No President Lockhart 
Yes 
President Pianalto 
Yes 
Governor Powell 
Yes 
Governor Raskin 
Yes 
Governor Stein 
Yes 
Governor Tarullo 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
Governor Yellen 
Yes 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
We have a few other items
.  We™re going to 
hear a little bit about the implementation
, we™re going to do very quickly the forecast, but if 
everybody is okay, why don™t we just go ahead and tak
e a 15 minute coffee break? 
[Coffee 
break] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don™t we 
recommence
? Let me turn the floor 
over to L
orie 
Logan, who will talk a bit about the operational aspect. 
MS. LOGAN.
8  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I will offer a brief descrip
tion of how 
the Desk plans to implement the Committee™s decision regarding the 
SOMA 
portfolio.  
Consistent with recent practices, the Desk intends to release a statement 
with operational details on this initiative at the same time as the release of the FOM
C statement.  A draft of the Desk statement is provided in the handout for your 

reference, with the exception that we will add the clause ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ 

into the second sentence of the second paragraph. 
Based on the directive, the Desk inten
ds to expand the SOMA™s holdings of 
agency MBS by 
$40 billion per month and maintain the existing policy for 

reinvesting agency principal payments.  Our current projections indicate that through 

the end of the year, paydowns on the agency debt and MBS port
folios will result in 
average monthly reinvestment purchases of roughly $30 billion.  Thus, combined 
8 The materials used by Ms. 
Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 8). 
                                   
  
       
    
        purchases will initially total around 
$70 billion per month and constitute about three-
fourths of monthly TBA gross issuance. 
Should the purchases extend for 10 months, as was considered in Tealbook B, we 
anticipate that the SOMA™s ownership share of the outstanding fixed-
rate agency 
MBS market would grow from about 18 percent to 27 percent, and that™s over a 

10-month horizon. 
In line with the current practice for reinvestment operations, the Desk plans to 
conduct the additional purchases 
in the newly issued securities in the to
-be-announced market, or TBA market.  These securities represent the most liquid sector 

of the MBS market, allowing purchases to be made in large size and are most closely 

tied with the primary mortgage rate. 
The Desk may purchase other agency MBS if 
market conditions warrant. 
The Desk intends to conduct these additional purchases internally as we™ve been 
doing for some time rather than relying on an investment manager to conduct the 

trades on our behalf.  We expect to be active almost every day
, and purchase 
operations will continue to be conducted in a competitive auction format with the 

primary dealers.
  Further, the Desk will continue the practice established at the end of 
last year of margining the unsettled MBS transactions with the primary dealers. 
Given the substantial portion of issuance being purchased and the uncertainty 
associated with MBS supply, the Desk will continue to conduct dollar roll 

transactions when necessary to facilitate the settlement of our purchases. 
Dollar rolls 
can be used to postpone or accelerate the delivery of purchases based on indications 

of the availability of agency MBS for settlement. 
In the reinvestment operations to 
date, the size of dollar rolls needed to postpone settlement have been fairly small, at 

about 5 percent of purchases, though this amount is likely to increase with the 

additional asset purchases. 
We will al
so use coupon swaps, 
if needed
, to facilitate settlement, as was the case 
in 2010.  A coupon swap would allow the Desk to exchange unsettled purchases in a 

given agency MBS coupon for other coupons more readily available for settlement.  

However, we do not envision needing to conduct such transactions, except in very 

rare cases where persistent supply problems suggest that settlement of purchases
, even over several months, is unlikely. 
The purchases of agency MBS securities under this new asset purchase pro
gram 
will begin tomorrow.  We plan to have two separate announcements for MBS 

operations going forward, one for the new purchases and one for the continued 

reinvestments.  The Desk will publish the monthly asset purchase amounts along with 

the announcement of the Treasury MEP operations around the last business day of 

each month.  Given there are only 17 calendar days remaining in September, we will 

purchase a pro rata share of the monthly pace in September of about $23 billion. 
           
   
                    
      
          In addition, we will continue to publish around the eighth business day of each 
month the planned amount of reinvestment purchases for the next month.  Thus, there 

will also be a new reinvestment purchase amount target posted today at the same time 

as the Desk™s operating statement is released.
  That concludes my comments.  Thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
Any questions?  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. 
Help us interpret financial market data going forward.  What do you 
expect?  Because
 our purchases don™t include TIPS, should we factor something in about TIPS 

yields?
  Are they in the habitat, out of the habitat? 
MS. LOGAN.  In our MEP purchases, we purchase TIPS today. 

MR. LACKER.  You do? 

MS. LOGAN.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  O
kay. 
MR. POTTER.  The MEP is still ongoing. 

MR. LACKER.  But we weren™t proposing to do it in the overall asset purchase program, 
were we? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Sorry? 
MR. LACKER.  Include TIPS. 

MS. LOGAN. If we 
had added purchases under a new asset purchase 
program for 
Treasuries, we would have done so. 
MR. LACKER. 
Okay.  You would.  Sorry.  I misread something then.  I apologize.  
Let 
me ask another question.  How linked is the private-
label MBS market to agency MBS yields? 
Do you anticipate this pushing that spread apart? 
MS. LOGAN.  I think 
the way we™ve been estimating these effects is that the MBS 
purchases would affect the Treasury term premium, and to the extent that the 
pass
-through from 
the lowering of interest rates moves other asset markets, equities
, or the private-
label market
Š                
      
   
                  
  we t
alked about what that pass-through is.  There™s some uncertainty, but we would expect the 
channel to be through that form.  I guess there could be some other form because it is MBS, and 
private label is a little bit more closely connected than maybe from T
reasuries to private label, 
but overall we have been expecting the pass
-through to happen through lowering interest rates 
more broadly. 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  R
elative to buying Treasuries, we™re tilting credit from the 
private-
label market to the agency market.  Thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  I™d just like to say something about the private label 
because there has been 
almost no issuance of private label in a number of years because there™s just not much supply out 

there.  There is 
a little bit of jumbo issuance.
  Again, in the spirit of things that are cooking out 
there, the Federal Home 
Loan Banks, particularly I think the H
ome 
Loan Bank of Chicago 
is 
now looking at consolidating jumbo securities from banks across the country, not 
just that are in 
the Chicago 
district
, and feeding them through Redwood to try to generate some more broader 
private-
label issuance
, for
 jumbo and more broadly. 
I would expect that to the extent that that 
happens, it certainly wouldn™t be unhelpful.  It 
might be helpful. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, but what they™re saying is that compared 
with 
buying Treasuries 
only, this is reducing agency MBS yields by moreŠTreasury yields will fall, but not as much as 

what they would fall if we bought Treasuries only.  T
hey™re 
tilting the playing field away from 
everything priced on Treasuries toward agency MBS. 
MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we™re still buying $45 billion of long-
term Treasuries 
in the MEP right now. 
                                                                                                     MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, I know that, but the apples-
to-apples thing 
is 
$40 billion agency 
MBS versus 
$40 billion Treasuries in this setting, and comparing those two, private-
label MBS 
yields are going to be higher, given that we™re buying agency MBS, than they would be if we 
were buying Treasuries only. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDL
EY.  They™re not going to be higher.  They™re not going to 
drop as much, presumably. 
MR. LACKER.  Exactly.  They™re going to be higher than they would in the alternative. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In that respect we don™t care because they™re not being 
created. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, they would be even less created now. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I don™t actually think we know very much about what would happen to 
private-
label MBS yields because there™s so little issuance; there™s so little pricing information. 
It™s conceivable 
that pushing down agency MBS would also push down private-
label MBS 
yields, but I don™t think we know because there hasn™t been much issuance there and we don™t 

have information. 
MR. POTTER.  The stronger the housing market is, the more it should support t
he 
private-
label market coming back and having more capacity. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
9 Let™s go on to the consensus forecast.  This, of course, is 
still an exercise.  We™re still working to figure out what we™re going to do. 
You have in front of 
you the consensus forecast.  If you turn to page 3, and we look at the forecast inclusive of the 

policy action today, that would be best approximated, I guess, by the line 
that 
says, ﬁPlus 
$750 billion LSAP program.ﬂ  That™s the post-
action
 policy forecast, and note th
at it includes the 
jointly determined federal funds rate at the bottom.  What I™d like to do is ask each person to say 
9 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 
6).       
   
                           
            one of three things.  Either you broadly agree with the forecast as given or you agree with 
reservations
Šlet me go back a second.
  As part of our exercise 
the staff, I believe, is intending to 
write up our discussion as if it were a quarterly monetary policy report, and what they will do is 

if you agree but with reservations, they will write up your reservations in minutes 
style 
descri
bing without attribution what the concerns were that people raised about the forecast.  
The 
other possibility is if you just disagree with the forecast, you should say so and explain why, and 

then they™ll write up the monetary policy report with attributio
nŠthat™s the plan
Šand say, 
again, what it is that you disagree about.  Y
es, President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  I don™t understand.  Are these two different plans or are these two 
different options for us? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Two different options. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
  You have three choices.  When I go around the table, you 
have three choices. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  We 
can disagree anonymously or 
with attribution? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree modestly and anonymously. 

MR. LACKER. 
Mod
estly and anonymously. 
CHAIR
MAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree violently and for attribution.  [Laughter] 
MR. 
LACKER
.  And there™s a threshold.  
[Laughter] 
Or is it a 
trigger? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Can I bring up just one more thing? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  For those people who strongly disagree, we™re also asking 
them to submit in the next few daysŠby MondayŠa paragraph or so explaining why, and we 

will eventually put this into a document and then circulate it back to the Committee. 
                           
  
      
  
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is everybody o
kay? 
MS. DUKE.  Can I just ask one question about agreeing with reservation?  I
f we™re 
comparing it with 
the 
$750 billion 
LSAP program
, and in voting for alternative B, I didn™t 
assume that the purchases went past the
 end of the year, w
ould that be a reser
vation? 
I just want 
to know how to characterize 
it.  What does ﬁwith reservationﬂ mean? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
I think you assume
 that you should take the Tealbook 
assumption here, the $750 billion, and say:  Would the economic path shown here be a 
reasonabl
e approximation of what you would anticipate, given the policy action taken?  And if 
not, why not? 
MS. DUKE.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay?
  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Am I agreeing that this is a consensus forecast or am I agreeing that 
this is ac
tually my forecast?  Because I submitted my forecast
. And you can see point for point, 
you know, where they™re different and where they™re not. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We™re trying to determine if it is a consensus, and therefore, 
we™re asking if you yourself find itŠ 
MR. EVANS
.  Is it close enough? 
MR. BULLARD.  I think it™s a good consensus.  It™s not as accurate asŠ 

MR. 
FISHER
.  I™m trying to remember my specific numbers.  All I remember is that 
I was in the central tendency. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So why don™t 
you just report what you reported and say if 
you think it™s broadly consistent with this or not? 
            
            
             
     MR. WILCOX.  This is an effort to ascertain the extent to which participants can affiliate 
themselves with the consensus forecast. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Preside
nt Fisher. 
MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry. 

MR. TARULLO.  I think it™s not unlike what we do with policy statements, which is to 
say everybody would have written it somewhat differently, but in the end can you kind of go 

along with 
it? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Ye
s, that™s what it is.  That™s right. 
MR. FISHER.  You said there were three questions.  Do we agree with the forecast?  Do 
we have reservations?  If so, what are they?
  What™s the third? 
MS. 
DUKE.  Do you disagree? 
MS. YELLEN. Do 
you have a fundamentally different view? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you fundamentally disagree with the forecast?  And 
remember it™s not about whether you agree with the policy action or not.  This is conditional on 

the policy action.  Conditional on the policy action, do you agree more or less with the forecast 

that™s been presented? 
MR. FISHER.  And if we have reservations, we should submit them.  Is that what you 
were saying earlier? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, Janet, would you like to 
comment? 

MS. YELLEN. I
f you broadly agree but have some reservationŠyou™re slightly more 
optimistic about the forecast
, you have a different view on oil prices, but aside from that you 

basically agree this is a reasonable forecast contingent on the policy path
Šthen say you agre
e                  
                   
         with reservations.  And 
the write
-up, as in the minutes, 
will say 
people have expressed some 
reservations, but nevertheless associate themselves overall with the view. 
The staff will write up 
the discussion of what the reservations were.  But those who 
just have a basically different view 
of the forecast should say so, and then there will be a few paragraphs they™ll submit, 
and that will 

be included in the document 
with attribution
.  This would be a portion of a monetary policy 
report where there would be a discussion of the diversity of views.  Think of this as a diversity of 

views and say 10 people supported the forecast without reservation.  Several people had 

reservations of the following sort, and four had essentially different views.  Here are the 

submissions.  In your paragraph, 
you™d describe 
and 
explain why your views are essentially 
different. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Let me just make sure I understand.  We™re assuming the 
policy path, this policy action? 
MS. YELLEN. Yes. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes, tha
t™s what we are doing today. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  So we™re not having individual ﬁappropriate 
monetary policy.ﬂ 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
No.  It™s just given what we passed today, is this a reasonable 
forecast
? MR. LACKER.  Wait.  That™s different than a policy path. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I™m going to suggest something slightly different from what 
Chairman Bernanke said, which is:  Given the policy decision today, if you look at the numbers 

that go along with that 
$750 billion LSAP programŠforget about whet
her the 
$750 billion is 
correct or not because you may think it will end up being $500 b
illion or 
some 
other numberŠ 
                              
     
    
              
 do you think that™s a reasonable forecast? I
s it close enough for talking purposes?  But if you 
think this is the wrong model of the world, the economy is just going to look a lot different, so 
much so that you want to, in effect, dissent, then you™re in the third category.  The middle 

category is a little tougher, but I think the two ends are very clear. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Everybody, this is a trial run.  [Laughter]  W
e™re trying to 
find out what works and what doesn™t work.  We may have already found out what doesn™t work. 

President Fisher, did you have a comment or question or you™re okay? 
MR. FISHER.  I™m fine. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You™re 
fine.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
My question was would it be better to try to have a little 
bit better understanding about what ﬁclose toﬂ is or would 
it be everyone™s personal view of what 

ﬁclose toﬂ is? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It™s your judgment of whether you 
sufficiently disagree that 
you want to have your name 
identified. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it does matter if people disagree
 or have different 
parameters in terms of how close is ﬁclose to.ﬂ  
We can do it either way, but you could argue th
at 
if you think the standard error is more than X, then you should disagree, or you could be a 

perfectionist and you disagree for very minute changes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So all of this is about reporting.  We™re trying to report the 
sense of the Committee
, and so how you would 
like the sense of the Committee reported 
is 
basically the question. 
MS. YELLEN. 
Right.  I
f we were really doing this
, the Chairman would be 
wal
king out 
into a press conference
 with these numbers, explaining the policy action, and pu
tting these 
      
     
                        
             
   
      numbers out to the public and saying, ﬁThis gives you a description of how we envision the 
economy unfolding with the policy decisions.
ﬂ  And the question is:  Would you be comfortable 

with these numbers as what he walks out into a press confer
ence 
with
? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I understand all of that, but let™s imagine that there™s half 
the people on the Committee who disagree for very small tolerances and
 half the people 
have 
very large tolerances. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Then no.  It should be 
meaningful tolerances. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It would be better if we had a more common metric 
about what 
the tolerances are. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, put it this way
:  Are you willing to write two paragraphs for Dave 
Reifschneider?  [Laughter]  That™s it, right? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, no, that™s different.  That™s 
a fundamental 
dis
agreement. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
The way I would put it is this.  I
f the consensus forecast came 
out like this
, and you were the sort of person who 
in a speech 
would say, ﬁI want to make an 
important point that my 
personal 
unemployment rate forecast at the end of 2015 would be one-
tenth lower,ﬂ then you should say you have reservations.  [Laughter]  But if you perhaps feel 

uncomfortable about making a big distinction abou
t one-tenth or so, thenŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There™s a standard error
, though, 
implicit in that. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I think there 
are
 two things.  One, there™s obviously a huge 
confidence interval around this, and so one way to look at 
it is 
that 
many 
differences just blur. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course. 
There will 
always b
e fan 
charts
.          
   
      
             
             
   
  MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  But does it make it a material difference f
or monetary policy, 
and the question might be if it™s 
one-tenth or so off on inflation or unemployment, you would say 
probably not. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s a good way of phrasing it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans, did you have a comment? 

MR. EVANS.  I was just thinking we should probably start [l
aughter]
, and then we™ll 
figure outŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNAN
KE.  Excellent suggestion.  All right.  Who would like to go 
first?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART. I endorse it.
  [Laughter and applause] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Very good.
  Anyone? President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Is it a good consensus?  I do think it™s a good consensus.  T
here are 
issues here about the mix between the forecast and the policy assumptions.  The way I did it was 

I had more inflation coming in the out years, and then I applied the outcome-based policy rule, 

which would then have the funds rate moving in a different way from here, and so the policy 

assumption then starts to also look different.  So I™m not quite sure what to make of this exercise.  

It™s fine as a statement of where the Committee is, and I would endorse it in that sense
.  As a general rule on this whole process, I don™t think 
that it
™s a good thing to get into 
the 
business of 

trying to dissent on a forecast because there are
 zillions of points here and a lot of subtleties here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
This is why we™re having a tr
ial run. 
MR. BULLARD.  Mildly different, I guess. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Broadly endorse. 
       
   
          
    
  
           
      
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Conditional on the policy path, I broadly endorse. 

CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Duk
e. 
MS. DUKE.  I actually normally would endorse, except that the reservation I would 
express at this point is that I think 2013 will be significantly lower because of the fiscal cliff. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MS. DUKE. 
That would be a reservation. 
CHAIR
MAN BERNANKE.  That™s a good example of a reservation.  Very good.  
Anyone else?  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Broadly endorse, but I have a weaker outlook.  So that™s my only 
reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor 
Yellen
. MS. YELLEN.  Broadly endorse. 

CHAIRMAN BE
RNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I see what I would term modestly more inflationary pressures 
than what are in this forecast, maybe one-tenth or two-tenths or three-
tenths more in inflation. 
With that said
, it comes 
back to what the Vice Chairman
 was talking about, that the choices of 
the Committee seem to be averse to those kinds of upticks in inflation.  For my own view, I think 

I would say I see modestly more inflationary pressures than what are in this. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fine.
  Governor Stein. 
MR. STEIN.  
I broadly endorse the baseline.  I™m not sure if I would be a weak deviator 
on the conditional effect of policy in the sense that I think that the incremental effect of the 
          
   
           
               LSAP is going to be roughly half of what it™s projected to be.  I™m not quite sure where that puts 
me. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  You sound like a ﬁ
two
ﬂ to me. 
MR. STEIN.  That feels like a 
ﬁtwo
ﬂ to you? 
PARTICIPANT
.  Do you want to write two paragraphs? 
MR. 
STEIN
.  No, I don™t want to write 
any para
graphs.  I want to hide in the weeds.  
[Laughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren said he broadly endorses.  President 
Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  I modestly endorse it.  It might scare people in terms of my forecasting.  I 
was within the central tendency.  They might want to change their forecast based on where I 

would be, with the exception of the funds rate, and I™d have to think about that.  But generally, 
I endorse.  
I will say this, Mr. Chairman
: Fiscal cliff, no fiscal cliff, et cetera
Šand I said this in 
my write
-upŠgoing beyond the first part of 2013 is largely pure guesswork. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In some positive sense, that™s true.  In a normative sense, 
we do need to find some kind of plan. 
MR. FISHER.  I understand that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We h
ave to have some kind of projection to base our 
thinking on. 
MR. FISHER.  With that caveat, it™s a wonderful exercise. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Obviously, yes.  O
ne of the benefits of this exercise
, I hope, 
is that we will be able to show fan charts that will g
ive some sense of the uncertainty. 
President 
Pianalto. 
        
             
  
       
   
  
               
   MS. PIANALTO.  I broadly endorse the forecast, although my forecast is slightly weaker 
for 
GDP growth and unemployment in the later years 
partly because
, like Governor Stein, 
the 
effectiveness of poli
cy is just a little weaker in my forecast. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good.  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  I broadly endorse, but two things about the process as opposed to th
e substance
.  One, the issue that arose at the outset that Betsy mentioned is somethin
g that people 
are going to have to think about, which is, what if we emerge from a meeting with a policy 

action that really isn™t any of the ones that are listed there?
  And, secondly, this 
category 
two
ŠI have a feeling
Šis going to be problematic in the fo
llowing respect. I have heard several people 
already who might have fit themselves into 
category 
two, a
nd if you end up saying, ﬁWe™ve got a 
consensus forecast
Š14 of the 17 members of the FOMC had qualifications on it,ﬂ I™m not sure 
how powerful 
it becomes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, the interesting question is whether or not a number of 
them had the same qualification. If they™re all nitpicks, 
that™s one thing, but if everybody said, 
ﬁThis doesn™t take enough account of the fiscal cliff,ﬂ then that would be something that should 

be communicated I think. 
MR. TARULLO.  Fair enough.  T
here may be some utility in thinking about moving to a 
binary 
system 
as we do with the statement.  You are either endorsing or you are not, but giving 
people a chance 
to comment, so if they say something like Betsy said a minute ago, it could be 

included in the explanation of the consensus. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s fine. 

MR. TARULLO.  But that™s just something to think about. 
                 
    
     
                  
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  Thank you.  We are looking for suggestions.  Anyone 
else?  Vice Chairman
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I agree with Governor Tarullo.  You don™t have to frame 
it as a reservation.  You can just frame it as where people would prefer to tilt the forecast.  I™m 
with Betsy on the f
iscal restraint. I am assuming that 
we will get some fiscal restraint 
next year
, and it will be more problematic to the outlook, so we have somewhat weaker growth in 2013.  

That said, I think this is a pretty good forecast.  T
hat is why I was getting at t
he point of, how 
much do you disagree? I am pretty confident that the economy will be weaker in 2013 than this 

forecast, but if I take this whole thing in its entirety, I wouldn™t really quibble about it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I 
have a tiny reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, the question is, would you object to my 
hypothetically taking this, putting this on the screen, and saying, ﬁThis is the Committee™s 

consensus forecast of what the economy is going to look likeﬂ? 
VICE CH
AIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it would also be good, though, to say, ﬁA few people 
thought that 2013 could be a little weaker becauseﬂ blah, blah, blah.  But I would do it in 

Governor Tarullo™s two-
bucket camp
 rather than three-
bucket camp. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agr
ee. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thanks.  Anyone else? 

MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 
               
  
    
             
       
               
     MR. PLOSSER.  I would say my forecast differs from this, obviously, and I think it is 
likely to show up 
in the assumption about current policy.  We are going to see more inflationary 
pressures and less positive outlooks on output and employment. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 
MR. LACKER.  I still don™t have a clear, coherent sense of what policy I am supposed to 
be conditioning on.  Am I foreca
sting the Committee?  I think I am.  So on that basis, I might 
provide a good test case here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MR. LACKER.  First of all, coming into this, on appropriate policy, I was weaker in 
2013 by a couple of tenths.  And I saw inflation a couple of tenths stronger, closer to 2 
percent 

over the next 
year 
or two, getting to 2 
percent 
next year. 
So I would have put policy to 
rais
e rates earlier. 
Modifying that in terms of making it a forecast of the Committee™s action, I would 
mark up inflation in 2014. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sounds right.  Anyone else? 

MR. FISHER.  Can I ask a question on that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Forgive me.  I™m slower than everybody else at the table.  In releasing 
this, we would be releasing the funds path? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Releasing what? 

MR. FISHER.  The funds path, 
the fed funds rate forecast as well
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes
. MR. BULLARD. If you are a year earlier, is that a significant reservation?  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I™m sor
ry. 
                       
  
                
   
         MR. BULLARD.  A year earlier on the funds rate, is that a significant reservation? 
MS. DUKE.  But is that a difference in the policy path?  Because the policy path assumes 
2015 liftoff. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
  You could have 
a different reaction functio
n. MR. 
BULLARD
.  But then you™ve got to do your presumably out
come
-based
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
Based on the original line of comments where we asked you to 
condition on the forecast, and you submitted something 
that
 had higher inflation, I would have 
said t
hat you were a 
ﬁthree
ﬂ because you showed that, conditioned on sticking with the August 
statement
-type policy, you had much higher inflation than this forecast, and that should be 
exaggerated more based on the policy.  So I would have said that you™re a 
three. 
MR. BULLARD.  But I don™t think I am outside of these confidence bands. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I don™t think that is relevant.  It goes back to the question of, 
do you think that your forecast, from a policy perspective, would be materially different? 
MR. BULLARD. 
Again, I just don™t think getting into dissenting on a forecast is a 
sensible thing to do.  Has the Chairman done a good job of characterizing the center of the 

Committee?  Yes. I think yes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Lockhart. 

MR. 
LOCKHART.  I want to make sure I understand.  The next step is to write up a 
mock quarterly monetary policy report or something like that? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  I™m sorry.  Just a description of this discussion. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Right.  But we see how 
it is going to be communicated, how it is 
going to be implemented, is that right? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  That™s 
the purpose. 
                        
      
            MR. WILCOX.  Just the diversity of views portion. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  Okay. 

MS. DUKE.  For the mock exercise, in addition to my own fiscal cliff reservation, can I 
sign up to Sandy and Jeremy™s reservation about the effectiveness? 
MR. 
REIFSCHNEIDER
.  Oh, sure. 
MS. DUKE.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else?  [No response]  All right.  Yes? 

MR. POWELL.  I™m on that line b
etween the one and the two for exactly the same 
reason
.  I went with the one, but of course I do have the same reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
A question to be thinking about here is
:  What would 
Governor Powell do if he thought that the policy action is 
weaker than we anticipate, but the 
underlying economy is stronger, so that the outlook looks okay for him? 
MR. POWELL.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Because we are not showing a comparison, right?  We are 
just showing the ex post. 
MR.
STEIN
.  Oh, you™re just showing the ex post. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that™s the question.  T
hat™s what we™re discussing 
here.  We haven™t asked the question whether or not you think the baseline is adequate. 
MR. FISHER.  You might 
have to prepare for your press conference. 
CHAI
RMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Do you have a question or a comment? 
MR. FISHER.  Well, the plan is, once we get this nailed down, that you would then refer 
to it in your press conference. Is that correct? 
                             
   
     
            CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And then, we are hoping at some point t
o have a monetary 
policy report. 
MR. FISHER.  Which you would still refer to the consensus forecast in. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nothing is nailed down.  One possibility, which Governor 
Tarullo alluded to, is that we can™t do this in a timely way because we don™t know what the 

policy action is going to be soon enough, in which case it might be something that only appears 

in publication with the minutes, for example, three weeks later. 
MR. FISHER.  I agree with Governor Tarullo, by the way.  H
e makes an excellent
 point.  
My next question would be:  Could you summarize what we just discussed as though we were at 

a press conference? It probably would be difficult at this juncture. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would say that this is the forecast 
of the Committee.
 A few 
people disagreed, thinking that these policies would lead to higher inflation.  Most people 
agreed with the broad contours, except they pointed out a few issues related to the fiscal cliff and 

the efficacy of policy.  
President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. I™m a lit
tle confused.  Someone used the phrase ﬁa diversity section.ﬂ 
But you, at the beginning, describedŠI think you did in this contextŠ
a minutes
-like document, 
and in the minutes, of course, when they discuss participants™ views, the different views are sort 

of woven into the main narrative.  I wasn™t quite clear on what you guysŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I just learned about this five minutes ago myself. 

MR. LACKER.  Okay. Great. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I think the plan is to have a document that describes the 
consensus forecast, gives its main feature, 
and shows 
it in 
a minutes
-type discussion: ﬁ
The 
Committee discussed it. Most agreed with it
 but raised the following points anonymously.  
            
          
 President Lacker thought that it was
 a bunch of garbage.ﬂ  [Laughter]  And that would be the 
content. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay
, we will just have to start. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I hope this was helpful to you 
all
.  [Laughter]  Just 
so you have something to look forward to, our current plan is to talk about this exercise in 
October, so be sure and make your plane reservations now.  [Laughter] 
The next meeting is 
TuesdayŒWednesday, October 23Œ24.  
The press conference 
is 
at 2:15.  There will be a 
TV in 
the Special Library
, and lunch is available if you would like to stay.  No presentations are 
planned.  Thank you very much. 
END OF MEETING 
             
                                                
  Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
 on September
 12Œ13, 2012 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, September 12, 

2012, at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Thursday, September 13, 2012, at 8:30 a.m.  Those present 

were the following: 
Ben Bernanke, Chairman 

William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 

Elizabeth Duke 

Jeffrey M. Lacker 

Dennis P. Lockhart 

Sandra Pianalto 

Jerome H. Powell 

Sarah B
loom Raskin 
Jeremy C. Stein 

Daniel K. Tarullo 

John C. Williams 

Janet L. Yellen 
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, and Eric 
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Ko
cherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively 

William B. English, Secretary and Economist 
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary 

Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 

David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 

Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, Wil
liam Nelson, David 
Reifschneider, Glenn D. Rudebusch, William Wascher, and John A. Weinberg, Associate 
Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Govern
ors 
                                                                                                              Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; 
Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, 

Board of Governors 
Andreas Lehnert,
1 Deputy Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, 
Board of Governors 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Di
rector, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
Brian
 J. Gross,
2 Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 

Eric M. Engen, Michael G. Palumbo, and Wayne Passmore, Associate Directors, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Fabio M. Natalucci, Deputy 
Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Edward Nelson, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
Kelly J. Dubber
t, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, respectively 
Cletus C. Coughlin, Troy Davig, 
Mark E. Schweitzer, and Kei
-Mu Yi, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Cleveland, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 
1 Attended Wednesday™s session only. 
2 Attended Thursday™s session only. 
                                                               Lorie K. Logan, Jonathan P. McCarthy, Giovanni Olivei, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,
3 Vice 
Presidents, Federal R
eserve Banks of New York, New York, Boston, and New York, 
respectively 
Michelle Ezer,
4 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
3 Attended after the discussion o
n potential effects of a large
-scale asset purchase program. 
4 Attended the discussion on potential effects of a large
-scale asset purchase program. 
                           
                   
            
                                                          Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
September 12
Œ13, 2012 September 12 Session 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  Our first item is 
a staff report 
on the potential effects of large-
scale asset purchases.  Seth Carpenter will lead, but Vice 
Chairman 
Dudley would like to introduce the other presenter. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would like to introduce Michelle Ezer from the 
Markets Group.  Michelle and I actually had the interesting experience of writing a paper on the 
case for TIPS
, right in the heart of 
the financial crisis, along with Jennifer Roush
. I am not really 
sure how I managed to do that during that period, but, obviously, Jennifer and Michelle did most 

of the work.  So she is a coauthor. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay
, thank you.  Seth. 
MR. 
CARPENTER.
1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the 
material that™s 
labeled ﬁPotential Effects of a Large
-Scale Asset Purchase Program
.ﬂ  The Committee received three memos from the staff discussing various aspects of 
potential new large
-scal
e asset purchase (LSAP) programs.  I will discuss some 
considerations about how LSAP programs might be structured, and Michelle will 

discuss the balance sheet and income implications, along with the associated exit 

issues. 
When considering the financial and economic effects of LSAPs, the staff analysis 
starts from 
a term 
structure 
model that embeds Treasury and MBS supply factors as 
determinants of 
the yield 
curve.  
These effects depend on market participants™ beliefs 
about the entire trajectory of the SOMA
 portfolio™s holdings of securities and the 
types of those securities.  The FRB/US model assumes that declines in the 
10-year 
Treasury yield pass through roughly one-
for
-one to 
other market rates. 
In addition, 
the lower Treasury rate reduces the discount 
factor in pricing equities, boosting stock 
prices.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar falls as well.  For LSAPs that 

include purchases of MBS, there is an additional assumed reduction in MBS and 

mortgage rates.  Finally, the changes in these market 
variables are 
used to simulate 
the macroeconomic effects of these 
purchases using the FRB/US model. 
Of course, the results depend critically on the models used and a wide set of 
assumptions, any of which could be challenged.  First, in the staff models, the one-
1 The materials used by Mr. Carpenter and Ms. Ezer are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 
                   
             
                    
  
                     
      for
-one pass
-through from the 10-
year Treasury yield to other market rates could 
misstate the connection 
among 
these rates
.  For example, frictions like 
capacity 
restrictions 
for originations may prevent mortgage rates from fully adjusting
, at least 
in the short run.  Another source of uncertainty concerns the embedded effects on 

equity prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar.  Some event studies of 

previous unconventional balance sheet actions point to smaller effects than 

incorporated in
to staff analysis.  Finally, the macroeconomic effects of the changes in 

asset prices are calculated using the FRB/US model, and other models would 
of 

course 
yield results that could be larger or smaller. In short, while the projections 
represent the staff™s best assessment, the effects are clearly subject to considerable 

uncertainty. 
Buying either longer
-term Treasury securities or MBS should, in principle, put 
downward pressure on longer-
term interest rates and
, so, stimulate the economy. 
Although staff models suggest that purchases of MBS have 
a somewhat smaller effect 
than Treasury purchases on most longer-
term interest rates, they have somewhat 
larger effects on mortgage rates, and when translated into estimated macroeconomic 

outcomes, the differences 
are fairly small, especially relative to the substantial 
uncertainty that surrounds such estimates.  As a result, the staff memos did not 

provide clear guidance regarding the allocation of LSAPs between purchases of 

longer-
term Treasury securities and purchases of MBS. 
Looking at your first exhibit, to illustrate the macroeconomic effects that are 
implied by the staff models, we compare a projection in which the MEP, the Maturity 

Extension Program, is continued as plannedŠ
the solid
, dark blue lineŠ
to a 
projection that assumes 
that 
the Committee instead ends the MEP and purchases $600 
billion in Treasury securities and $400 
billion in MBS by late next year
.  That™s 
labeled 
option 1 
as in the staff memo
 and it™s the dotted blue line.  In addition to 
lowering term premiums from LSAPs, this option is also assumed to put downward 

pressure on longer-
term rates by pushing off the first increase in the federal funds rate 
by about six months.  This LSAP program is projected to boost real GDP, 
lower the 

unemployment rate, and increase the inflation rate somewhat.  As a consequence, 

more rapid progress toward both of the Committee™s goals is made.  The staff 

memorandum provided prior to your last meeting concluded that the purchases under 

such a 
program would not likely lead to a deterioration in market functioning.  

Michelle will 
later 
discuss some of 
the anticipated effects of the program on the 
Federal Reserve™s balance sheet and income. 
As I noted 
before
, the estimated interest rate effect of 
an LSAP depends on the 
public™s understanding of the FOMC™s intended plans for purchases and exit.  This 

consideration is particularly important for a flow
-based
 or open-
ended program that 
continues until a certain economic outcome is achieved.  If the public understands the 

FOMC™s stopping rule and has the same forecast for the economy as the Committee, 

and the economy evolves according to those projections, then our models would 

suggest that the flow-
based LSAP is 
roughly equivalent to a stock-
based LSAP 
of the 
same ultimate size.  Of course, the economy would likely not proceed exactly in line 

with expectations, so under a flow-
based LSAP, the anticipated total amount of asset 
             
      
        
         
          
                                 purchases would 
likely 
be more state dependent and evolve as the economy evolves.  
Option 4 in the memo entitled ﬁOptions for an Additional LSAP ProgramﬂŠ 

presented here 
as the dashed red lineŠwas intended to correspond roughly to such a 
program when the economy faces an adverse shock, and, as a result, purchases end up 

at a level tha
t is higher than originally assumed. If the ultimate size of purchases in 

this case is $2 trillion, our models suggest that the net effect would be somewhat 

smaller than if, from the beginning, a $2 trillion LSAP had been implemented.  

However, a flow-
bas
ed approach, if communicated clearly to the public, also could 
boost business and consumer confidence by reducing the odds of adverse tail 

outcomes and limiting the expected variance of economic outcomes.  This confidence 

effect is not captured in the staf
f projections but could be important
.  Alternatively, if 
the 
stopping rule is not clear, and the public believed that the Committee might stop 

purchases somewhat earlier than the Committee actually intended, then the interest 

rate effect 
could be reduced relative to what our models suggest.  
However, a
s the 
public came to understand the Committee™s stopping rule, the expected size of the 

SOMA portfolio would revise up, and the interest rate effects would become larger.  

Michelle is now going to discuss the 
balance sheet projections and some of the issues 
related to the exit. 
MS. EZER. 
Thanks, Seth.  As Seth mentioned, I will be discussing the balance 
sheet and income projections described in the LSAP options memo and associated 

exit issues.
  I plan to focus on the same two LSAP options Seth discussed, though the 
memo presented several options.  Turning to the top-left panel of exhibit 2, you can 

see the path of the portfolio under a baseline scenario in which MEP is completed and 

options 1 and 4 from the memo.  Under the latter two options, the portfolio grows 

significantly as a result of the asset purchases. 
Consistent with the exit principles, we 
assume that 
6 months prior to the first increase in the target federal funds rate, 
securities are allowed to ma
ture without reinvestment, and 6 
months after that first 

increase, sales of agency securities begin. These actions normalize the size of the 

portfolio through time.  The addition of a new LSAP program extends the period of 

time between the start of asset sales and when the portfolio normalizes in size. 
For 
example, under option 1 it takes 41 months for the portfolio size to normalize after 

the initiation of MBS sales.
  This is 6 months longer compared 
with 
the MEP 
scenario. 
In terms of Federal Reserve income, cumulative remittances to the Treasury over 
the projection period are lower than in a scenario with no additional LSAP.  
The 

lower remittances reflect higher inte
rest expense and the larger capital losses from 
MBS sales. 
Looking at the top-right panel, until 2016, remittances are higher under 
the LSAP scenarios, because of the higher interest income from the larger portfolio 

and minim
al additional interest expense
.  Thereafter, income is lower as a result of 
higher interest expense and larger capital losses. 
Under option 
1, annual remittances 
are projected to bottom out near zero.  By contrast, under option 
4, remittances fall to 

zero for more than 5 years, and a 
deferred asset is created. 
Of course, income and balance sheet projections can be sensitive to interest rate 
projections, and those projections are subject to uncertainty.  
One gauge of the 
               
          
       
   
              
       
    
  
           
              interest rate risk in the portfolio is presented in the middle
-left panel. Here, we 
present the projections of Federal Reserve remittances under an assumption that 

1 year after federal funds liftoff, the federal funds rate and 10
-year Treasury yield are 
100 basis points above the baseline levels, and these higher levels 
persist for the 
remainder of the projection period.  Under all of the LSAP options shown, the higher 

interest rate paths result in a period of no remittances to the Treasury and the creation 

of a deferred asset, as shown in the middle-right panel.  Under option 4, 
remittances 

to the Treasury would cease for a considerable number of years, and a substantial 

deferred asset would be created. 
The portfolio projections highlight two implications that an LSAP may have on 
the exit strategy.
 First, as shown in the bottom panel, the level of reserves would be 
higher at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate.
 Second, in order to 
remain consistent with the existing exit principles, MBS sales would need to take 

place over a shorter period than 5 
yea
rsŠthe period currently assumed in the 
projections.  
Absent a shorter MBS sales period, or other changes to the exit strategy, 

the size of the portfolio would not normalize within 2 to 3 years of the initiation of 

asset sales as anticipated by the exit strategy principles. 
Starting with the first point, under option 
1, reserve balances will be about 
$2.3 trillion at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate
Šabout $1 
trillion 
larger than expected under the current policy
, and also $1 trillion
 larger than assumed 
in June 2011.  
While increasing the IOER rate will raise short
-term market rates by 
itself, reserve
-draining tools can help to ensure a closer connection between the rates, 

and greater use of these tools may be needed
, given the increased quantity of reserves.  
The memo entitled ﬁThe 
Effect of an 
Additional $1 Trillion LSAP on the E
xit 
Strategyﬂ discussed the status of each of the different draining tools.  However, it is 

too early to provide specific details of a drain
ing plan
, because such a plan will 
depend on how markets evolve and the lessons learned once these tools are used in 

large scale. 
Turning to the second point, the exit strategy principles themselves will not have 
to change as a result of a new LSAP. The e
xpectation
, however, 
that the size of the 
balance sheet would be normalized within 2 to 3 years of assets sales might not hold, 

depending on the size of the 
asset purchase
 program.  Under option 1, by reducing the 
period of asset sales to 
3½ years from the
 5 years assumed in making the projections, 
the portfolio size would normalize within the assumed 2 to 3 
years. 
The s
taff 
currently believes that the faster average pace of MBS sales would likely be 

manageable from a market
-functioning perspective.  
That said, reducing the sales 
period would concentrate capital losses and result in Federal Reserve remittances 

declining to zero for a few years and create a deferred asset. 
In contrast, assumptions 
associated with the exit strategy principles would need to b
e altered under a $2 trillion 
LSAP like that under option 4.  Agency sales alone would not be enough to normalize 

the size of the balance sheet within 
2 to 3 
years of the initiati
on of asset sales in this 
case. 
Moreover, sales of securities in the volume envisioned under option 4 over a 
three
-year perio
d may cause market disruptions. 
          
                       
                  
In any event, the Committee may wish to review its exit principles periodically, 
particularly if the Committee implemented a flow
-based LSAP program, where the 
ultimate size o
f purchases would be unknown.  Adjustments to the principles could 
include more heavily relying on asset sales as a tool to drain reserves, for example, by 

expanding it to include a moderate pace of Treasury security sales. Asset sales could 

also occur so
oner.  
On balance, although the current exit strategy principles remain 
valid, additional analysis will be useful to determine 
whether alternate strategies 
might prove more helpful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Seth and I will be happy to 

answer any question
s. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Of course, this is just a summary of 
a lot of work that the staff has 
been doing on all aspects of asset purchases. You have received a 
number of memos.  Also, let me just mention that a little bit later this morning we will talk about 
the consensus forecast, which gives, in more detail, the staff projections of the effect
s of 
programs of different sizes on the economy.  
Let me now open the floor in case there are any 
questions 
for staff.  President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  I appreciate all of the 
work that went into this.  It has been quite helpful to me in thinking about what is going on.  Seth 

has made 
a good summary of the uncertainties and the range and assumptions that are needed to 

get the po
int estimates. 
I want to focus on two things. 
One has to do with the assumptions about market segmentation and 
pass
-through.  In 
some sense, the FRB
/US assumes
Šas you mentioned, SethŠ
that the 
pass
-through from the 
reduction of Treasuries to corporate and mortgage-
backed securities is one
-for
-one, which 
suggests, as you alluded to, that there is more segmentation across duration than there is across 

asset classes
, in the case of the models.  So one question I have would be, suppose that actually 
there was more segmentation across asset classes than across the term structure?  In other w
ords, 
if 
5-year 
Treasuries
 were a better substitute for 10-
year 
Treasuries
 than mortgage-
backed 
securities or corporate bonds are for 10
-year securities
Šwhich is the way it is kind of structured 
in the modelŠhow would that change your analysis of these e
ffects?  That is one question. 
                           
   
       
      
          
             
  
 And the second question is, you talked about the assumptions that are made and 
the 
uncertainties, and yet what we really got
, at the end of the day, w
ere 
some point estimates. 
So if 
I had to push you and I wanted to think about standard errors on these point estimates, how big 
do you think they are truly likely to be
?  Can we tell the difference, given the uncertainties 
among these different strategies
?  W
hat 
is 
your assessment of 
that? 
So those are the two 
questions I have. 
MR. CARPENTER.  Okay. 
The first question, what if there were more segmentation 
across asset types than across 
maturit
ies
? I think pretty clearly what you would see in that case 
is that we might have an effect on Treasury yields if we are buying 
Treasurie
s, and that would 
tend to push down 
Treasury 
yields and widen the spread relative to other asset types.  And to the 
extent that it™s other interest rates that have a direct effect on economic activity, you would get a 

smaller effect.
  So I think, in principle, that™s the way it would go. 
The hard part there
, I think, 
is there has clearly got to be a little bit of that going on.  And 
the previous memo about market functioning that we sent around said we might get to the point 

where you are buying so much that you are dislocating the 
Treasury 
curve from the rest of 
market interest rates. I think we are very sensitive to that possibility, and I think the staff 

conclusion so far is that we haven™t gotten to that point.  And I think some of the other studies of 

LSAPs and how they work also point to pretty substantial spillovers to other asset classesŠ
some 

Fed studies and some academic studies.
  So I think that™s a reasonable hypothesis to maintainŠ
I think 
it™s something that we will want to worry a lot about, esp
ecially if the purchases were so 
large that they were to somehow disrupt market functioning.  But my reading so far is that we are 

not there yet
, for some of those reasons. 
             
               
      
      
             
    
   Another reason isŠespecially if you go back to some of the previous LSAPsŠ
as the 
Desk has made clear what segment of the market we are buying
, there ha
ve been some pretty 
clear adjustments in interest rates at different points along the curve
.  This
 suggests 
that the 
maintained hypothesis that we have
, that the maturity matters a lot
, is coming through in some of 
the event studies.  W
hen the Desk helped the market understand exactly what the maturity 
distribution of purchases 
was 
going to be, we saw some movements of yields at the long end 
relative to the belly of the curve that suggest t
hat people see this sort of segmentation across 
maturities.  In addition, I think some of the reaction 
to the MEP caused us to feel 
a little bit better 
about that assumption.  The movement in the short rate relative to the long rate, once you control 
for e
xpectations, seemed 
to conform reasonably well with some of the inte
rest rate models that 
we have. 
So I think the short answer is you would get a widening of spreads, and to the extent that 
Treasuries are
n™t 
the thing that matter
s for economic activity, you would get less of an effect.  
On the other hand, if you were to do mortgage-
backed securities purchases, and the same 
hypothesis came up, then presumably you™d get a bigger effect just on the MBS rate, and 

presumably mortgages a
s well.
  And so the scenario you bring up might be an argument for 
having both asset classes
Šan argument
 that we didn™t cover in the memo.  I
f there is 
this 
segmentation across asset types, then buying both 
Treasuries
 and MBS may be a good thing to 
do, because then you will be able to affect both of those 
rates
, instead of relying on the purchases 
of 
Treasuries
 to also push down mortgage and MBS yields along with it. 
MR. PLOSSER.  To interrupt just a second on that point, though, that begs the question 
about 
buying MBS
Šlet™s say, 
even if it might help the mortgage market
.  You don™t have any 
evidence on whether that pass
-through 
to corporate and other asset classes is either differential or 
            
      
      
                 
the same or less than it would be with 
Treasuries
? Are you assuming 
that other asset classes 
would follow the same amount then, in that kind of story? 
MR. CARPENTER.  Right.  So I was trying to go into the counterfactual world where we 
are assuming this asset segmentation
.  And so there, 
there are 
lots of other hypotheses.  O
ur 
models sort ofŠ
and they are empirical models, where we get the results based on actual data
Š suggest that the purchases of MBS do have the same general effect on longer-
term interest rates 
by pulling out the longer-term assets and pushing things down.  I
f we had a different model, we 
would have to confront all of those same questions that you asked, including
, if there is a 
segmentation, what sort of 
pass
-through would there be?  But the models that we have, and the 
estimation that we have done, sugge
st that we are getting more or less the same effect on longer
-term rates of MBS and Treasuries
.  I was just saying, in the alternate version of the world, 
where 
there is a segmentation, 
it might be an argument for buying two different types of assets that 
we 
didn™t discuss in the memo. 
Your second question about standard errors is a really good one, and it is hard.  There are 
lots of different models that we have coming together, and I think Dave can probably speak 

really knowledgeably about the standard errors, especially from the FRB/US model.  But there is 

layering
, model upon model, 
to try to get these effects. 
I think we feel pretty good that we know 
for sure the sign of the first derivative, which is in what direction these things would happen.  

We pr
esented a lot of results, though, for different-
sized LSAPs in the memos, as Michelle 
pointed outŠ$750 
billion
, $1 trillion, 
$2 trillion. 
I think we can™t say with any confidence that 
we know the difference between a $750 billion LSAP and a $1 trillion LS
AP.  We are pretty sure 
we know that the 
$1 trillion
 one does more, but those are so close to each other that I don™t have 
       
              
      
                      
     
     
   
         much confidence in being able to differentiate.  
It™s t
hat sort of uncertainty 
I see, b
ut I don™t 
know if you want to talk about the 
macro effects. 
MR. PLOSSER.  I™m sorry.  Just to push it just a little bit.  So rather than the difference 
between 
$750 billion 
and 
$1 trillion, let™s just take one of them, the 
$1 trillion
 one.  And you 
estimate, what was it, 62 basis points on the unempl
oyment rate after two years?  Was that it? I 
can™t remember the exact number.  Whatever that number was, can you give me a standard 
error 
on that point estimate? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I™m going to come to that directly.  
First
, just to reiterate what 
Seth s
aid, your logic is correct.  To the extent that you think 
that the 
pass
-through 
from buying 
Treasuries 
into corporate 
bond yields
, stock market prices
, the exchange rate, 
and 
things like 
that
, are 
less than in the model simulations
, you are going to get smaller results. 
Second, I agree with Seth that the 
pass
-through 
effects 
that 
we have in there
Šas we have 
been saying right from the start back in 2008, early 2009Š
are
 highly uncertain.  And as time has 
gone on, I think the one source of uncertainty that has gone down is the 
concern
 about whether 
purchases 
would have any effect
.  At least we 
now 
think they ha
ve an effect. 
But having said 
that, 
there is 
still 
much uncertainty around these estimates. 
In terms of actually coming up with a confidence interval, I can™t do that, but I c
an say 
the following qualitative things that 
I think 
are helpful. 
First, take the model that Min We
i and 
Canlin 
Li 
developed that we are mainly using for pricing the effects on Treasuries
 and MBS.  
Now, that model kicks out a standard error.  I don™t know what it is, but it does not 
have 
tight 
error bands.  There is considerable width 
to the confidence intervals.  That said, we think the 
number is reasonable.  But could the number 
be somewhat smaller or somewhat bigger?  Yes. 
One point on why 
it could be bigger is, if you go back to the first LSAP, the event studies 
                                        
          
           suggested 
the LSAP
 might have lowered 
Treasury 
yields by 100 basis points.  
In the analysis that 
Min and 
Canlin
 are doing, it™s 50.  So that™s an example, 
where they are not necessarily taking 
the highest-
side estimates. 
There are other studies that suggest that we could be getting lower effects on financial 
markets than in the FRB/US analysis.  On the other hand, 
FRB
/US ignores some things, 
such as 
the 
potential 
pass
-through to house prices
; it has no effect 
in the simulations
.  And, there 
are 
confidence effects
 that Seth alluded to.  Even if you knew what the financial effects would be, 
there would still be a subs
tantial confidence interval for the economic effects
.  I don™t have them 
off the top of my head, but we have generated confidence bands for FRB/
US 
impulse responses 
over the years.  They are a lot like 
those in other models.  They are fairly significant 
around what 
the unemployment rate 
effect 
would be.  
The effect
 could be considerably closer to zero, or it 
could be bigger.  L
et™s say that
, for 
a given LSAP, the point estimate is a half a percentage point 
on the unemployment rate after three years
Šthat™s t
rue 
for the way we are scoring 
alternative 
B. Could it be a quarter?  Yes.  A quarter 
is certainly inside the 
70 percent 
confidence interval
.  Could it be three-quarters of a percentage point? Yes.  That would be inside the 70 
percent
.  So 
that™s just sa
ying what
, I think
, everyone agrees upon: there are v
ery wide confiden
ce intervals 
on these effects. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  While I was listening to Seth™s disclaimers at the beginning, it sort of 
sounds like an Allegra ad on television [l
aughter]
: These are the risks, et cetera.  And the papers 
actually were quite good.  The paper you particularly referenced had a lot of disclaimers in it.  

And what I am interested in seeing vetted more thoroughly is the degree to which this 

compounds the complexi
ty of a
n exit when we decide to exit. 
          
          
                        
    
     It seems to me one of the virtues of, 
particularly
, ﬁThe 
Effect of an 
Additional $1 T
rillion 
LSAP 
on the E
xit 
Strategy
ﬂ was the discussion of substantial uncertainty.  There are lots of 
quotes in there that are qualified. 
It seems to me that the proponents of 
an extended LSAP would 
take a view from a signaling channel perspective that one of its benefits is that 
it is effective 
precisely because it makes it more difficult to either raise short
-term interest rates or sh
rink the 
balance sheet for some time.
  And in a way, what I am concerned aboutŠand I am interested in 
learning more
Šis the degree to which we tie the hands of our successors, or if not tieŠ
maybe 
that is too strong a wordŠwe tangle their hands, and how much 
more difficult the exit strategy 
becomes. 
It strikes me that the stronger the recovery
Šthat is, the more rapidly we achieve 
equilibrium interest rates
Šthe harder it is going to be for us to exit.  And I would like to see that 
vetted a little bit more. 
I thought the papers touched on that, particularly the paper you referred 
to, but I think it would be helpful, Mr. Chairman, if we got a better sense of what complexities 
this imposes upon exit at the right time. Just a comment. 
MR. CARPENTER.  No, that™s 
really helpful. 
MR. FISHER.  I don™t know what your take is on this. 

MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely.  We clearly have a lot of details to write down.  So if 
the Committee wanted to exit 
next week
, or something like that, we would have lots and lots and 
lots an
d lots of details to write down, none of which are we prepared to give you right now, 
because the world presumably, between now and exit, is going to change.  And so it is going to 

take some time. 
That said, I just want to leave you with one thought.  When 
we were writing these 
memos, one of the first points that we wanted to have clear in our heads before writing themŠ
all 

of the staff who were working on this, including staff at the Desk who are experts on both 
      
  
                            
      
    
           
  
financial markets as well as 
the execution of things and the staff 
at the Board
Šwas
, does 
anybody think that if we were to do another LSAP as envisioned in these memos, that when the 
Committee wants to tighten monetary policy
, the staff would not be able to follow through on 
that
?  Because I wanted to make sure that everybody was able to look in their heart of hearts and 
say, ﬁWe think that the Committee will be able to tighten policy appropriately to hit its
 dual 
mandate,ﬂ and everybody said, ﬁYes, we think we are in that situation.ﬂ How we do it is not 

perfectly clear yet
, for a variety of reasons
.  But we would have had to write a very, very 
different memo
, I think, if we really thought there was some risk to the conduct of monetary 
policy in terms of our ability to execute the exit strategy. 
MR. FISHER.  You point out in the memo that there is a learning process here, 
in terms 
of the different tools that might be used.  But I still think we should press this in our discussion 

before proceeding. 
MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely. 

MR. FISHE
R.  Yes, sir. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I 
want to follow up on one point b
ecause it also relates to what 
President Plosser was talking about.  I think, 
whether it is connected to fear that we won™t be able 

to exit or whether it is a signaling that the Committee is willing to be more accommodative 

persistently out in the future, those policy expectations 
can have a big effect 
on some of the 
results
.  Ofte
n, the way we score thingsŠand I think I threw out a half a percentage point a 
second agoŠ
doesn™t take 
into account this additional signaling effect
 about the future path of the 

funds rate t
hat 
you potentially can get.  T
here is some evidence from the even
t studies that you 
did get 
it with the first two LSAP programs
Šthat by announcing 
a program
, you are also 
sending the signal that you are going to be more willing to keep rates lower for longer. 
      
           
               
        
           
    MR. FISHER.  That™s what I was
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right. 
At least as far as the model scores it, if that™s fully 
credible, if the expected funds rate path the market has really flattens out, in principle, you get a 
nontrivial kick from that. 
MR. CARPENTER. 
The only thing to highlight, though, is the difference 
between a 
willingness to keep the interest rate lower
 for longer versus an ability 
to raise them
.  And we 
don™t currently worry about the second partŠwe don™t worry about the ability to raise interest 

rates.  But what the Committee decides to do, obviously, is about the willingness to keep interest 

rates lower
. MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Does the FRB/US model allow you to 
isolate the kind of intermediate estimates
Šthat might be credit aggregates or asset price index 
levels
Šthat fit between lower interest rates and GDP growth, so that you could actually get a 
sense of the transmission mechanism working through the model? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
You can snip cer
tain transmission mechanisms and see what it 
does to the total effect 
if you
 just zero it out.  We have done experiments like that, and what it 
shows is, roughly speaking, changing 
Treasury 
yields, if it doesn™t go out into any other asset 
prices, doesn™t do anything in the model, to a first approximation.  
What matters is that it goes 

into private long-term interest rates, like MBS and corporates; second, that it goes into 
the 
stock 

market; and, third, that it goes into exchange rates.  So you can think of 
it as 
three channels
: cost 
of capital, wealth effects, and exchange rate.
  The model says each of those is worth 
roughly a 
third of the overall effect.  So if you didn™t believe one of the channels was operating, or you 
      
                                  
  thought it was operating only half 
as effectively as it usually does, you could then scale the 
numbers down with that rough math.  And that would be approximately correct.  
But in terms of 
what it implies for bank lending, or something like that, no, the model doesn™tŠ 
MR. LOCKHART. 
It doesn™t explicitly estimate the
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It doesn™t have any explicit predictions about what happens to 
bank lending or anything like that. 
MR. LOCKHART.  So to simplify, for my purposes, the exercise assumes some kind of 
historic
al correlation between lower interest rates and economic activity. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Which may or may not prevail in this current situation. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Which may or may not prevail, with one very important 
caveat.  Because housing is at such an extraordinarily low percentage of GDP, in essence, 
that 

historical correlation has been marked down in these analyses.  Ordinarily housing is a big 

source of a kick.  In these scenarios, the direct channel on housing construction activity is worth 

hard
ly anything.  It™s a little bit, but it™s very small.  That could be right or wrong, but in the 
results that Seth was showing and 
that 
were in all the other analys
is we™ve sent you, 
there is,
 in 
that very important sense, 
an attenuation of the effectivenes
s of monetary policy, whether it™s 
conventional or unconventional right now. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to follow up on this issue 
about confidence intervals.  In 
figure
 1, there would be data uncertainty; there would be 
uncertainty about transmission channels; there would be uncertainty about models.  If you 

layered all of that together, you are going to get very wide confidence intervals.  But on 
              
          
    
   
          
              exhibit 
2, where we are
 looking at the SOMA holdings, there we can sort of mechanically map 
out, more or less, what is going to happen.  There is some uncertainty based on interest rates
, and 
so on, but 
I just want to be clear on this
: This is
 much more solid, I would say, than page 1, 
which is very uncertain and very speculative about 
what the effects might be. Is that a fair 
assessment? 
MS. EZER. 
Our portfolio projections depend importantly on the interest rate 
assumptions that were provided, so those confidence intervals will feed through into our 
projections when it comes to things like Federal Reserve income over time.
  When it comes to, 
say, the top-
left
 panel, the path of the portfolio over time, the confidence interval is probably a 
little bit smaller
, provided that the 
assumptions that we made about the timing of liftoff and the 
strategy used for exit remain constant.
  There the confidence band would be in your projections 
for prepayments on your MBS portfolio.  But since you are assuming that you are going to get 

rid o
f your holdings of agency securities over a set period of time, it is just going to change kind 
of the wiggles in how MBS declines over that period.  But we would still eliminate it over a 
five
-year period with confidence. 
MR. BULLARD.  Just one other comment, Mr. Chairman.  On exhibit 2, 
panel
 4, ﬁD
eferred 
Asset.
ﬂ  T
hat is kind of a nice term
, ﬁdeferred asset.
ﬂ As far as I know, the Committee 
has never used the deferred asset.  It strikes me as a possible political firefight to bring that into 

play.  
All 
of the scenarios here, other than 
option 1, if I™m reading this correctly, would bring the 
deferred asset into play
, with possible repercussions, I think, 
for the Federal Reserve. 
MR. CARPENTER. 
Just a small bit of clarification:  I
t has never been the case that we 
have had
, for the Federal Reserve 
System as a whole
, a deferred asset
.  It has 
been the case on 
several occasions that there has been a deferred asset for a given Reserve Bank. 
        
       
                     
     
        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think the defense in that case would be that 
the total, 
which was including the very high 
remittances
 early in the period, still would be higher than 
historical norms. 
MR. POTTER.  That™s correct. 
MR. BULLARD.  That might be a hard story to tell when the time comes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair
man
, you have a two-hander? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
  Yes.  I think the confidence intervals on interest rates are 
going to be almost proportionate to the confidence intervals on the real economy variables, 

because you are not going to know what the trajectory o
f short
-term rates is going to be or the 
shape of the yield curve. And, in fact, you are probably even more uncertain about the shape of 

the yield curve because you have never gone from purchasing all of these assets to selling all of 

these assets.  So we
 don™t really know how the market is going to react to that. 
The second thing I just want to note very briefly is a lot of this also depends on what 
monetary framework you are actually going back to.  And the presumption of the staff memo is 

that we are going back to a 
corridor system.  But you might decide, as you go through this, that 

maybe IOER works pretty well. 
And 
you might actually want to go back to a floor system that 
would allow you quite a bit more discretion in terms of how your exit actually works.  And that 

would feed into a lot of these projections.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Again, I want to thank the staff for all of the work 
you 
did to help prepare us for this meeting, including the work on LSAPs, but also work on other 
tools like IOER.  So we appreciate it very much.  
Let me turn to item 
2 and cal
l on Simon Potter 
to discuss financial developments. 
                 
                             
    
                                                                             MR. POTTER.
2 Thank you
, Mr. Chairman.  Over the course of the 
intermeeting 
period, global financial markets were dominated by three areas of focus: 
the ECB™s 
new Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) pr
ogram, fluctuating expectations for 
further policy accommodation from the FOMC, and continuing concerns over global 

growth prospects.  By the end of the 
intermeeting
 period, market perceptions of the 
effectiveness of policy measures to at least attenuate t
ail risks facing the global 
economy contributed to improved risk sentiment in financial markets, as seen in 

higher advanced economy sovereign yields and stock markets. 
I will begin with developments in U.S. interest rates, which in the Treasury 
market were moderately higher over the 
intermeeting
 period.  The upper-
left panel 
shows the decomposition of changes in nominal yields for 5- and 10-
year securities 
during key portions of the intermeeting period.  
Nominal 
Treasury yields increased 
significantly early in the period, with the 10-year yield up by more than 35 basis 

points at one point.  Most of the 
initial increase in yields was driven by improved risk 
sentiment on expectations of a forceful ECB policy respons
e, as well as by stronger
-than
-expected U.S. economic data
.  The rise in yields partially reversed following the 
release of the August FOMC minutes and continued somewhat after the Jackson Hole 

symposium.  The move lower in the 5-
year real component was co
nsistent with 
growing expectations for policy easing.  
To date, there is little evidence of worries 
of the fiscal cliff affecting pricing in the Treasury or other markets. 
At the same time, inflation compensation
, as derived from inflation
-indexed 
securities
, rose at the 5
- and 10-
year tenors
.  Higher energy prices contributed to the 
increase in inflation breakevens, particularly at shorter maturities
.  However, spot and 
forward 5
-year breakeven inflation rates remain well within recent historical ranges, 
as seen in the upper-right panel. 
As shown in the middle-left panel, dealers continue to assign the highest 
probability of a first increase in the 
target
 rate to the second half of 2015.  However, 
the distribution has continued to shift from earlier liftoff
 dates and into 2015 and 
beyond.  The survey results are broadly consistent with market-
implied measures of 
liftoff, as market prices indicate significant odds that the target rate will not be 

incre
ased until the middle of 2015. 
Immediately following the F
OMC statement on August 1, interest rates increased
, as markets had been pricing in close to even odds of an extension of the forward 

guidance
.  The middle-right panel shows an event study based on the small sample of 

forward
-guidance surprises.  Reading from left to right, the blue dots represent the 
three events in our study: 
first, the decision to maintain the late
-2014 forward 
guidance at the 
most recent 
meeting; second, the extension of the forward guidance to 

late
 2014 at the January meeting; and third, the introduction of the original mid-2013 
language in August 2011.  
The 
x-
axis measures the surprise component of these 
decisions, which we measure in months and derive from the difference between the 

announced 
forward
-guidance date and the ex
pected month of liftoff calculated from 
2 The mate
rials used by Mr. Potter are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 
      
               
  
    
       
      
                 
          
   our d
ealer surveys
.  The 
y-axis measures the change in the 10
-year Treasury yield 
after the FOMC announcement
.  Alternative methods of measuring the surprise in 
months yield broadly similar results
.  Averaging across 
these measures suggests a 
rule of thumb of roughly a 1 basis point change in the 10-
year Treasury yield for each 
month of 
forward
-guidance 
surprise
.  Of course, measuring announcement effects is 
complicated by the interaction between forward guidance and 
expectations for the 
balance sheet
, including exit, which this analysis does not consider.  In the three 
events examined
, there were no explicit changes to the balance sheet or exit 
principles. 
Turning to other domestic assets, MBS spreads to Treasuries ar
e narrower over 
the 
intermeeting
 period, as seen in your lower-
left panel
.  Investors attributed much of 
the fluctuation in MBS spreads over the period to shifting expectations for Federal 

Reserve purchases, especially in the last few days.  By contrast, t
wo other 
intermeeting developments may serve to tighten mortgage market conditions on the 

margin
.  First, the FHFA announced that it will raise guarantee fees on GSE loans by 
10 basis points starting in the fourth quarter of this year, a fee that lenders w
ill likely 
pass on to borrowers.  Second, the Treasury announced that the wind-down of the two 

GSEs™ portfolios will accelerate to a 15 percent yearly rate, from 10 percent at 

present
.  Much of the wind-down is expected to occur through paydowns, 
necessita
ting only a small portion of sales from the portfolio over the next year.  

Given this, investors do not expect the accelerated wind-downs to be disruptive to the 

MBS market, and spreads to Treasuries were little changed following the 

announcement. 
The final panel looks at how recent developments have affected 
U.S. 
risk assets
.  Overall, the stabilization in European financial markets and heightened expectations 

for domestic policy easing have supported both equity and debt markets.  
The 

S&P
 500 index rose over the intermeeting period by more than 4 percent and is 
currently at its highest level since the beginning of 2008.  
Near
-term uncertainty, as 
measured by the VIX, is near multiyear lows
.  High
-yield bond spreads have 
tightened to levels last observed in
 2011:Q3, and corporate bond issuance in July and 
August has been higher than 
over the same period last year. 
Your second exhibit turns to developments in Europe and global asset prices more 
broadly.  
The most important 
development 
in global financial markets was the 
steadily growing expectation that the ECB would announce an effective new program 

to purchase shorter-
dated peripheral sovereign debt
.  As seen in the top-
left panel, 
these expectations led to a significant narrowing of
 peripheral sovereign debt spreads 
to German yields, particularly at shorter maturities wi
thin the scope of the program. 
Many of the uncertainties regarding the new program were resolved by the ECB 
announcements last week, leading to a further narrowing of peripheral spreads, 

additional gains in European equities, and appreciation of the euro against the 
U.S. 
dollar and the Swiss franc.  
Indeed, euro
-area financial markets have exhibited a 
greater degree of stability over the 
intermeeting
 period, and investors do not appear to 
be seeking significant protection 
against 
large swings in asset prices
, as seen in the 
                                       
    
  
  
               upper-
right panel
, ﬁImplied Volatility on 
Euro
pean Equities and on the Euro-
Dollar 
Currency 
Pair
.ﬂ 
As Steve Kamin will note in his briefing, the OMT
 program has the potential to 
ease financial stresses but must be accompanied by fundamental reform measures at 

the national level
.  Changes in forward peripheral spreads to Germany appear 
consistent with this view
.  Your middle-left panel shows Spanish an
d Italian 
five
-year 
debt spreads 
relative to Germany on a 
five
-year
-forward basis
.  These forward 
five
-year spreads have come down much less than spot spreads on instruments that are 

within the maturity range
 of the ECB™s purchase program. 
In the near 
term, financial markets will face a number of uncertainties, including 
the ongoing EU and IMF review of Greek compliance with the terms of its aid 

program.  In addition, for those countries 
not already in a program, the ECB will not 
activate the OMT unless
 there is agreement on conditions for accessing fiscal support 
facilities
.  It is unclear whether Spain will take this step w
ithout renewed market 
pressure. 
Looking forward, both Spain and Italy need to ramp up debt issuance over the 
remainder of the year
, after issuing at a somewhat tepid pace in recent months
.  This 
can be seen in the middle-
right panel
.  Spanish and Italian banks have historically 
been a significant source of demand for their own sovereign™s debt.  
However, that 

source of demand has drop
ped
 off in recent months.  As shown in the bottom-
left 
panel, since the ECB™s last three
-year LTRO, Italian banks have added to their 

sovereign debt holdings at a greatly reduced pace
.  Spanish banks have actually 
brought down their holdings of sovereign debt since the first quarter, given their own 

funding difficulties.  On a more positive note, anecdotal reports suggest that asset 

managers are reducing their underweight positions on Spanish and Italian debt, and 

access to primary debt markets has improved 
for Spanish and Italian banks. 
The last panel of this exhibit focuses on global risk assets 
more 
broadly.  
The 
accommodative policy stance of many central banks has been supportive of equity 

markets in recent months, particularly in the 
United States
 and Europe.  
In contrast, 
emerging market equities have generally underperformed, reflecting investors™ views 

that th
ese regions may be experiencing a slowdown in economic activity.  China™s 
Shanghai Composite I
ndex remains at levels last seen in early 2009. 
Your final exhibit focuses on recent Desk operations and market expectations for 
additional policy actions as reported in the d
ealer 
survey.  
Over the intermeeting 
period, the Desk purchased $60 billion in longer-term Treasury securities and sold or 

allowed
 to mature without reinvestment $58.5 billion of shorter-
dated securities under 
the maturity extension program (MEP).  These operations continue to proceed 

smoothly.  In particular, the Treasury security purchase operations have recently met 

with better de
mand.  As shown in the upper-left panel, the previous trend toward 
lower coverage ratios and less favorable prices for the purchase
 operations reversed 

somewhat. 
       
              
             
  
                          
           As shown in the upper-right panel, the MEP transactions have been lengthening 
the average dura
tion of the SOMA™s Treasury holdings in line with the policy intent.  

This measure is expected to reach about 
eight 
years if the program continues through 
the end of the year, far longer than the historical range of two to three 
years.  This has 
pulled the average duration of the overall portfolio higher as well, given that the 

duration of the MBS portfolio has recently remained steady at around 
two 
years. 
The next two panels focus on the reinvestment of principal payments on the 
SOMA™s holdings of agency debt and MBS.  Over the intermeeting period, the Desk 

purchased $33 billion of MBS.  These reinvestment purchases have generally 

proceeded smoothly, with market trading volumes remaining steady and only some 

instances of specialness in the coupons being pur
chased. 
The middle-left panel shows the monthly pace of paydowns, which has 
averaged 
about $26 billion since October of last year.  Given continued low interest rates, we 

expect the paydowns to run at roughly $31 billion per month through the end of the 

year.  Such a pace would suggest that 
the 
MBS purchases resulting from the 
reinvestments of the agency paydowns would constitute about one-third of the gross 

issuance of TBA
-eligible securities. 
The middle-right panel shows the distribution for the 30-
year sector of principal 
paydowns to the MBS portfolio, as well as the coupons in which the Desk has 

reinvested.  The portfolio continues to shift into lower-coupon securities, reflecting 

the overall decline in 
rates and the decision to concentrate purchases in newly
 issued 
TBA securities that are more liquid and more directly linked to the primary rate
.  Since June, low interest rates have led to paydowns of holdings of lower-coupons 

MBS, including the 3.5 and 4 percent coupons.  
Newly issued securities also have 

longer duration than those paying down, so these purchases have extended the 

duration of the MBS portfolio. 
Your final two panels of this exhibit show results from the most recent 
dealer 
survey.  
We use
d a phone poll this Monday to update some of the answers, following 

the significant developments in Europe and the e
mployment 
report.  As seen in the 
lower
-left panel, dealers assign a 90 percent probability to any easing action being 
announced at this mee
ting
.  More specifically, dealers place very high odds of 
80 percent on a change to the rate guidance.  The median respondent also saw a 

65 percent chance of an announced increase in the size of the SOMA portfolio.  

Expectations for these policy actions fi
rmed somewhat following last Friday™s 
employment report.  The derived joint probability for an extension of the forward 

guidance and the announcement of additional asset purchases increased to 57 percent 

in this Monday™s phone survey, up from 46 percent in 
the 
dealer survey. 
The panel to the right shows the dealers™ projections for the size and distribution 
of additional asset purchases anticipated through the end of 2013, as derived from 

respondents™ expected path of the SOMA balance sheet.  Respondents ex
pect the size 
of the balance sheet to grow by around $600 billion by the end of 2013.  Median 

expectations are for an increase of $300 billion in Treasury and about $300 billion in 
             
                  
                 MBS holdings by the end of 2013.  While not asked specifically about the st
ructure of 
a potential asset purchase program, some respondents indicated in their written 

comments that they expect an open
-ended program conditioned on economic 
variables.  Mr. Chairman, this completes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions for Simon?  President 
Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Two questions for Mr. Potter.  The first has 
to do with 
the 
duration of our holdings of agency MBS.  The graph indicates the average 
duration of our current holdings is around two.  Now, would our average duration of purchases 

under what we™re going to talk about later today or tomorrow, would that be substantially larger? 

Do you have a sense of what that would be? 
MR. POTTER.  Yes.  Somewhere between four and six.  Is that right, N
ate
? MR. WUERFFEL. 
That™s correct
. MR. LACKER.  Four and six? 

MR. POTTER. 
Yes
. MR. LACKER.  Okay.  So the other question I haveŠ
I was at a conference a couple of 
weeks ago.  I believe I saw you there, Mr. Potter, andŠ 
MR. POTTER. 
Symposium
, yes
. MR. LACKER.  An economist there was arguing that the effect of our forward guidance 
occurred more via revisions in investors™ expectations about future economic conditions rather 

than a change in their views about our future reaction function, and 
becaus
e you folks have such 
rich interactions with the dealer community and you talk to them about 
this forward guidance, I 
wondered if you guys had a view as to the economist™s assertion. 
MR. POTTER. 
Those dealer economists also 
read about
 Jackson Hole.  Some of 
them 
were there
, so I think they viewed that with quite a lot of interest.  I
n the dealer survey
, some 
               
     
            
        
        
      
   people thought that the change in rate guidance might be not just a calendar type, but trying to 
distinguish it from just a pure expectation of where you expected the economy to be.  I don™t 

think it™s possible to get a very clear answer from these respondents, because I don™t think the 

FOMC
™s been completely clear on this either. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Simon, I think I heard you correctly.  So we™ve been purchasing about a 
third of the eligible TBAs, and you also mentioned that there™s a planned 
increase
 in the 
rate 
of 
GSE wind
-downs to 15 percent from the 10 percent level earlier.  I
s that likely to change? If we 
were to proc
eed with just 
$30 or $40 billion, as outlined in a
lternative 
B, would that change our 
percentage of the eligible TBA purchases, given the contraction that™s occurring among the 

agencies
? If my memory is correct, they had about $1.4 trillion.  It goes back 
to last March. 
I can™t remember the last time I looked at the numbers.  So that™s about $15 billion; 15 
percent 

translates to about $15 billion, I think, in the contraction.  I™m just curious if it 
affe
cts the 
percentage of eligible TBA that we™d be hold
ing if we were to proceed. 
MR. POTTER.  No, I don™t think so. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

MS. LOGAN. 
We™re currently purchasing about a third of gross issuance.  That number 
is going to go up to 60 to 75 percent, depending on which option the Committee chooses. 
MR. FISHER.  Right, s
o that is not affected by
Š MS. LOGAN
.  The reduction that the GSEs are doing is happening 
in more than just 
TBAs
; they™re reducing in other types of securities 
as well
.  So I would think that number is 
probably fairly small.  In terms of the total amount outstanding, we™re currently going to have 

about 18 percent of the MBS, and that would move to about 25 percent. 
       
    
   
      
             
         
        
    
   
 MR. FISHER.  Okay
, thank you.
  And just an observation, if you look at your 
panel
 5 and
, particularly
, the high-
yield 
spread 
on panel
 6, things obviously are going our way.  T
his is 
what we would like to see, as well as the equity price response.  What doesn™t seem to be going 
our wayŠand I only point it out as an offset, even though it™s a short time horizonŠ
is 
it seems 

that the 
breakeven 
inflation rates
Šwhether it™s the 
5-year
, 5-year forward
; the 
5-year
; the 
10-year, which is not on this chartŠbottomed in the spring of this year, and the slope is upward.  

We can talk
, perhaps
, later.  I don™t know if we™ve done an LSAP-
type program in a context 
of 
rising inflation expectations or 
not. I think there was at least a 
chart in the 
Teal
book that would 
indicate we haven™t done one yet under those circumstances. 
But I just point out, Mr. Chairman, that if you draw 
a line from the bottom of the 5-
year 
rate, it really bottomed out in the summer of 2011 and has been on the rise. I™m not saying it™s 

dangerous, and it may be something that we would like to encourage, 
or some at this table would 

like to encourage, but we do have rising inflation expectations.  And to say inflation expectations 

are contained
Šwe might think about how we want to phrase that as we get down to the policy 
statement of tomorrow. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I™m not sure I take the same inference.  The 5-
by-5 
is pretty 
flat and is lower than it was last year. 
MR. FISHER.  
And 
the 
5-
year? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  At
 the margin, and the 5-year is obviously being affected by 
the oil price movements. 
MR. FISHER.  And the 
10-year also is not on this chart, and then gold prices, of course, 
have increased significantly
, for those 
who 
care about that ancient relic. 
       
      
           
           
                
   
            
  
                                                     MR. POTTER. It is true that the deflation risk we can calculate is lower than it was in 
2010. MR. FISHER.  Right.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questi
ons for Simon? [No response] 
Okay.  Seeing 
none, we need to vote to ratify domestic open market operations since August.  
Without 

objection?  Okay.  Our next item is the economic and financial situation, and David Wilcox and 

his colleagues will make that
 presentation. 
MR. WILCOX.
3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think there should be a single 
summary exhibit. 
You all may be relieved to know that my prepared text includes 
1,192 words, and I do not plan to ad lib an additional 2,000 words into my delivery.  
[Laughter] 
As you can see from the upper-
left panel of the forecast summary exhibit, the 
near
-term outlook for real GDP growth in last week™s edition of the Tealbook is 
broadly similar to the one that we sent you in July.  To be sure, the July gain in real 

PCE was better than we had expected.  However, consumer sentiment
Šshown in the 
lower
-left panel
Šhas remained downbeat, job gains have been modest, and the price 
of gasoline has moved back up, all of which caused us to largely discount the 

favorable spending news.  Similarly, July shipments of capital goods were stronger 

than we had expected, but forward-looking indicators, including the continued decline 

in the capital goods orders data, as well as the subdued responses to various surveys 

on capital spending plans and business conditions, are consistent with only subdued 

near
-term increases in business outlays.  If you squint hard at the upper-
left panel, 
you will detect that we shifted a little GDP growth from the second half of this year 

into the first half of next, reflecting our assessment that the drought will depress farm 

output in the second half of this year by more than we had predicted in July. 
The one component of aggregate demand that has seemed to have been on a 
somewhat stronger trajectory relative to our expectation in the July Tealbook was net 

exports.  Even so, last week™s forecast called for GDP growth to average just 

1.8 percent through the middle of next year, about in line with our prediction for the 

growth of potential over this period. 
Since the Tealbook closed, the main piece of economic news was last Friday™s 
employment report.  In a seeming exception to Dave Stockton™s famous description 

of the usual shelf-
life of t
he staff economic forecast, our jar of mayonnaise survived 
its first 48 hours in the Mojave Desert with only relatively minor signs of spoilage.  

[Laughter]
  The red line in the bottom-right panel summarizes our effort to combine 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
          
       
                                   
      
   
 the signals from the estab
lishment and household surveys (the latter of which is not 
shown on the chart because it is so noisy compared 
with the establishment results), 

and to control for weather effects and recession-
related seasonal adjustment 
distortions.  As you can see from the downward tilt toward the end of that line, the 

estimated underlying pace of private payroll employment growth has trended lower 

over the course of this year and now 
is 
at the low end of the range that it has occupied 
during the past 2½ years.  The unempl
oyment rate unexpectedly declined 
0.2 percentage point, but like many other analysts, we have been inclined to see more 

weakness than strength in the totality of the results from the household survey, given 

that the employment measure from that survey and 
the participation rate both 
declined.  Based on our projected path for real GDP over the next several quarters, we 

continue to expect the unemployment rate to average around 8¼ percent through the 

first half of next year.  I should also note that the workweek was lower than we had 

expected, and average hourly earnings were flat
, rather than increasing slightly as we 
had expected.  In combination, these results suggest a modestly weaker trajectory for 

compensation and
, therefore,
 household spending than we had factored into the 
Tealbook. 
Two other key pieces of information released since the Tealbook were also 
weaker than expected.  In particular, vehicle assembly plans now point to a slower 

pace of motor vehicle production in the third and fourth quarters th
an we had 

projected in the Tealbook, whileŠ
as Steve will discuss shortly
Šthe latest foreign 
trade data were slightly to the soft side of our expectations in terms of the
ir implications for GDP growth. 
In all, these bits of information would cause us to shave about ¼ percentage point 
off our forecast for the pace of real GDP growth during the second half of this year, 

leaving our forecasted average growth rate for this quarter and next at an anemic 

1¼ percent. 
Turning to the medium term, we upgraded our outlook slightly relative to our July 
projection.  As Steve will discuss, the improvement, such as it is, partly reflects a 

somewhat less worrisome situation in Europe than we had previously believed.  As 

we described in the Tealbook, even after factoring in the disappointment that we think 

would ensue from an announcement of no change in the stance of monetary policy at 

the conclusion of this meeting, we judge that stock prices would remain on a slightly 

higher trajectory and the dollar would be slightly weaker than we assumed in the 

previous projection.  These small positive influences are only partly offset by the 

increase in oil prices, part of which may itself reflect the improvement in sentiment 

related to the crisis in Europe. 
The small upward revision 
to real GDP over the medium term led us to shave a 
little off of our projected path for the unemployment rate, which is shown in the top-

right panel of the exhibit.  Even by the end of next year, however, we expect no 

significant reduction in the unemploy
ment rate. As real GDP accelerates more into 
2014, the unemployment rate declines about ½ percentage point, ending that year at 

about 7½ 
percent. 
         
    
    
     
         
   
   
     
         
     
       
    
  
  Aside from the crisis in Europe, the other main concern that continues to loom 
over the domestic outlook is the fiscal cliff.  On this front, there have been no major 

developments recently, and we continue to expect none, 
at least through the 

November elections.  At this stage, I can only assure you that our decision to stand 

pat on our fiscal policy assumptions reflects no lack of concern or uncertainty on our 

part:  The fiscal cliff continues to figure prominently in our thinking as a serious 

threa
t to the still
-anemic recovery. 
Turning to the inflation outlook, the incoming data on core PCE price inflationŠ 
the 
middle
-right panel
Šhave been close to our expectations.  We continue to project 
that core inflation will hold steady at about 1½ percent through the end of 2014, 

reflecting anchored inflation expectations, a persistent margin of labor and product 

market sl
ack, and modest gains in imported goods prices. 
In response to the upward move in spot prices for crude oil since the July 
Tealbook, we have marked up our near-
term projection for headline PCE inflation
Š the middle
-left panel.  We have, however, made only small revisions to our near-
term 
food price forecast.  Although we now expect the quantity effects of the drought to be 

worse than we had forecast in July, the futures prices that we used in preparing our 

July food price projection had apparently already in
corporated almost all of the price 

effects.  Despite the upward pressure from food prices that we think will begin to 

show through around the end of this year, we expect headline inflation to step down 

slightly in the first part of next year, as the antici
pated reduction in crude oil prices 

implied by futures markets pushes down retail energy prices.  Steve will now 

continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.  In 1972, when Chinese Prime Minister Zhou Enl
ai was asked what 
he thought was the historic impact of the 
French 
Revolution, he famously answered: 
ﬁIt™s too soon to tell.ﬂ 
[Laughter] 
By those standards, assessing the implications of 
the European Central Bank™s plans to intervene in peripheral debt markets would 

seem hopelessly premature.  And yet, as Simon has described, anticipations of 

aggressive ECB action have substantially calmed European financial markets, slightly 

brightening an admittedly still
-cloudy outlook. 
As described in its announcement last week, the ECB plans to purchase sovereign 
debt on the secondary market, provided that the beneficiary governments enter into an 

arrangement with the region™s financial backstop facilities and agree to policy 

conditionality.  Although the ECB will be announcing neither a target ceiling for 

yields on peripheral debt nor the amounts it intends to purchase, it has signaled a 

more aggressive and sustained program than its earlier forays into bond markets. 
Beyond simply comforting investors that the ECB is riding to the rescue, these 
plans could ease financial stre
sses in a number of ways.  First, by lowering yields, the 

bond purchases would reduce public debt service burdens and improve fiscal 

sustainability.  Second, and as a related matter, by taking sovereign bonds out of the 

hands of private investors, ECB purchases may create room in those investors™ 

portfolios for new issues, thereby improving the governments™ access to financing.  
          
  
           
                 
   
   
         
                     
  
    Finally, the package of ECB purchases
, plus access to the regional financial backstop 
facilities
, is widely anticipated to involve less stringent conditionality, and thus less 
stigma, than the full
-blown IMF and EU rescue packages received by Greece, Ireland, 
and Portugal.  In consequence, it is more likely, though far from certain, that Spain 

and/or Italy may request financial assistance before market conditions have become 

so adverse that further financial turmoil is inevitable. 
With markets figuring in brighter prospects for official support, financial stresses 
over the next several months are likely to be less pronounced than we assumed in the 

July Tealbook, and we are anticipating that, barring further adverse shocks, European 

markets could soon begin the long, slow process of normalization.  However, we are 

still very far from being out of the woods.  In the near term, European l
eaders still 
need to work out the conditionality to be required of governments benefi
ting from the 
financial rescue facilities and ECB intervention, and that could be contentious.  

Additionally, IMF and EU officials are currently assessing the status of Gr
eece™s 
struggling adjustment programŠalthough Greece™s official creditors are expected to 

approve a much
-needed disbursement by October and postpone more difficult 
decisions until later, this is not assured, and a messy Greek exit from the euro area at 

this time could be quite dangerous. 
Taking a longer view, the ECB™s new program is not, to 
coin a phrase, a panacea. 
It can only give Europe breathing space to implement the fundamental reforms that 

will ultimately restore confidence.  If the Europeans do not make progress on the 

measures needed to achieve fiscal and financial stability
Šbudget consolidation, 
growth
-promoting structural reforms, and region-
wide banking initiatives
Šthe 
ECB™s ability to contain financial tensions will be sorely tested.  Accordin
gly, market 
confidence likely will not be fully restored until the peripheral economies prove they 

can cut their budgets, improve growth prospects, and strengthen their banksŠ
and all 

that could take a number of years. 
In consequence, economic activity in Europe is also likely to remain subdued for 
some time to come.  To be sure, the easing of financial stresses, combined with some 

data that have been less bleak than expected, have led us to project a somewhat 

shallower recession than we wrote down in the July Tealbook.  Even so, in our 

current projection, euro-area GDP continues to contract through the middle of next 

year and recovers only very weakly thereafter. 
The outlook for our other trading partners, while hardly as bleak as that for 
Europe, is nonetheless subdued.  Excluding the euro area, aggregate foreign growth 

dropped from roughly 4 percent in the first quarter to 
less than
 3 percent in the 
second, below its trend pace.  Moreover, since your last meeting, indicators such as 

PMIs and exports have ge
ner
ally come in on the soft side. 
These developments are worrisome, but considering the factors responsible for 
the slowdown, our best guess is that 
economic 
growth will bottom out in the coming 
quarters rather than deteriorate further.  The pace of 
deterioration in Europe, which 
accounts for much of the United Kingdom
™s stagnation this year, as well as the 
             
                               
              
                    slowdown in Asia™s exports, is projected to become only a little more pronounced in 

the second half of this year.  The recent weakness in U.S. growth has also weighed on 

our trading partners, but the U.S. economy should start picking up a few quarters 

down the road.  And much of Asia™s slowdown reflects the fading of the bounceback 

from Thailand™s floods and Japan™s tsunami last year.  All told, we 
anticipate that 
foreign growth outside the euro area will stay subdued at 3 percent over the remainder 

of this year.  It then picks up to 3¾ percent by 2014, as the euro area starts to recover, 

the U.S. economy picks up steam, and monetary policies around 
the world remain 

quite accommodative. 
Another factor weighing on foreign growth, especially in Asia, has been China™s 
slowdown from near double-digit rates in the past two years.  Chinese growth 

registered 7½ percent in the second quarter of this year.  With recent weak exports 

and PMIs leading us to revise down our forecast, we see growth remaining at that 

relatively subdued pace during the remainder of this year, before picking up to about 

8 percent thereafter. Under these circumstances, we continue to s
crutinize the data 
for indications of a hard landing, but we do not see any compelling signs that one is in 

the offing: 
 Retail sales growth has remained reasonably solid, housing prices have 

flattened out, and the government retains the monetary and fiscal scope to counter a 

decline in demand. 
The effect on oil prices of resurgent political tensions over Iran poses another 
threat to the global economy.  Crude oil prices have now retraced more than half of 

their decline from earlier this year, and our curre
nt projected trajectory of oil prices 
averages roughly 10 percent higher than in the July Tealbook.  A rise in oil prices of 

this magnitude should not substantially affect the foreign outlook.  By our rough 

estimates, it could reduce 
economic 
growth in the advanced economies by 
0.1 percentage point over the next year or so, while the effect on aggregate emerging 

markets growth is roughly a wash
, as gains by oil exporters offset losses by importers.  

By the same token, our inflation outlook is a bit higher i
n the near term but little 
changed further out.  However, no resolution of the problem of Iran™s nuclear 

program is in sight, and we are attuned to the risk of much steeper rises in oil prices. 
All told, considering the momentous developments taking place 
in the global 
economyŠMario Draghi™s plan to save the euro, China™s struggle to achieve a soft 

landing, and 
fluctu
ations in commodity marketsŠthe outlook for U.S. trade is, well, 
not so momentous.  In the first half of this year, notwithstanding the global slowdown 

and the rising dollar, net exports managed to eke out a 
small 
positive contribution to 
U.S. GDP growth.  We received trade data for July yesterday; both exports and 

imports fell, but the trade balance was little changed.  Accordingly, we retain o
ur 
view that for the next couple of quarters, the combination of slowing foreign growth, 

a still
-elevated dollar, and the effects of the drought on agricultural production leads 

to some moderation in export growth, and the external sector imposes a modest 
drag 
on the economy.  After that, net exports gradually shift back toward neutral, as the 

global economy picks up and European stresses subside, so that a reversal of flight-

to-safety flows allows the dollar to start depreciating.  Thanks to Mr. Draghi, th
is 
projection is based on a somewhat lower path of the dollar than in the July Tealbook, 
         
  
      
                     
   
                   
                                                         and thus a bit faster export growth and less drag from net exports.  Andreas will 

continue our presentation. 
MR. LEHNERT.
4 I™ll be discussing material from our recent 
QS report 
on financial stability 
and from an earlier memo on the effect of low interest rates.  In our 
report, the most prominent shocks we identified were an intensification of the 

European sovereign crisis and a U.S. recession, perhaps brought on by a s
uboptimal 
resolution of the ﬁfiscal cliff.ﬂ  The major vulnerabilities we highlighted were, first, 

the market™s perception that some large banks remain weak, despite substantial 

increases in capital and liquidity, which raises the likelihood of funding runs and 

increases the cost of raising capital; second, the unstable funding model of brokerŒ 

dealers
; and, third, the persistent risk of runs on money market funds. 
We have also placed increasing emphasis on vulnerabilities stemming from the 
low interest rate 
environment, and that™s what I™ll focus on today.  After all, long-
term Treasury yields haven™t been below 2.5 percent for a sustained period since 

1954, a time when the financial system was quite different. 
A low short-
term interest rate policy, given st
rained household and business 
fundamentals, is designed to improve macro performance.  The benefits arise, in part, 

from increases in asset prices and
, thus, the value of collateral held by businesses and 
households.  These increases should, in turn, enhan
ce financial stability. 
But a low 
rate environment could lead investors trying to boost yields to borrow too much, take 

on too much risk, or bid up asset prices enough to stretch valuations.  Relatedly, 

important parts of the financial system might become
 vulne
rable to a rapid rise in 
rates. 
To assess these risks, we surveyed a wide range of asset markets and financial 
institutions looking for signs of excessive valuations, greater leverage, 
or increased 

risk
-taking.  To summarize, we found little evidence that the low rate environment 
has fostered additional vulnerabilities to date: 
 Valuations for broad asset classes are 
not stretched
, and we identified only a few isolated pockets of increased 
risk
-taking. 
As shown by the top panel on your first exhibit, 
estimated term premiums 
for 
10-year Treasury yields are quite low, due in part to safe-haven demand for 

Treasuries resulting from strains in Europe.  Term 
premiums
Šand thus Treasury 
yields
Šcould increase quickly if, for example, concerns about the U.S. fis
cal situation were to intensify. 
Your next three panels cover valuations in three major U.S. asset classes: 
equities, residential real estate
, and corporate bonds.  Overall, valuations across these 
asset classes show little sign of pressure.  As shown in the middle left, stocks are not 

trading at unusually high multiples; indeed, forward price-
earnings ratios are 
generally well within their ranges over the past 20 years.  Our measure of residential 

real estate valuation, shown to the right, is near an all-
time low.  Risk premiums
 in 
4 The materials used by Mr. Lehnert are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 
       
           
                   
              
  
        
       the high-
yield corporate bond market
Šas measured by the implied forward spread far 
out in the future (the black line in the bottom-
left panel)
Šare near their average of 
the past 20 years, notwithstanding the extraordinary highs 
experience
d during the 
financial crisis. 
However, valuations of assets in narrower and less-liquid markets have shown 
signs of pressure. Issuance of so
-called leveraged loans has been robust this year.  
Moreover, there is a trend toward lighter use of loa
n covenants and increased 
leverage.  As shown to the right, average ratios of debt to earningsŠknown as a debt 

multiple
Šamong this class increased further this year, although it remains below its 
pre
-crisis levels. 
Your next exhibit considers evidence on l
everage and 
risk
-taking
.  In the 
nonfinancial sector, as shown by the pink and blue regions in the top panel, household 

and business leverage has continued the decline begun in the recession.  Government 

borrowing, by contrast, has picked up, leaving the ratio of debt held by the public to 

GDP at its highest level since W
orld W
ar II. 
As shown in the middle two panels, there are signs that, potentially, commercial 
banks are taking increased interest rate risk.  Banks have increased their holdings of 

long-
mat
urity securities. As a result, their portfolios may be more sensitive to a 
sudden rise in interest rates than they were a year ago, depending on their interest rate 

hedges.  The low interest rate environment, combined with an unlimited FDIC 

guarantee on transactions accounts, has attracted a surge of deposits to banks.  The 

ability to issue deposits at below
-market rates should benefit banks were rates to rise; 
however, we don™t have historical experience to judge the sensitivity of these new 

deposits to a rise in rates.  That said, as discussed in the Tealbook, results from a 

recent informal survey of banks suggested they did not think it was likely that 

deposits would decline rapidly when the added insurance expires.  We™re currently 

working with economists and supervisors from throughout the Federal Reserve 

System on an analysis of interest rate risk at banks and plan to include the results in 

our December report. 
Life insurance companies are vulnerable to extended periods of low interest rates, 
in part b
ecause they have a significant body of liabilities with guaranteed returns that 

exceed current yields on safe assets.  As a consequence, insurers may be feeling 

particular pressure to reach for yield by extending their exposure to duration and 

credit risk. 
Indeed, as shown in the bottom left, the average maturity of insurers™ 
bond portfolios has risen in recent years, as firms accept greater duration risk.  

However, the shift isn™t particularly dramatic, and we are working with colleagues 

here and at the F
ederal Reserve Bank of Chicago to understand the risks faced by, and 
posed by, these institutions. 
The panel to the right shows the rapid rise in assets of real estate investment 
trusts
ŠREITs
Šthat specialize in holding agency-
guaranteed mortgage
-backed 
sec
urities.  While these institutions are something of a niche player, their business 

model of funding agency MBS holdings with repo, while vulnerable to sharp rate 
            
    
                 
      
            
     
        
  
     
   
  
   
                                                   rises, has proved quite profitable in recent years, producing double-
digit returns for 
shareho
lders.  This growth is one of the clearest indications we have of the 
willingness of some investors to take on additional interest rate risk in order to earn 

higher current returns.  This willingness may be enhanced by the apparent safety of 

investing in G
SE-guaranteed securities. In terms of their systemic threat, at their 
current scale, the sudden distress of mortgage REITs would likely be painful but 

manageable for the broader financial system. 
I™ll conclude with a less quantifiable form of risk produced by the low 
interest 
rate 
environment, related to a sense that a great deal of money is sitting on the sidelines.  

Consider two examples:  First, respondents to the SCOOS report that their clients 

have significant unused borrowing capacity; and second, pr
ivate equity firms focused 
on leveraged buyouts have elevated levels of committed but uninvested capital.  
All 

of this and more amounts to ﬁdry powderﬂ that could be deployed quickly.  Thus, 

while our ongoing monitoring efforts have so far found little evi
dence that the low 
interest rate environment has led to excessive increases in leverage, asset valuation
, or 
risk
-taking, investors do have the means to rapidly shift their portfolios.  Ed Nelson 
will continue our presentation. 
MR. NELSON.
5 I will be referring to the packet 
labeled ﬁMaterial for Briefing 
on the Summary of Economic Projections.ﬂ 
As shown in the top panel of exhibit 1, under your individual assessments of 
appropriate monetary policy, you see real GDP expanding only moderately t
his year
, but you expect the pace of the recovery to pick up next year and that economic 

growth in 2014 and 2015 will be somewhat above its longer-run value.  

Correspondingly, you expect the unemployment rate, shown in the second panel, to 

stay near recent readings for the rest of the year
, before gradually declining over the 
subsequent three years.  All of you expect that the unemployment rate at the end of 

2015 will be appreciably below its present rate; nevertheless, almost all of you expect 

it to be above what you judge to be its longer-run normal level.  Turning to the 

bottom two panels, you generally expect total PCE inflation of around 1¾ percent 

over the four quarters of 2012.  For 2013 through 2015, you generally see core and 

overall inflation stayi
ng close to or slightly below your 2 percent inflation objective. 
Exhibit 2 tabulates the ranges and the central tendencies of your projections, 
along with comparisons to the June SEP and the current staff forecast.  Compared 

with your June projections, you now anticipate a slightly stronger recovery and a 

somewhat larger decline in the unemployment rate over the projection period.  Your 

inflation outlook is little changed.  The Tealbook forecastŠwhich embeds the 

assumption of no additional accommodationŠputs economic growth in 2013 and 

2014 at the lower end of your central tendency, and the unemployment rate above it; 

the 2015 forecasts, however, are within the central tendency.  The Tealbook forecast 

for inflation runs consistently below your central tendencies for 2013 to 2015. 
5 The materials used b
y Mr. Nelson are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
                   
             
     
     
       
   
      
     
               
        
          
  Exhibit 3 provides an overview of your assessments of the appropriate path for 
the federal funds rate.  As shown in the top panel, most of you think that it will not be 

appropriate to begin raising the funds rate until 2014 or later.  About two-
thirds of 
you now see firming only beginning in 2015 or 2016, compared with about one-third 

of you in June.  Four of youŠtwo fewer than in JuneŠ
now believe that economic 

conditions will warrant increasing the federal funds rate before 2014.  Two of you 

favoring a funds rate increase before 2014 cited the need to tighten policy relatively 

soon in order to prevent inflation from exceeding the Committee™s 2 
percent 

objective, and two pointed to the need to forestall financial imbalances.  Many of 

those who would not raise the funds rate until 2014 or later cited sizable output or 

unemployment gaps alongside an inflation profile unlikely to exceed 2 percent over 

the medium run. 
The bottom two panels of the exhibit provide your assessments of the app
ropriate 
target for the federal funds rate at the end of each year of the forecast period and over 

the longer run.  For the 6 participants who 
see the funds rate leaving the effective 

lower bound in 2014 
or earlier
, the median value for 
the funds rate at 
the end of 2014 
is 
1.75 percent.  The 12 participants who expect that the funds rate will not leave the 

lower bound until 2015 judge that the appropriate funds rate at the end of that year 

will be 1.6 percent or less, while the 1 
participant who sees the st
art of firming in 
2016 sees the funds rate at 75 basis points at the end of that year (not shown). 
Fourteen of you now judge that ﬁappropriate monetary policyﬂ calls for a more 
accommodative path for the federal funds rate than in your June SEP, involving 
either 
a lower target for the funds rate at the end of the initial year of firming or a shift out 

in the first year of firming.  Moreover, 11 of you indicated that appropriate policy 

calls for additional asset purchases
, at this meeting or before long. 
Exhibit 4 depicts the economic conditions that you anticipate for the year in 
which you expect the first funds rate increase. Your projected unemployment rates 

range from about 5¾ to 8 percent, with a median of 6½ percent, while your inflation 

projections 
are in a narrow range of roughly 1¾ to 2¼ percent, with a median rate of 
2 percent.  Generally, participants who expect the first funds rate increase in
 2012 or 2013 (shown by the 
blue triangle and 
white diamonds) see a higher level of 
unemployment at the time of 
the first funds rate increase
 than do those reporting later 
firming
 dates (shown by the gray circles, dark blue squares, and 
the 
gray triangle
). The final exhibit reviews your assessments of the uncertainty and risks 
surrounding your economic projections.  As shown in the top two panels in the 

column on the left, almost all of you continue to indicate that you judge the current 

level of uncertainty about GDP growth and unemployment to be higher than the 

average level over the past 20 years.  The co
rresponding panels to the right indicate 
that you continue to view the risks to GDP growth as weighted toward the downside 

and, accordingly, the risks to unemployment as weighted to the upside.  Many of you 

attributed your continued emphasis on downside growth risks to concerns about 

Europe and U.S. fiscal policy; other factors cited included uncertainty about the level 

and growth rate of potential output and the possibility of a hard landing in China.  
      
  
  
    
     
    
                                Turning to the bottom two panels, 8 of you assess the uncertainty attending your 

projections for total PCE inflation as higher, and another 10 of you see the 

uncertainty as broadly similar to the average level of uncertainty over the past 

two
 decades.  Most of you continue to see the risks to inflation, shown 
to the right, as 
broadly balanced.  Thank you.  That concludes the staff presentations. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much for your presentation.  The floor is 
open for questions.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Wilcox, the lower right-
hand panel 
displays a model estimate, and I 
was wondering what it™s an estimate of. 
MR. WILCOX. It™s a statistical exercise that tries to combine several different sources of 
information.  First and most broadly, it combines the payroll survey estimate of job gain with an 
adjusted measure from the household survey, 
where the adjustments
Š MR. LACKER.  Have been comparable. 

MR. WILCOX.  Štry to take the household measure and do about a dozen or 
15 adjustments that put it on
, as conceptually 
as possible, 
an apples
-to-apples basis with the 
establishment survey. 
The second category of information that it builds in is that we had one of our seasonal 
adjustment experts, Charlie Gilbert, take a close look at this series, specifically with a question in 

mind of trying to disc
ern effects on seasonal factors that stem from the timing of the sharp 
downdraft in employment in 2008 
and
 2009, and to advise us on the extent to which those timing 
effects may have bled into seasonal factors
, causing published estimates of seasonally adjusted 
job growth around the turn of the year to be systematically higher than they should actually be. 
The third type of information that™s built in is a regression
-based analysis of weather 
effects.  It seems like a dim memory at this point, but we had, a
s you will recall, an 
extraordinarily warm winter this year, and there was some speculation that that may have shifted 

the timing of employment.  Those weather
-related effects are pretty small, but they™re included 
           
    
                    
       
       
     here
, as well
, for the sake of completeness.  And then around all of that, what we do is just apply 
a simple 
Kalman 
filter to the resulting series in an effort to extract for you where we think all this 
statistical evidence would point in terms of what™s the best available estimate of job gain
, taking 
account of all that information that™s available to us. So it™s
, at some level
, nothing more than a 
statistical exercise to try to extract signal from noise.  On the other hand, it packs in a 
tremendous amount of information. 
MR. LACKER.  Those all sound like very useful and constructive statistical initiatives.  I 
just wondered what the target you were aiming at trying to estimate is. I mean, is it the trend or 

the current value? 
MR. WILCOX. It™s essentially a smooth
ed trend that takes account of both the 
information in the establishment survey and the household survey.  I mean, I could reiterate: 
It takes account of that
; it tries to adjust for weather and 
seasonal
Š MR. LACKER.  You™re aiming at a true measure of the cu
rrent gain
, or a true measure of 
the trend? 
MR. WILCOX.  True measure of the current gain, smoothing through 
a variety of 
sources of noise. 
MR. LACKER.  A smooth measure of the current gain.  I™m less confused now. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You™re confused at a 
higher level. President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I actually drove back from our western 
symposium this year with two geriatric dogs and other things, but I want to comment on the fact 

that driving across the s
tate of Nebraska, what
 struck me was the drought and the corn crops and 
just how dead the entire s
tate of Nebraska looked
, at least from Interstate 80. 
       
                                 You made some reference to the drought and the corn crop, and I remember reading 
somewhere
ŠI couldn™t find it in my searchingŠabout your estimated effects of the drought on 
GDP this quarter and next.  And I™d like to hear you talk a little more about what you think those 

effects were
; the ramifications of those effects, of how they bleed, in some sense, through in your 

forecast t
o your employment forecast, for example, through an Okun™s l
aw measure because 
GDP is lower
; how much impact you thought it had on the gap in the near term; and how that 
dissipates through your forecast.  Can you just walk me through those linkagesŠt
his is clearly a 
classic supply shock of 
a dr
oughtŠand how much then it feeds into other things that matter that 
we look at a lot for monetary policy? 
MR. WILCOX.  So I™ll take a first crack at it and invite my other colleagues to jump in 
with additional i
nformation.  We thought in July we had built in some quantity-
related effects
Š about $10 billion is my recollectionŠon farm output.  This time, based on USDA assessments of 

field conditionsŠ
people may be doing something a little more systematic, out walking
 in the 
fields with their clipboard and so forth to look at corn yields
; corn is one of the crops that is most 
affected
Šwe think that it™s about a $30 billion hit to real farm output this time, so substantially 
bigger than what we had built into the July projection. 
We think that that™s likely to show up mostly in a decumulation of inventories in the third 
and fourth quarters.  The way that inventory arithmetic works, the hit to GDP growth is going to 

be concentrated in the third quarter.  We™ve got the same rate of inventory decumulation built 

into the fourth quarter, but because it™s the same rate of decumulation in both quarters, the 
effect 
on GDP growth 
we™ve penciled in 
is zero in the fourth quarter.  
We also think there will be a 
small additional negative effect on agricultural exports as well, so that™s where in terms of the 

GDP accounting
Š        
       
   
                       
   
  
                    
MR. PLOSSER.  And that led to how much of a decrease in your estimate of 
GDP growth for the third quarter? 
MR. WILCOX.  About 0.8 
percent
age point o
n GDP growth
. MR. PLOSSER. 
Yes, 0.8 
percent
age point.  That™s what I thought 
I remembered. 
MR. WILCOX.  We thinkŠwe hopeŠthat™s going to be a transitory supply shock and 
that next year
, our planning assumption has been, crop yields are going to come back to normal.  
Now, there™s sort of a philosophical question about when that actually occurs.  If we were 
operating 
in annual data, it would be perfectly clear that it would happen in 2013.  
However
, the 
way that the BEA does it, and we™ve been in very close contact with them, is 
to smooth that 
through the four quarters of the calendar year, so that snap back to normal crop yields, 
basically 

at this point, of course, by assumption, occurs in the firs
t quarter. 
So we™re mimicking 
the 
BEA™s algorithm in packing in the return to a normal level of GDP in the first quarter of 2013.  

That™s not based on any pretense that anybody actually knows that that™s the way the corn plants 

are going to grow in 2013.  
That™s just the 
BEA 
methodology.  I wouldn™t have anything better to 
suggest to them if I were in their shoes. 
Now, farm proprietors™ income actually sees a much smaller effect because prices are up 
and there™s crop insurance, and so the implications for 
nominal farm income are much less 
severe than they are for real output. 
We think that there™s likely to be very little effect on 
employment because we™ve made the assumption that employers are going to smooth through 

this transitory effect.  I wouldn™t be surprised, of course, if there was some effect on things like 

farm equipment manufacturers and that sort of thing, but I think that™s going to be lost in the 

noise in terms of our ability to actually 
estimate it. 
       
                               
   
   MR. PLOSSER.  So this wouldn™t show up in 
any sense on your estimates of the 
magnitude of your output gap over the next two quarters? 
Would you raise that? 
MR. WILCOX.  M
echanically, I suspect our output gap will be a little wider over the 
second half of this year, and then it will just come back in the first quarter of 2013.  Is that right, 
Bill? 
MR. 
WASCHER
.  Yes, that™s right.  Because we tend to set potential growth on an 
annual basis, we didn™t make an explicit adjustment to the gap measures you see in the Tealbook 

for the effects of the 
drou
ght
.  I would say that in terms of when we look at Okun™s l
aw relationships and thinking about the path of the unemployment rate, 
we did take out the effect of 

the drought from potential in that equation.  So we didn™t want the drought to affect the 

unempl
oyment rate forecast. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Ye
s, that™s kind of what I was trying to get at.  Okay.  Thank you very 
much. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  One minor place it might show up, because we didn™t do the 
adjustment, would be in the Tealbook 
B rules thing. It™s pretty small, but the 
rules
 would 
respond to that. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Did I just understand correctly that you removed the effect of the 
drought on the gap, the unemployment rate gap? 
MR. WILCOX.  In our Okun™s l
aw analysis, in setting the unemployment rate. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It will bounce right back. 

MR. WILCOX.  I™m sorry? 
                           
               
    VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The effects are just going to go away in two quarters. 
MR. WILCOX. It is a transitory effect.  The fu
nds rate is constrained at zero.  So it 
doesn™t have any implication for the funds rate.  And in terms of calibrating the response of the 

unemployment rate to the GDP gap, we sterilized the GDP gap from transitory dro
ught
-related 
effects on GDP. 
MR. LACKER
.  Okay.  So let me just ask the question for which 
this is most germane
Š do inflation dynamics depend on this adjustment? 
MR. WILCOX. 
I think we™re talking about splitting a micron here, butŠ 
MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, but I™m just very curious about the principle here. 
MR. WILCOX.  The methodology is intended precisely to seal off the implications for 
core inflation.  I should say, of course, 
the first
-order implication for inflation is through food 
prices. 
MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, right, righ
t. MR. WILCOX.  That has been allowed to feed through. 

MR. LACKER.  Right.  But in terms of the gap™s effect on inflation, you want to sterilize 
it from the effect that the dr
ought is going to have on real output and employment in a 
year 
or 
two. 
MR. WILCOX
.  Correct, y
es. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question for Andreas.  
On exhibit 2, you have 
this chart that looks at nonfinancial sector credit to GDP.  
I keep staring at it, and I am still trying 
to figure out what implications I™m supposed to draw from it.  The secular uptrend from 1956, at 
          
      
              
       
                   
best
, flattens out for a while
.  So the first question is what implication do you think we were 
supposed to draw from this
?  And, second, if you looked at a char
t of 
nonfin
ancial sector assets 
to GDP, would that also show 
mostly a secular 
uptrend?  And then, how do you put those two 
together? 
MR. LEHNERT.  I think the
re are
 key macro questions that are impli
cated 
by your 
question, which I™m not going to touch, but 
just from a financial stability perspective, at the very 
highest level
, in some sense, financial stability concerns in a low-
rate environment arise when 
you see people and businesses borrowing more.  This picture was just supposed to 
be an easy 
way 
to portray the fact that we™re not seeing households and businesses borrowing more. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Right.  We could 
also interpret it as, gee, credit to GDP 
is still really, really high
, and
, therefore, that means bad things.  That is what I was sort of 
getting 
at. 
So you don™t take a negative signal away at all from the total level of credit to GDP is still 
high? 
MR. LEHNERT.  Ye
s, okay.  I treated that as a separate question.  So then there™s a 
question, are we approaching some kind of 
fiscal moment
, some sort of S
argent
Wallace 
moment, where the global carrying capacity for U.S. sovereign obligations is being reached? 

That™s something that we highlighted in our report as a potential risk.  
If there™s 
a material 
worsening in the fiscal outlook, 
or if 
there™s some really ugly resolution to the debt ceiling 

negotiations in January and so forth, all those things could have negative implications for future 

stability. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But the total level here, if you add household, business, 
and government together, that™s not a good sign. 
MR. LEHNERT.  If you look across countr
ies
, you would see a lot of different 
levels. 
           
          
   
  
      
    
   
           
    
     
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
They™re 
all over the place. 
MR. LEHNERT
.  Exactly.  So I don™t know why Denmark is one and Japan i
s a different 
one, but we can just judge the 
United States
 by its own history. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  First, I wanted to thank Andreas for a very good summary
, very helpful 
graphics
, and so on.  We™re in the middle of doing our 
SABR
 analysis for banks, and one of the 
positive attributes we have noticed is that we seem to be seeing a brighter picture for the average 

bank.  For example, the ones that we rate one or two probably are performing 
the best that we™ve 
seen in terms of the percentage of potential 
downgrades since December of 2006.  So I think 
that™s one positive aspect that wasn™t included.  I™m not being critical, but when you look at your 

second panel of long-
term securities held by comm
ercial banks and so on, there seems to be a 
healthier tenor, and we™re not done with the analysis yet, but I just wanted to point that out. 
With regard to seasonality, I wanted to ask Dave Wilcox about the August employment 
numbers; I think I™m correct in 
saying that that is a number that gets revised more frequently 

than others.  I think 17 of the last 22 years, i
t™s been revised, and if I remember correctly, last 
year it went from zero to 44,000 to 104,000, and I assume we™re taking account of the fact th
at 
that is often a highly unreliable number.  Am I correct? 
MR. WILCOX.  We™re taking account of the fact that it is the best possible information, 
and we don™t confuse it with truth, absolutely.  [Laughter] 
MR. FISHER.  So we assume it gets revised more o
ften than not? 
MR. WILCOX. 
Yes. 
           
          
   
              
             
  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
The BLS has a 
confidence intervalŠ
the 90 percent 
confidence 
interval is 
plus or minus 100,000.  So that gives you an idea. 
MR. WILCOX.  It™s a sample-
based estimate. It is based on a very large 
sample of 
employers. It™s a universal sample of large employers and a statistically drawn probability 
sample of medium an
d smaller employers, but there are a host of issues associated with 
constructing that number, including the fact that not everybody th
at ultimately will report
, 
reports in the first wave of responses and that seasonal adjustment, as my remarks described 

earlier, involves 
a great deal of science but some art as well.
  So I don™t have any specific reason 
for doubting or casting aspersions on the August number, but you™re absolutely correct that 

month in and month out, that™s a number that is subject to two-sided revision. 
MR. FISHER.  And then lastly, just listening to Steve Kamin, this is perplexing about oil 
and gas 
prices
, and particular
ly prices at the pump.  There may be some seasonality in terms of 
the 
switchover 
that
 occurs, but given the weaker economy, which I think almost all of our 
forecasts have envisioned, and given the production that™s taking place stateside, even 

accounting f
or the storm that took place in the Gulf, it just seems odd that we might expect oil 
prices to increase rather than hold level or decrease.
  And f
or what it™s worth, the ﬁoiliesﬂ that I 
speak to
Šfrom the independents to Tillerson at Exxon and so onŠ
their expectation is that this 
has been a bit of a bulge, and that it™s more likely to settle down and actually decrease somewhat.  

For what it™s 
worth
Šand I always emphasize that because Mr. Tarullo insists that I do so when I 
talk about my anecdotal evidence
ŠI just wanted to pass that on. 
MR. KAMIN
.  Thank you. 
Just to be clear, our baseline forecast for crude oil prices in 
the markets is, indeed, to decline over time from the current level. 
MR. FISHER.  It wasn™t clear the way you presented it.  So I wanted 
to add that. 
      
          
                     
    
  
   
    
   MR. KAMIN
.  Yes.  So just to clarify, what I was alluding to was future upside risks that 
could take place if geopolitical problems in the Middle East became more pronounced than they 
are now. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to come back to the financial 
stability handout, exhibit 2, 
chart
 1, which is ﬁN
onfin
ancial 
Sector 
Credit
-to-GDP Ratio.
ﬂ In 
answer to the earlier question, you said 
that the cross
-country evidence on this was all over the 
map, and that does not gibe with what I understood the cross-country evidence to be, which was 

that this line is basically trending up across the developed economies.  S
o it looks very similar 
actua
lly. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Sorry. I meant the cross-country evidence on the level.  I thought that 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley was asking, is 2.5 a magic number? I mean, this number is much bigger 
in some countries and much smaller in other countries. 
MR. BULLARD.  Oka
y, but the picture would look the same. 
MR. LEHNERT. 
Yes. 
MR. BULLARD. 
It has always been trending up, I guess.  The developed world has 
always been trending up, 
is that right? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
The tricky part about this is if you have a secular trend 
of more intermediation, then this is going to be an upward-trending number, and so the degree of 

intermediation in a financial system really is important in terms of what 
number you 
get. 
               
         
              
    
              MR. BULLARD.  When people showed this picture to me over the year
s, I always said, 
well, this was 
financial market deepening
, and 
good things are happening in the 
intermediation 
sector
.  It didn™t pan out so well later. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Well, and presumably by analogy, 
then
, the fact that it™s 
now falling 
for the household and business sectors 
isŠ MR. BULLARD.  Y
es.  Okay, thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I just 
wanted to make a comment on the 
financial stability report. I continue to find a lot of value in this, and I think particularly as we 

look at these trends 
in a low interest rate environment, I would take no exception to the 
conclusion that right now imbalances are not obvious.  But just thinking back to how we thought 

about land values in the 1980s, in the late 1990s and early 2000s, as we watched banks begin to 

concentrate in commercial real estate and even some of the subprime exposures, the point at 

whi
ch to know when to take signal from some of those things is very difficult, notwithstanding 
supervisors and others 
looking at them.
  So I think as you continue to monitor this, as we get into 
December and beyond
, looking at where these trends are going 
wil
l be 
very important. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any other questions for our colleagues? 
[No 
response]  Okay.  Seeing none, on the agenda, we have an opportunity for participants who want 

to raise questions or issues related to financial stability
.  And Vice Chairman
, if you™d like to 
start off
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen and I were in B
asel 
over 
the weekend, and I have to say that there was a 
pretty strong sense of unanimity that what the 

ECB did was essentially the best that t
hey could accomplish, given the various constraints under 
                              
   
                 
  
 which 
they were 
operating.  The fact that the purchases could be unlimited means that the 
program has the potential for actually being an effective backstop, and the fact that the ECB will 
be pari p
assu 
with other bondholders is important because it really will reduce the pressures on 
private holders.  
So in effect, 
there may be private holders, if they view this as credible, who will 
actually want to invest in these sovereign instruments for a carry trade because the yield 
curves 

in these countries, 
of course
, are very, very steep. 
There™s also a bit of carrot now to incent proper actions by the government.  So if you do 
the right thing, we will intervene and we will hold down your debt service cost.  And I don™t 

think th
ere was that carrot before
, so I think that™s pretty significant.  I think that the ECB has 

essent
ially put on the table something that could take the risk of an interest rate-debt service-
fiscal deficit spiral a bit off the table as long as the countries do the right thing.
  And in addition, 
if these purchases do, in fact, materialize, I think this does push you in the direction toward 

further fiscal union.  After all, the ECB is backstopped by 
the entire 
euro zone, so such purchases 
will increase the joint and several nature of the union.
  And finally, I thought the other thing that 
was noteworthy abo
ut the ECB action was that it was a 22 to 
1 vote, with only 
Weidmann
 of the 
Bundesbank dissenting.  Given the fact that the German political leadership, 
at least for now
, seems to be supporting the ECB actions, this means that the Bundesbank™s opposition i
s somewhat marginalized at this point. 
So that™s the good news. 
Despite this, I don™t think we should kid ourselves.  I think the situation remains very 
tenuous despite the ECB™s supports.  I™d be, probably, slightly darker than Steve™s comments on 

this.
  Several issues worth highlighting: 
First, the ECB program would only activate if the 
countries actually negotiate an MOU with the 
euro group, and already we™re hearing signs 
that 
Spain seems to be reluctant or slow in terms of pursuing it.  In fact, the Spanish may decide that 
                       
         
       
            the backstop might be e
ffect
ive even if they don™t seek an MOU.  That seems like a highly risky 
strategy, but it is something that they might decide to do.
  Second, the program obviously will 
only continue if they stay on the progra
m. And, third, it™s going to take a while for this all to be 
implemented because the MOU has to be negotiated with the e
uro group
, and all of the finance 
ministers have to agree, and several parliaments actually have to approve the MOU.  So this idea 
that this is going to be happening very, very quicklyŠ
I think the market is probably a little bit 
ahead of itself in terms of how quick
ly this will come into play. 
Other issues
Šthe 
ECB program will not necessarily crowd in investors, because it™s not 
clear how long this is going to last.  So you might buy things, but you still have quite a bit of 

risk.  
You still have a very bad feedback 
loop from the austerity programs to the economy, to 
fiscal performance
, and
 the state of the banking system.  This doesn™t take any of that off the 
table, and there™s still no road map as to where we™re actually going in terms of the ultimate 

destination
:  What does greater fiscal union in Europe look like? 
So this is a very important 
thing that the ECB has done.  I think they did the best that they could possibly do, and the good 

thing is they put the problem back in the lap of the governments, 
where it b
elongs.  They have 
done what they can do now, and now it™s up to the governments to decide, both in the core and in 

the periphery, if 
they™re going to go along. 
The basic model
, though, of this whole situation hasn™t changed.  Countries have to show 
they™r
e on a sustainable path to regain market access.  The core countries are unwilling to be 
explicit about the level of support because of 
fears that this will undermine the effort.  The 
constitutional court decision in Germany today, which was actually mostly positive, affirmed 

that the German commitment is limited to 
•190 billionŠthat™s it, and so that™s sort of 
significant. 
            
     
          
              
  
   
     
 I think the unwillingness of the German Constitutional C
ourt to be explicit does create 
uncertainty that makes progress more difficult.
  So we do still have a long way to go, and we 
don™t have big, solid backstops to absorb shocks or support confiden
ce.  The ESM
ŒEFSF resources are
 still very much too small to credibly backstop Spain and Italy, and the ECB support 
may be too uncertain as t
o its sustainability.  So it™s progress, but there a
re still a lot of questions 
on the table. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you for the financial stability report.  Like President George, 
I do appreciate the monitoring that you™re doing in this area.  I just had two quick questions.  

They both relate to money market funds.  We™ve had an SEC proposal that wasn™t proposed, and 

I was wondering about your perspective looking at Europe, 
where there™s more than
 $1 trillion of 
money market funds 
and 
they have a mix of floating and fixed NAVs.  I don™t know how much 
time you spent looking at the European money market funds, but I™d be interested in your 

perspective on the industry™s concern with the floating NAV, which se
ems to have been 
successful in stopping forward movement.  And then the second question is, given that they have 

both floating and fixed NAVs in Europe, and the deposit rate went down to zero, is there 

anything to infer about interest on excess reserves fr
om the European money market fund 
experience with the deposit rate going to zero
? MR. LEHNERT. 
Are
 those questions you™d like me to answer? 
[Laughter] 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If not here, at another time. 

MR. LEHNERT.  Very, very briefly, and I certainly don™t approach your expertise in this 
area, we™ve long maintained that the redemption of par, what you call the fixed NAV, is useful in 

certain circumstances.  There are certain elements of the U.S. tax cod
e and other things that 
             
    
     
        
  
   
          
     
     
                                                                 make it useful
.  But basically
, at the end of the day, it™s just a safe place to put your money
, and 
if 
it floats up and down a bit, it™s not the end of the world.  And, of course, the European 
experience highlights that, although p
resumably their tax treatment might be slightly different. 

Then what™s happened to European money markets since the deposit rate went to zero? It
™s maybe still a little early to tell what the long
-run effects are, but the initial wave of reports is that 
there hasn™t been an implosion of the money markets. 
MR. POTTER.  One fund closed.  The Bank of AmericaŒMerrill Lynch fund closed. 

MS. LIANG
.  I guess I would just add that even at current rates, the proportion of U.S. 
funds that are waiving fees is really
 quite high, so the implications of further reductions in 
money fund rates could have effects.  S
ome ballpark estimates
Šthey are not precise
Šis 
that 
about 70 percent of U.S. funds are waiving their fees at this pointŠthat™s a pretty big number. 
CHAIRMAN BE
RNANKE.  Okay.  Why don™t we take a break for lunch?  When we 
come back, I™ll talk briefly about the experimental consensus forecast, and then we™ll go to the 

economic go
-round.  Why don™t we reconvene at 1 o™clock?
 [Lunch recess] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
6 Why
 don™t we 
re-commence?  Please feel free to finish 
your fruit or your cookie. I™ll provide the entertainment here.  [Laughter] 
I™d like to talk for just 
a few minutes about 
the 
latest iteration of the experimental consensus forecast.  You have a 
handout 
with that title. It proceeded in the same way as in previous iterations
:  The staff sent out 
a preliminary Tealbook forecast about a week in advance and 
received your comments. We also 

had the benefit 
this 
time of having the SEP.  So using all that, 
we came up with the forecast 
that™s shown in table 1 on page 1, and which is diagrammed in exhibit 1 on page 4. 
6 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
                  
           
      
    
  
      Like the Tealbook, this forecast or projection is conditioned on no change in policy.  That 
is, it™s 
conditioned on the August policies of continuing the MEP and late 2014 guidance.  
Generally speak
ing, the data are quite similar to 
the 
JulyŒAugust consensus, which is shown 
immediately below.  One exception is the 2013 real GDP forecast on the very first line, 
2.2 percent, which is a little bit weaker.  That was not inconsistent with the comments that came 

on the first draft
; most people either saw the near term as being a bit weaker or about the same
.  But I want to come back to that number in a moment.  The unemployment and inflation numbers 

are pretty similar, and if you care to look at the figure, you™ll see that the trajectories are very 

similar obviously, particularly relative to the standard errors. 
Like last time
, we also looked at the consensus forecast under alternative policy 
assumptions, and that™s given in table 3 on page 3.  Under each variable, the first line, the status 

quo is, again, the same as the consensus forecast in t
able 1.  That™s the forecast assuming the 
August policies continue.  The subsequent lines include, first, a chan
ge in the guidance to 
mid-2015, so simply 
a mechanical moving out of the interest rate path to mid-2015, and then 
subsequent 
additions of 
a $750 billion or $1 trillion LSAP program.  So that gives the 
alternative
s.  The differences are consistent with the 
FRB
/US analysis
; I™ll come back to that 
point as well.
  And 
exhibit
 2 shows the paths for the federal funds rate, the unemployment 
rate, 
and inflation under optimal control, under the no-
policy
-change consensus forecast in red, and 
then the alternative policies provided in t
able 3. 
Now, this time an issue came up
, which was less of a concern last time, but 
it raises an 
important question that I think the subcommittee is going to have to look at, which is that, of 

course, the SEP is conditional on each person™s view of optimal monetary policy.  And in this 

case, if you turn to table 2, which shows median forecasts in the September SEP, you™ll see the 
        
           
     
    
  
     
    
      SEP is broken into two categories
: all participants and participants who assume further easing. 
A major
ity of people submitted a forecast in which they assumed that the guidance would be 
advanced to 2015 and that we would undertake additional asset purchases. 
So the SEP submissions actually assume that change in policy.  So then the question is, 
how do you get from those SEP projections back to the no-policy-
change baseline?
  And what 
the staff proposed, and what they did, 
was basically they took these policy differentials that are 
in t
able 3
, and they subtracted from the SEP results to get the baseline.  An
d to the extent that 
those differentials are not accurate or are different from what people expect, then that will, of 

course, create some noise in the baseline forecast. 
So I raise this for a couple of reasons.  The first is that we need to think aboutŠ
and we 
talked about this last time
Šwhether the consensus forecast we would want to release would be 
the pre-
meeting status quo policy forecast
ŠI think President Lockhart suggested that last time
Š or the postmeeting inclusive
-of-the-action forecast, or both.  We could consider both
; I think we 
need to discuss that.  If we do both, then we will have to figure out how to make sure people are 

comfortable with both the before and the after, if you see what I™m saying. 
For this meeting, I think it will not 
be 
very m
uch of a problem.  What I had proposed to 
do is, as was given to you earlier on, in 
item
 5 after the policy decision tomorrow, I will ask you 

whether you are comfortable with the consensus forecast inclusive of the policy action.  And if 

we do take policy 
action, then this whole issue will be irrelevant because we™ll be looking at the 
policies assuming 
the further easing
Šat least for those participants who submitted that. 
But I 
just want to flag this point and note that we are planning a discussion in October of this whole 

project, and certainly one of the issues we™ll want to discuss is whether or not we want to look at 

ex ante, ex post
, or both forecasts, and how we would best extract that information.  So, again, 
                   
               
         
    tomorrow after the policy decision, I™ll ask you if you are comfortable with the consensus 
forecast, including whatever policy decisions we m
ake; are 
comfortable, with reservations; or 
have a 
very 
different view.  And 
I™ll 
ask you
, if you have a different view, 
to briefly state 
what 
that 
difference is.
  Any questions or comments? Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
You have this issue that the SEP has some people 
who 
have no change in policy; others have changes in policy.  That™s going to still be an outstanding 

issue going forward.  Do you have any thoughts on how we wouldŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that™s what I™m raising
Šwe have to figure out how to 
deal with that
.  One possibility would be to specifyŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  A, B
, and C? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, ye
sŠI suppose.  If we™re going to do the ex ante, 
before
-meeting projection, then everybody would be asked to make a projection conditional on 
the policy prior to the meeting, and the forecast could be used to say, 
ﬁWe thought this was 
unsatisfactory.  That™s why we took the action we did today.
ﬂ  Alternatively, we could ask for a 

forecast conditional on one or more policy actions.  But that™s an issue that 
this particular 
exercise has made clear, and I™m just flagging it for discussion by the subcommittee. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It™s interesting to see the difference that people submit in 
terms of the policy, because you actually find out what people think 
about how 
efficacious the 
policy is
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, of course.  
That™s right.  That™s certainly one of the 
benefits of doing that.  But everything that we are considering here also has the cost of 

multiplying the number of projections and forecasts we™re asking people to do, and that™s 

something we need to take into account.  
President Lacker. 
       
              
         
           
          
MR. LACKER.  You mentioned parts of the consensus forecast process.  We™re asked to 
provide a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, and I™d urge the staff and all of us to give 
some thought to what that ought to mean.  As I read the instructions, I thought of f
our different 
interpretations of that.  You take as a given that what we™re trying to do in writing down a 

forecast is 
to write
 down the mean of a joint distribution of the economy and policy.  Well, if you 
ask us to submit a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, are you asking us to replace our 

reaction function with one that™s fixed at that path unchangingly, 
and averaging over that? 
What 
do all 
of 
the shocks have to be? 
What™s the most likely outcome that delivers that as the policy 
reaction
Šwhat
 economy is weak enough to justify that policy?  That™s a different question.  Or, 
do we take 
our reaction function and add-
factor it so that it delivers that policy 
as a mean? 
There™s a bunch of different ways you can think of doing that, but we ought to be precise about 

it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course
Šwe™ll have to be precise.  These are 
complexities. 
One possibility would be to have everybody, again, assume appropriate monetary 
policy and 
deliver that joint distribution 
that you™re describing; and then, 
try to see if th
ere™s a 
center of gravity 
of that, which looks like the consensus; describe that consensus; and then 
describe those wh
o differ and qualitatively how they differ.  So that would be one approach.  
Another approach could be, for example, to ask people to use a specific reaction function or to 

specify their own reaction function.  
President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. 
Yes
Šthank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I like the idea
, in principle, 
of having a consensus forecast based on status quo policy and then a consensus forecast based on 

the policy action.  I think, though, that 
in practice
, the latter is going to be very challenging
, because you could easily imagine that the Committee could come up with a choice of a policy 
            
  
     
                 
    
action that they had not considered ex ante.  And then it becomes very difficult to know how the 
timing would work and to 
get the logistics to work. 
CHAIRMAN BERNA
NKE.  No, absolutely.  And again, I think Governor Yellen™s 
subcommittee will solve these problems for us [
laughter] and bring that to us in October.  
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Let me just reiterate on this. I do think that the market expectation o
f the Committee™s policy as of a certain date, which encompasses all aspects of monetary policy, is 

a fixed point that we could rally around.  Everyone c
an give their prognostication based on that.  
That would give us just one exercise to do.  Usually the 
market ex
pectation is not a long way off.  
It might be somewhat off, but it™s not a long way off, and it would simplify the exercise in my 

mind and would keep it clear
er what we™re 
doing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s, of course, what the British and some others do. 

MR. BULLARD.  Ye
s. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Does that address President Lacker™s concerns?  I wouldn™t have thought 
so. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not exactly.  Only if it™s approximately 
right
. MR. EVANS. 
Yes
Šright. 
CHAIRMAN BERN
ANKE.  Anybody else?  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  Narayana made the point I was going to make. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments or questions? 
Again, we will be 
discussing this at the next meeting.
  President Evans. 
             
    
                    
   
   
        
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a question 
that™s a little bit different
? I
t was triggered by 
some comments that President Fisher made earlier in asking questions, where he alluded to the 
fact that some people around the table would be, however you put it, more accepting of a high
er 
inflation rat
e than others, or whatever.  And in exhibit 2 on page 5, this question comes to my 

mind, which is, 
there is an optimal control path that is shown that has inflation rising to
ŠI think 
it™s 2.3 percent, 
if it™s co
nsistent with previous Tealbook-
style analyse
s. I personally don™t see 
anything in this path that™s inconsistent with our long
er-run strategic approach that we adopted in 
January, and I just wonder if that™s the sense of the Committee or if there™s an important 

divergence of opinion there, which seems to be one of the points that President Fisher might 

have been raising. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we are clear that our objective
s are
Šthink of a 
quadratic objective function.  They™re symmetrical.  The
re is an 
increasing marginal cost 
of being away from each objective. 
We have a balanced approach, but people w
ill have different 
models of the economy, and they™ll have different weights in their objective functions.  So this 
is 
obviously not a purely value-fee projection.  
President Bullar
d. MR. BULLARD. Is 
exhibit 2 something that would be distributed as part of the 
consensus 
forecast
? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, nothing has been decided, but I would
n™t 
imagine 
we would want to do all of those things. 
MR. BULLARD.  So this is just an internal document, 
like the ones we always use. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. EVANS.  I wasn™t asking a question about communications.  I was asking more a 
question about how we interpret our long
er-run strategic document, 
because at various times
, we 
          
          
                
    
  make diffe
rent comments about these types of outcomes, and it strikes me that there™s less 
agreement on that particular observation than sometimes is given by the words that we use. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I™ve said in press conferences that it™s a symmetric 
objective a
nd we have a balanced approach, and so on.  
Anyone else? 
[No response] 
All right. 
Now we come to the main event. Let™s start ou
r economic go-round with President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Intermeeting data
, I think, 
have done little to 
alter the economic picture.  We
™re in a period of sluggish economic growth, clearly.  
Our Fifth 
District survey measures, which fell sharply in July, 
have 
bounced back to neutral readings now, 
and the tenor of our anecdotal reports has been middling of late, consistent with reports we™
ve 
been hearing since the spring.  While activity is weak, we
™re not seeing any signs in our D
istrict 
of a dramatic slowdown around the cornerŠ
or a dramatic pickup
, for that matter. 
I thought it was appropriate, Mr. Chairman, that at our last meeting you took a longer-
term perspective by focusing on economic growth over the entire recovery.  As you noted, real 

GDP growth has averaged around 2 percent since the recovery began.  I think 2.2 percent is the 

pre
cise number.  We keep seeing swings in growth every couple of quarters around that average.  
So it mak
es sense to focus on the longer-run path around which we™re fluctuating, rather than 
just the last quarter or two.
  At our last meeting, Mr. Chairman, you talked about why growth 
was so low, and you discussed the spider charts put together by Board economists Greg Howard, 

Robert Martin, and Beth Anne Wilson.  I believe they refer to them as butterfly charts, but I™m 

not taking a stand on insects here.  
The 
main purpose of their paper was to show that advanced 

economies recover as rapidly from banking and financial crises as they do from other recessions, 

and I thought they did a pretty convincing job of that.  
Their charts also show that the current 

recovery
 in U.S. GDP tracks quite closely the typical advanced economy recovery from banking 
        
                                        and financial crises
, as well as the typical advanced economy recovery from housing slumps.  
The message I take away from their work is that we shouldn™t have expected to do much better 
than what we™ve experienced, and I think that™
s consistent with the message from some other 
research along the same lines.
  Now, the authors don™t focus on the notion of a gap, however.  
And for many people right now, the motivation for furt
her stimulus is that the relevant gap is 
quite large. 
I was quite pleased to see the memo from Bruce Fallick and Jeremy R
udd on this subject.  
It™s 
a helpful, well-organized description of how the staff thinks about and estimates economic 
slack
Šlays it out
 quite clearly.  And I think this memo should help clarify our mutual 
understanding going forward. 
But I
™d like to make a suggestion or two for further clarifying our 
discussions.  My suggestion is that we distinguish carefully between two distinct concep
tual 

notions of slack.  One concept is defined by the number to which the unemployment rate would 

converge in the future in the absence of unanticipated shocks and under appropriate monetary 

policy.  This is essentially what 
we™ve referred to as the 
ﬁlonger-run normal rate of 

unemployment.ﬂ I think that™s what we called it in our consensus statement in January.  T
hat™s a 
fine term for it.
  When people refer to sustainable employment, this is the concept I think of
:  what the economy is going to converge to 
several years from now, after the current shocks we
™ve 
experienced have dissipated and
, under appropriate policy, we get back to some trend with no 
shocksŠ
the mean forecast out there.
  Now, this number probably doesn™t vary much over time 
because
, by defi
nition
, the effect of current shocks has faded out by the time the economy 
converges to this number.  In fact, this number might be close to constant over time, or it may 

vary only with some slow-moving and predictable things, 
such as
 the demographic compo
sition 
of the labor force and the like.  So I think when you look at a construct like the NAIRU, the non-
              
      
                              
 accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, it
™s constructed with this notion in mind.  I™
ll come 
back to 
the 
NAIRU in a minute. 
The second concept of 
economic slack
, which I think we should distinguish from this 
first one
, is based on the reference level of the unemployment rate 
with which it is most 
appropriate to compare the current unemployment rate for the purposes of assessing current 
monetary pol
icy.
  Equivalently, one can think of this just as well in terms of the reference level 
for output 
with
 which it™s most appropriate to compare current output for monetary policy 
purposes.  
This is sometimes referred to as the 
ﬁnatural rate,
ﬂ although some writers refer to this 
as the 
ﬁefficient rate
ﬂ and reserve 
ﬁnatural rate
ﬂ for something distinct.  But 
ﬁnatural rateﬂ 
tends 
to be the term that 
we™ve used around the table here and 
that 
others 
have used
, and it™
s what the 
staff memo uses.  So 
I™
m going to stick with that term for this reference rate. 
In some very simple models, these two concepts are identical.  But in general, they™re not 
the same.  Indeed, in our standard, modern, mainstream models, almost all of the shocks hitting 

the model should affect the natur
al rate, even if the longer
-run normal rate doesn™t vary much.  
Now, not all of the shocks that hit the economy should affect the natural rate.  That™
s very clear 
in these models as well, and I™
ll talk more a little bit later about 
the difference and
 what kinds 
of 
shocks fall in that category.  By the way, I™d mention that modern models are all extensions of 

the 
Solow 
growth model that the Chairman referred to at our last meeting. That model is 
deterministic, nonmonetary.  These mod
els are extended to include a role for monetary factors 

and to include the role of uncertainty and unpredictable shocks to the economy.  I think the staff 

memo would have been clear
er if it had distinguished between these two notions of slack, 
because the 
estimates they present in this memo
Šsome are aimed at this longer
-run notion, and 
some pretty clearly are aimed at this short
-run reference notion.  
For example, the NAIRU 
            
       
             
      
          
  
      estimates they present ar
e designed to estimate the long
er-run normal rate of unemployment, 
because 
they 
deliberately exclude high
-frequency factors, but our models tell us that™
s clearly the 
wrong benchmark for policy in a world in which the economy is hit by a range of shocks.  
So my 
suggestion would be that staff 
members
, when they present 
to 
us a gap or a natural rate concept, 
be clear about what they™re trying to present.  I™ll note hereŠ
and I
™ll come back to this in a 
second
Šthe discussion we had about adjusting the natural rate for the drought
; that
™s a high
-frequency 
adjustment.  But the logic for making that adjustment is really identical to the logic for 
this reference rate that responds to current shocks. I think it would also aid clarity if we, in our 

discussions, were mindful of this distinction between these two.  The gap between the current 

unemployment rate and the long-run normal unemployment rate is exceptionally high by 

historical standards, and that gap clearly represents a tremendous amount of human suffering.  

And I can understandŠeveryone should understandŠwhy that would add urgency to the search 

for remedies to that.
  But modern macroeconomics is pretty clear about the gap that™
s relevant 
for the conduct of monetary policy, and it™s conceptually different from the gap defined by the 

distance 
between whe
re we are today and 
where we
™re going to be several years from now. 
So how do you estimate policy-
relevant gaps? Well, you need a model because you
™re 
talking about a counterfactual; 
you
™re talking about something that doesn™t happenŠ
it™s a latent, 
unobserved variable.  You need a model to be able to extract something like that from the data, 

and different models, obviously, 
give you different estimates. 
The staff memo presents estimates 
derived from EDO, the Board™s New Keynesian dynamic stochastic gener
al equilibrium
 model.  
And it delivers 
an estimate of the current gap 
of 
a little under 3 percent, defined this second way, 
the natural rate way. 
That compares 
with 
the NAIRU
-based estimate that the Tealbook provides 
        
      
                 
  
         
     
       
     
         of about 4½ 
percent, so you can see 
that you can get a significant difference there
.  This 
illustrates the extent to which the model you bring to bear makes a difference. 
So how big is the relevant gap?  Well, I™ve said beforeŠand I think others around the 
table have said before
Šthat we don™t think it™
s large, and we
™ve tried to describe economic 
factors that, in theoretical models
, would affect the natural rate and so would
n™t
 add to the gap.  
So they™d reduce your estimate of the gap.  
Now, rather than repeat myself
ŠI know that hasn™t 
stopped 
me in the past
ŠI thought I™d take the opposite tack and talk about what™s in the gap.  
The economy in a model that™s taken to the data is envisioned as driven by shocks and other 
developments.  Those shocks 
all affect the data you see, but not all of th
em affect the natural 
rate.  So the things that affect the economy, but don™t 
figure 
into this natural rate, are the things 
that affect the gap. 
What could those things be?  Well, this depends, obviously, on the model 
you use to interpret the data, the mode
l you use to extract an estimate of the natural rate, and so 
determine the gap. 
Let™s take a look at
 EDO, the Board™s DSGE model.  Its 
estimate of the gap 
is based on the natural rate, as I said, and it™s near 3 percent.  What would it take for the gap to 

be that large in that model?  Now, I should caution here
:  What I
™m going to say is based on my 
understanding of the model conceptually, theoretically.  I haven™t looked at the empirical 

decomposition, but based on my understanding of what™s going on in t
hat model
Šthis is true for 
a lot of other models as wellŠ
you
™d have to believe 
that 
one of two sorts of things 
is going on 
for the gap to be large. 
First, you could believe that firms have not fully adjusted their prices in 
response to the downward shift in demand that occurred four years ago.  These models are based 

on the notion of prices being sticky temporarilyŠ
that people set prices and
, for a time
, they™
re 
not incented to
ward, 
or they
™re prevented from
, adjusting their prices to reflect developments 
that they
™re seeing at their doorstep.
  So this price stickiness keeps prices from adjusting.  A 
fall 
                                             
     in demand shows up in quantities rather than prices at first, and then later, as prices adjust, the 
adjustment shows up in prices rather than quantities.  So that™
s the general mechanism.
  To 
attribute it all to that, you
™d have to believe that there™s 
an incredible amount of price stickiness 
in this economy.  I don™t find that plausible, and I don™t think it lines up with other evidence we 

have on the degr
ee of price stickiness in the economy. 
The second class of things you could believe, in order to believe that the gap is large, is 
that the economy has been hit by a string of large shocks that have not affected the model™s 

natural rate but have affected t
he economy.  And this is what the model attributes the large gap 
to.  What would those shocks be? Well, in EDO, there 
are
 only two kinds of shocks that would 
affect the gap.  One is a string of upward shocks to the degree of monopolistic power that firms 

have in setting prices. Firms are monopolistic competitors.  They have a little bit of pricing 

power, not total, and the amount of pricing power they have is determined by the degree of 

substitutability between goods.  For some reason, goods are less of a substitute for each other 

now, so firms have more pricing power, and t
hat™s why prices haven™t adjusted
, quantities have, 
and the gap is high.  Alternatively, you could believe that a string of analogous shocks in the 

labor market ha
s occurred, so that workers have more bargaining power in setting wages and 
are 

able to extract a 
kind of monopoly power from the firms they work for.  Now, I don™t have direct 

observations on any of these.  You infer these from the model and the data.  You 
take the model 

as given, you infer these kinds of things.  But those don™t really match up, in my mind, to the 

kinds of anecdotal stories you hear from people.  You just don™t hear about firms having a lot 

more pricing power than they did four years ago, and it certainly doesn™t seem consistent to think 

of workers as having a lot more leverage now, either.  So I find both of these implausible.  
Now, 

as I said, this is based on my understanding of EDO
; my understanding of how the theoretical 
              
    
    
    
              
     
  
       
  
       model is built
Šthat is well documented.  In that EDO model, in the memo results, they didn™t do 
the decomposition.  They didn™t show us how much of the gap is due to sticky prices left over 

from 
2008 shocks, how much is due to monopoly power shocks, how much is due to wa
ge pricing shocks.  I said they don™t seem plausible, but the right way forward for us, in talking 

about these things, is to put some estimates on the table and do the decomposition.  W
e have a 
working group under 
way that works with a set of these models. 
There are 
other DSGE 
modelsŠPhiladelphia, Chicago.  What™s the other one? 
PARTICIPANTS.  New York. 

MR. LACKER. 
New York.  I forgot New York.  And there 
are
 others around the 
System.  I know 
that 
Atlanta operates a pretty elaborate model as well.
  So e
ach of these taken to 
the data would give you a different estimate of the gap, and they™d give you a different 

decomposition of what the gap was about.  We™d be able to look at those, if we had them in front 

of us, and say, ﬁWell, attributing the gap to this is persuasive to me.  It matches up with what I 

think is out there,ﬂ or, ﬁThis reason for the gap to be large isn™t persuasive to me.ﬂ  And we could 

have a discussion that goes beyond, ﬁI think the gap is big.
ﬂ ﬁNo, I think the gap is small.
ﬂ  ﬁNo, 
I think the gap is big.
ﬂ ﬁNo, I think the gap is small.ﬂ I think we could make progress by putting 
the cards on the table, by putting some more-
explicit analysis on the table. 
So that™s my suggestion for improving our discussion of the gap going forward.  As I 
said, the estimates of the 3 percent gap in EDO seem implausible to me compared 
with 
factors 
that I
™ve talked about that are likely to affect the natural rate rather than the gap
Šthings like 
the 
labor market
, skill problems, 
the 
housing overhang, and policy uncertainty, which 
aren™t 
captured by the models.
  We could have a debate then about what is in the model or not.  T
his is 
what goes into my thinkingŠthat we shouldn™t expect much from monetary policy now.  
                   
                     
 Moreover, we might be pretty close to where the policy-
relevant natural rate is right now.
  Thank 
you
ŠI took some extra time here.  I appreciate it.  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE C
HAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I don™t really understand why the DSGE model should 
be particularly relevant to the current set of circumstances, given that this is a financial shock, a 

huge financial shock, and my understanding is that DGSE models are very rudimentary, 
if 
they 

hav
e anything
, in terms of the financial sector.
  To go to the DSGE models 
as a source of 
determining the natural rate versus the NAIRU and 
the size of the gap seems a little bit 
ﬁoff the 
reservation
ﬂ relative to the source of the shock.  So I™m just curious what your reaction is. 
MR. LACKER.  Sure.  Let me say two things to that.  
The f
irst is that progress has been 
made in putting the rudiments of a financial sector in these models.  The New York model is a 

leader on that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  B
ut we™
re still in elementary school. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  The second thing I™d point out, though, is that if we™re going to 
think about the data we see, draw conclusions, and act on it, we™
re using either an explicit model 
or an implicit model.  There
™s no avoiding that.  Otherwise, what we™re doing is gibberish.  
An explicit model has the advantage of exposing all sides of the reasoning process to scrutiny by 

others.  You can say, 
and it
™s perfectly legitimate to think, 
ﬁAll right
Šyes, this factor that I t
hink 
is important is not in this model,
ﬂ and I just did that with EDO.  I just said, 
ﬁLook, it doesn™t 
have a very articulate labor sector
ﬂŠbut we can debate that, and we can look at the magnitudes 
and talk about that.  
So I think it
™s a vehicle for analysis and discussion that crystallizes our 
thinking, that pins things down, but I don™t think it™s constructive to say, ﬁX isn™t in the model.  I 
       
              
    
    
                have a free pass to say whatever I want.ﬂ I just don™t think that™s constructive.  I know that™s not 
what you were advocating. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, President Lacker.  You™
re a 
perfect straight man for me because 
I™m going to be rather brief 
[laughter] 
to preserve 
time for 
the main event. 
Reports from my 
District contacts were very little changed from August. 
Economic expansion remains positive but very modest.  Just a coup
le of comments from 

contacts.  First, housing-sector contacts and several of my banking directors repor
ted that 
residential real estate activity in general is clearly improving.  Prices have firmed in many areas, 

sales volume has increased, and permitting is rising.  Purchase mortgage applications have 

increased recently, and refinance activity remains positive. I have also seen data suggesting that 

the recent increase in purchases is bei
ng driven primarily by mortgage-financed homebuyers 
rather than cash investors.  Second, a director from a large management consulting firm offered 

the view that a number o
f his firms, very large corporate clients, have resigned themselves to a 
2 percent growth world, and that major actions these businesses might take to accelerate their 

growth are largely on hold.  We heard a similar theme from several contacts.
  And, third, 
inflation and rising business costs are not much of a concern among our contacts.  My director 

from the country™s largest home-
improvement retailer reported that suppliers are not asking for 
price 
increases in this environment. 
Let me shift to my 
Bank™s assessment of the national economy and outlook.  It has 
become pretty difficult, in my view, to reject the view that the economy has been on a roughly 

2 percent growth trend for most of the recovery.  Maybe I™m a little slow, but the recognition has 

gelled
 in my thinking, 
just in the last few weeks
, that this is the prevailing reality.  Based on 
                        
          
     
         recent estimates, this may even overstate the immediate reality.
  My outlook for GDP growth 
continues to show only modest improvement on this trend over the forecast horizon.  In 
particular, beyond this year and next, I remain less optimistic about the pace of 
GDP growth than 
the Tealbook.  With respect to employment, my baseline outlook has been a continuation of the 

trend of roughly 150,000 per month that has prevailed over the past two years.  This pace would 

be sufficient at current participation rates to make continuing but modest progress on the 

unemployment rate. However, last week™s job report makes it pretty clear that employment 

growth has fallen short of the 150,000 trend over the past four months.  Even though four months 

amount to a small sliver of time, I am concerned about the lack of any sustained progress on the 

unemployment rate since the beginning of the year.  It is getting harder to rule out the p
ossibility 

that returning to the 
scenario of 
150,000 jobs a month is at risk.  
My perception is that the well
-known uncertainty factors, including those associated with various downside risks, are 

contributing to some of the recent softness in the data.  I have no argument with the SEP bias that 

GDP growth risks are weighted to the downside, but I don™t rule out that these uncertainty drags 
could dissipate and that there is some upside potential.  For instance, some of the incoming 

information around housin
g and 
Europe has been mildly encouraging, and it
™s plausible that if 
the major sources of uncertaintyŠnotably, the fiscal cliff and European situationŠ
are resolved 

favorably, or more or less favorably, in a few months, the outlook actually could be brighter.  So 

it strikes me that this environment is not as clear
-cut as the situations that we faced on the cusp 
of LSAP1 and LSAP2. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Mr. Wilcox, did you want to add to the 
conversation? 
          
   
        
      
      
                      MR. WILCOX.  
Yes. I don™t have a detailed response to President Lacker™s comments, 
but I thought I might just offer a few observations.  Sometimes I
™m in sympathy with many of 
the points that President Lacker makes.  I think it™s impor
tant, though, to state that we take it as 
our remit to advise the Committee to the limit of our ability to measure the economy, to estimate 
and understand the economy, to observe economic processes.  We think it™
s critically important 
not to do more than that, and we™re profoundly aware of the extent of our ignorance and the 

ignorance of the macroeconomic profession at large, regarding key questions about how the 

macroeconomy works. 
I™
m reminded of a comment that Larry Summers once made in quite a 
differen
t situation
, in which he said, ﬁYou know, economics is an interesting field.  I doubt that 
when astrophysicists get together
, they debate the fundamental validity of the laws of gravity.  
And yet what we as economists do is, we have profound uncertainty about questions that are as 

fundamental as the laws of gravity.
ﬂ  We on the staff do make every effort to distinguish short-

run influences that we can identify.  For example, we have adjusted our reference level of the 

unemployment rate in light of influence
s that we can identify and estimate
, stemming from 
emergency unemployment benefits and from the quality of functioning of the labor market.  We 

have adjusted our measure of the gap between the actual unemployment rate and the reference
, 
or natural, 
rate of
 unemployment for those kinds of things.  But beyond that, we confront the real 
world in which data are imperfect, theory is deficient, policymaker and staff bandwidth is 

limited, and there are a lot of profound and fundamental debates to be resolved. 
With regard to EDO, it is a state
-of-the-
art DSGE model coming directly out of the 
intellectual tradition that President Lacker refers to. It
™s part, but only part, of the intellectual 

base that we consult in the course of putting together our analysis that we provide to the 

Committee.
  Now, whether the empirical properties of that model are plausible or implausible is 
                
                              
              
a little difficult for me to say.  They are what they are, and they
™re derived by an effort to work 
directly in that intellectual tradition.  W
e have pursued a diversified, 
multimodel strategy
, which 
we think provides our analysis with a greater robustness than would be the case if we had a 
single 
model or a single-
intellectual
-tradition strategy. 
So I
™m in sympathy with many of the 
points that President Lacker raises, but I think we need to recognize that the macroeconomic 

profession has a long way to go before we can deliver the kind of clarity and certainty that it 

seems to me is implicit in much of your remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President 
Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate Dave Wilcox™s comments 
there, and I™
ll have a few comments on the slack memo at the end here. 
Let me talk for a minute 
about the Eighth District economy, which continues to expand at a modest pace.  The drought in 

the 
District has been especially severe and is having an important effe
ct on agriculturally 
based 
businesses.  I generally agree with the Tealbook analysis of the 
effe
ct of the drought on the 
macroeconomy over the next couple of quarte
rs. 
District labor markets are improving slowly. 
The 
District unemployment rate, based on 16 D
istrict MSAs, has continued to decline this year 
and is, according to the most recent data, about 7.5 percent, noticeably below the national 

unemployment rate.
  Employment growth in the District has been slow, just a touch better than 
the national data, according to the most recent observations.  District real estate markets have 

improved during 2012.  Data on home sales for District MSAs, for instance, are up by 
a healthy 
margin compared 
with
 2011.  Specifically, year-
to-date home sales are up almost 13 percent in 
Louisville, 7 percent in Little Rock, 10 percent in Memphis, and 16 percent in St. Louis.  

Similarly, building permits for single
-family homes year to 
date in 2012 versus 2011 were up 
42 percent in Louisville, 14 percent in Little Rock, 46 percent in Memphis, and 23 percent in 
               
             
          
   
    
  
    St.
 Louis.  So I think that the housing part of the equation is moving off the bottom in 2012, and I 
find that encouraging. 
Natio
nally, I view the macroeconomy as being in a sluggish 
economic 
growth mode, but 
for a variety of reasons, I do not think the current constellation of data readings is one that should 
trigger outsized monetary policy action.  I view the U.S. economy as being on a path not too 

different from the one suggested in the work of Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rog
off as cited by 
President Lacker.
 They noted that post-
financial
-crisis or 
post-bubble economies tend to grow 
relatively slowly for a long time.  Our economy cl
early suffered through 
a collapse of a housing 
bubble, along with an associated financial crisis, so it is not really that surprising that the 

economy is following a path similar to the one experienced by other countries 
that 
have been in a 
similar situati
on.  In particular, the notion of a rapid return to the pre-
crisis
, bubble-influenced 
real GDP growth trend seems quite unrealistic accor
ding to the international cross-country 
evidence.  This, to me, is the leading hypothesis for our current situation.  I am concerned about 

the global slowdown and that, fed in large part by ongoing recession in Europe, this is affecting 

and will continue to affect U.S. multinational corporations.  These effects are quite apparent in 

my discussions with business contacts in 
medium and large firms in the 
District and across the 
nation.  Many are reporting troubling or worrisome movements in revenue and volume data 

during recent months.  While this bears watching, I do not think it is yet at the point where I 

foresee an especially severe impact on the U.S.  Some of this is certainly to be expected when the 

pan-European economy, which is actually somewhat larger than the U.S. economy, is in 
recession. 
I see U.S. inflation as subdued but generally close to target, unlike the summ
er and fall of 
2010, when nearly all measures of inflation were low and on a downward trajectory.  Again, this 
             
                 
   
   
             
  
     bears watching, but in my view, a threat of continued disinflation and possibly eventual deflation 
has not materialized, at least so far. 
Inflat
ion expectations are, by our own description, stable.  
Five
-year TIPS
-based expected inflation was about 208 basis points yesterday.  This, again, is 
not the situation of 2010, at least so far.  In addition, the five-year TIPS real yield of about 

minus 145 basis points is considerably lower than in 2010, suggesting that monetary policy may 

be much easier today than it was at that juncture.  In addition, I do not see financial stress as 

being particularly high at the current moment.  The St. Louis Financial Stress Index is showing 
a relatively tame reading. Of course, many factors could increase financial stress, but as of now
, those events have not occurred and, in fact, may not occur. 
I think it makes sense to wait and see what Europe can deliver during th
e fall.  As I
™ve 
told all of you before, I™
ve become 
more pessimistic on the medium
-term European prospects 
during the summer, as I have come to doubt that Europe has the type of either informal or formal 

institutional arrangements to deal with a crisis of
 this magnitude.  
Still, I think the jury remains 
out on that issue, so it would make sense for us to wait and see what the Europeans do, 
and see 

what happens.  
Certainly, recent declines in Spanish and Italian yields across the yield curve for 

government debt in both countries have been impressive 
and
 substantial, even if the medium-
and longer-term outlook for Europe is questionable.  
I am concerned that the ECB is not really 
easing aggressively in order to mitigate the 
euro
-area recession. Indeed, the ECB is preoccupied 
with selective debt purchases on a basis that requires some conditionality, which means that they 

have to wait for the country to react to their offer.  This throws off the timing of the relationship 

between the 
normal business cycle 
and 
monetary policy.
  So that™s keeping the ECB from acting, 
which makes me worried that the U.S. action could exacerbate the recession there by 

strengthening the 
euro.  And indeed, the e
uro has been stronger in recent weeks.
  You might say 
      
             
              
          
  
   
 we worry only about the U.S. economy, which I think is very true and very relevant, but this 
could end up feeding back to the U.S. in a detrimental way if we make the European situation 

worse. 
Longer
-term interest rates in the U.S. are already very low.  Ten
-year 
Treasury tr
ading in 
a recent session was around 170 basis points.  That™
s extremely low by rec
ent historical metrics. 
Longer
-term inflation expectations are in excess of 250 basis points, depending on which 
measure you use.  That implies negative real yields over a 
10-year horizon.  That™s an extremely 
long horizon to have a negative real yield.  I think the U
nited States 
can benefit from the lower 
yields that we have in place right now.  We can benefit from the flight to safety that has driven 

capital out of Europe, 
much as the U
nited States
 did during the 1997Œ98 
Asian currency crisis. 
Also, equity markets are at recent highs
Šfour
-year highs, 
if I™m not mistaken.  This seems to 
indicate among investors a certain confidence in the future of U.S. economic performance 

despite an ongoing worldwide slowdown, and I think the jury is still out a little bit on whether 

the U
nited States
 can be the strength in the storm here or whether we™re going to get pulled into 
the global slowdown ourselves.  Obviously, there are detrime
ntal effects from the rest of the 
world, but there are also offsetting 
flight
-to-safety effects in the U
nited States
.  So I think we 
could afford to see how that plays out for a few months here going forward. 
Labor markets in the U.S. are improving, although in a halting and uneven way.  It is 
sometimes noted that the national unemployment rate has not improved during 2012.  I might 

remind the Committee that this was also true in 2011.  We had 9.1 percent unemployment in 

January of 2011.  As of August 2011, 
we were also at 9.1 percent.
  However, today™s 
unemployment one year after that is 8.1 percent, 1 full percentage point lower.  That™s about as 

good as we can do in this game, about as good as we can do in one year™s time.  The U.S. 
              
    
       
       
          unemployment rate has 
rarely, if ever, dropped this much in one year during the past 25 years.  
This improvement, 
of course
, occurred unevenly, but it did occur nevertheless and from a 
starting point last year at this time in September that looked considerably darker than today
™s outlook.  
Some might say we did
n™t
 take action last year, but we took action through the m
aturity 
extension p
rogram.  That program is still in place and still on the table. 
In summary, as always, there are many ongoing developments that bear watching, but I 
think that the current readings on key aspects of the economy do not argue for outsized monetary 
policy action at this particular juncture.  I™m not saying I would never support it, but I don™t think 

that this moment is probably the right time. 
A few comments on the slack memo.  I do appreciate the memo, and I think it did a great 
job of outlining the approach to the slack issue that has been taken by the staff for, 
I belie
ve, 
many years at the Fed.  I thought it was accurate and outlined the issues very well.  The memo, 

to me, suggests that the ﬁ
get
-serious DSGE approachﬂ shows exactly how complicated this 
concept really is when you try to get down to it.  W
henever 
you
™re 
trying to fix something, it
™s good to know what you™re trying to fix.  And the great thing about the New Keynesian model is, 

you know what you™re trying to fix.  You™
re trying to fix the fact that there are sticky prices out 
there, and you can improve welf
are in that model in a certain way by certain types of monetary 
policy actions.  But different assumptions that you might make inside the model are quite subtle, 

and they can imply different welfare outcomesŠ
that is, different amounts of utility that actua
lly 
get delivered to households.  I think 
that 
there
™s no substitute going forward, that the Committee 
just has to take a stand on these complicated issues and we have to roll up our sleeves and say, 

ﬁWhat is it that we think we need
 to do?
ﬂ and ﬁW
hat is it that we want to fix?ﬂ
  The problem is, 
because of the subtleties inside these models, what we learned from the models is that you can 
          
        
                       
       inadvertently be doing more harm than good, depending on what™s actually going on in the real 
world and depending on whi
ch assumptions are really the ones that make the most sense. 
I think 
there
™s a very clear core idea, and you don™t have to read the whole literature to get at the core 
idea.  The co
re idea is that the flexible price level of output is a volatile object. 
Even in an 
economy that had no frictions whatsoever, there would be all kinds of shocks, and that level of 

output, which would be a Pare
to-optimal thing, would be moving around all of the time.  T
he 
actual level of output that we observe is probably not that level of output, and therefore there 

may be scope for a policy action.  But in any event, that volatile flexible price level of output is 

not going to be a smooth trend the way we traditionally have thought about it in macroeconomic 

circles since the 19
50s and 1960s.  Most of what we try to do when we think about potential 
output and measures of slack is to get a smooth trend.  I don™t think that that™s supported by the 

modern macroeconomic literature. 
The memo also makes it clear that there
™s tremendous 
uncertainty about estimates of 
slack, even if you™
re willing to swallow other assumptions about 
the 
statistical models or the 
economic models.  
As I
™ve emphasized in the past, even if all you want to do is forecast, and you 
don™t care about all of the the
oretical issues, the relationships between the slack measures and the 
actual inflation outcomes are questionable themselves and are weak and
, I think, 
have gotten 
weaker over time. 
I™ve talked about slack many times here, but I do think that, 
going forwar
d, it would behoove the Committee to put a clear model on the table.  W
e can argue about whether 
those assumptions 
are
 the right ones, whether 
we like them, 
and whether we think we can bring 
other evidence to bear on the particular assumptions.  And 
we can 
get it clear
er in our own heads 
how we think we™re helping matters with our policy. 
                                    
           I also thought it was very interesting in the memo
ŠI™ve often wondered about the term 
ﬁNAIRU.ﬂ  The memo makes it clear that the ﬁAﬂ no longer belongs in 
ﬁNAIRU,
ﬂ and in fact
, the ﬁNﬂ doesn™t belong in ﬁ
NAIRU
ﬂ either
Šso just ﬁ
IRU.
ﬂ It™s just 
ﬁIRU
ﬂ at the end.  T
he ﬁAﬂ 
stands for ﬁ
accelerati
ngﬂ 
and staff 
members 
make it clear that they™ve had to take that part out 
because it wasn™t working very well over maybe quite a long time period.  So I thought that that 
was interesting.  Maybe we should quit using the term, since the acceleration part isn™t in there 

anymore.
  Thanks a lot.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The past nine months remind me a bit 
of Samuel Beckett™s play 
Waiting for Godot. 
Rather than waiting for 
Godot
, we are waiting for 
the labor market recovery.  And like 
Godot, the recovery in the labor market continues to elude 

us.  
In the Beckett play, the character
s seriously consider suicide as their best solution to the 
seemingly endless wait.  I do hope 
that 
tomorrow we arrive at a better solution.  [Laughter] 
Unfortunately, last month™s labor market report was quite consistent with my submission 
for the e
xperimental consensus forecast.  I had a more pessimistic outlook for the next 18 months 
than the consensus forecast, and it assumed that we would not see robust employment growth or 

a significant change in the unemployment rate by the end of the yearŠ
or, for th
at matter, the end 
of next year
Šwithout further accommodation.  The modest employment growth did not surprise 
me, although I may not have sufficiently considered the possibility of the further declines in 
the 

labor force participation rate that were a striking feature of last Friday™s employment report, 

reducing the unemployment rate but for the wrong reason.  
One of the distinctive features of this 

recession and recovery has been the percentage of the unemployed who remain unemployed for 

greater than
 26 weeks.  Unlike the deep recession in 1982, in which there was a quick recovery 
        
                          
          and, as a result, a re
latively small increase in long
-duration unemployment, this recession has 
had a weak recovery, resulting in more long-duration unemployment.  Work being done by the 
staff in Boston that decomposes the 
Beveridge 
curve by duration of unemployment finds that the 
shift in the curve is primarily generated by workers who suffer long-duration unemployment.  

Faster growth in the economy would likely mitigate some of this problem. 
While some have attributed the slow recovery to a deleveraging process, I would put less 
weight on that argument.  Consumption and business investment have not been the laggards in 

this recovery.  Rather, government spending and housing account for much of the unusual 

weakness.  In fact, if you exclude housing and government spending from GDP for this recovery, 

it looks much like the previous two recoveries.  The unusually weak government spending is, in 

part, a result of the state and lo
cal governments pulling back in response to greatly diminished 
revenues, a direct consequence of the depth of the recession and the weakness of the recovery.  

Many were prepared for a revenue shortfall, with funds accumulated in their rainy day funds, but 

this recession quickly put most rainy day funds underwater.  Housing is usually a driver of most 

recoveries but has been absent for much of this recovery.  However, since the onset of the 

housing bust, the population has grown, per capita income has grown, 
interest rates are low, and 

prices are more affordable, resulting in tentative signs of a housing recovery.  This is a propitious 

time for considering additional stimulus to housing. 
If homebuyers feel that house prices are on 
the rise
Šas many indicators
 suggest 
and
 the Tealbook forecastsŠ
and that mortgage rates will 
remain this low only temporarily, we may start to get new homebuyers to commit before rates 

and prices rise. 
It is important to note the significant downside risks we are still facing.  While there have 
been some positive announcements about financial support out of Europe, the underlying 
                        
              
      
   solutions still require political support.  Domestically, while most are aw
are of the dangers of a 
fiscal cliff, the positive solutions still require political action.
  Should either of these risks 
materialize, we will need to consider a further array of tools: 
 possibly expanding QE even 
further, using asset purchases to target long rates
, or providing more commitment in our 
guidance.  An important addition to these tools might also be an expanded set of discount 

window actions.  The staff memo on this provides a good road map to possible ways forward.  

They include a variant of 
the Bank of England program, a mortgage program that would provide 
low-cost funding for banks to finance mortgage loansŠparticularly to those parts of the 

mortgage market that have been slow to recover, and programs that might require T
reasury 
support to reduce the credit risk entailed on certain types of lendin
g.  While some of these tools 
are likely to be most useful during a crisis where lending markets are disrupted, some could be 

implemented even in the current rate environment. I would encourage the staff to continue to 

search for creative ways that we can support those areas of the economy that are still troubled.  

As further progress is made, it may be worth discussing, either as an additional tool if the 

recovery continues to be quite slow or as a contingency plan should some of the tail risks 

materialize.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  During the intermeeting period, the 
economic data have confirmed that the ec
onomy remains stuck in low gear. Like the Tealbook, I 

expect only modest 
GDP growth in the second half of this year.  
Clearly, the economic recovery 
hasn™t been able to gain traction in the face of a variety of head
winds.  These include household-
sector d
eleveraging, tight credit for many potential borrowers, fiscal retrenchment, and global 
uncertainties.  Given these headwinds, absent further monetary policy accommodation, I would 
          
  
          
         
    
     expect sluggish growth and no meaningful progress toward our employment mandate until 2014.  
Indeed, when judged on a policy-consistent basis, my outlook is somewhat more pessimistic than 

the Tealbook forecast and consensus forecast, with slower 
GDP growth and a higher path for the 
unemployment rate. 
In gauging the medium-
term ou
tlook for the economy and the stance of monetary policy, 
I find the 
Kalman
-filter model that I developed with Thomas Laubach to be a useful tool.  A
fter 
this morning™s discussion, I™
m a little nervous about going into the 
Kalman 
filter, but I
™m assured 
that Thomas is ready with a white board to answer any technical questions regarding our model.  

But this model seeks to distinguish between transitory and highly persistent supply and demand 

influences on economic activity.  In response to President Bullard™s 
earlier comments, I would 
stress that in our model, we do not impose any restriction that potential output growth is smooth.  

We let the data speak to that.
  The highly persistent influences on demand can be summarized by 
what we call the natural rate of 
interest.  In the model, a highly persistent reduction in demand 
lowers the natural rate of interest.  And I think importantly for thinking about the stance of 

monetary policy and a number of issues around that, our balance sheet policies should boost the 

natural rate of interest, all else 
being 
equal, in this empirical model. 
So, influenced by Board 
staff research that highlights the information content of gross domestic income along with gross 

domestic product, I™ve estimated a modified version of the LaubachŒ
Williams model using both 

GDI and GDP.
  The current estimate of the natural rate of interest from this model is about 
minus 75 basis points.  The current real funds rate, therefore, is only about 1 percentage point 

below this estimate of the natural rate.  This implies that the current extent of monetary 

accommodation, including our balance sheet policies, has only modestly exceeded the severe 

headwinds that we™re facing in our economy. 
         
          
        
                             Given my forecast
s for subdued 
economic 
growth and very little pr
ogress on the 
employment mandate over the next few years, my SEP projection assumes considerable 
additional monetary policy stimulus.  In particular, I assume a new program of open-
ended 
purchases of 
Treasuries and MBS.  They expand the Fed™s balance sheet
 by about $1 trillion over 
the next year or so. 
And with this stimulus, I expect a faster recovery, with real GDP growth of 
2½ percent next year and 
3¼ percent in 2014, with the unemployment rate edging down to 
7.9 percent at the end of next year and 7.3 percent 
at the end of 2014.  
I see the risk
s to this 
outlook as skewed to the downside.  Another bout of brinkmanship around the fiscal cliff seems 

likely, if not inevitable.  The problems plaguing Europe also remain daunting, with considerable 

risk to our economy if the financial crisis intensifies. 
Here I would just echo the comments made 
earlier by Vice Chairman
 Dudley.  I share those views and was somewhat more pessimistic than 
perhaps the Tealbook™s description of recent events in Europe.  The bold program that the ECB 

has announced will certainly buy some short-run relief, but the underlying problems remain
:  a 
lack of political federalism, an unsustainable fiscal outlook, and disparities in economic 

competitive
ness across Europe.  So, in summary, the ECB™s actions may serve as a useful bridge 
loan.  
I hope it is not a bridge loan to nowhere. 
The fiscal cliff and the crisis in Europe are not just risks to the outlook; 
by increasing 
uncertainty
, they 
also 
seem alr
eady to be adding to the factors slowing our recovery.  It seems 
everyone I talk to stresses that uncertainty is holding back hiring and investment.  Indeed, 

uncertainty appears to have virtually paralyzed some businesses, prompting them to postpone 

capita
l spending and delay payroll expansions.  So a key question for monetary policy is whether 

this rise in uncertainty should be viewed primarily as a shock to demand, which lowers both 

output and inflation if not counteracted by additional monetary policy stimulus, or as a shock to 
            
    
       
                
           
   
supply, such as the drought, which lowers output but boosts inflation.  R
ecent theoretical and 
empirical research has addressed this question.  As I described back in December, empirical 
research by my staff at the San Francisco Fe
d finds that over the past 30 years, 
higher uncertainty 

operates like a negative aggregate demand shock that reduces both economic activity and 

inflation.  Following uncertainty shocks of the types that we currently face, expenditures on 

consumer durables, investment, short-
term interest rates, and inflation all fall
, while 
unemployment rises
, in this analysis.  
Now, I
™m sure President Lacker will be very happy to hear 
what I
™m about to say, and that is that we also looked at this issue in a fully micro
-fou
nded 
DSGE model.  This finding that uncertainty acts primarily as a demand shock is confirmed by 

the research using such DSGE models, both by my staff and by academic researchers. 
An increase in uncertainty causes households to save more for precautionary reasons.  This a
ffects 
both supply and demand in the models.  However, in these models, the demand effects are by far 

the dominant ones.  This is because the negative effects of an uncertainty shock on consumption 

are amplified when prices are slow to adj
ust, causing businesses to cut production further.  
This 
implies that uncertainty shocks lead to a negative output gap, a fall in inflation, and this is 

consistent with the empirical evidence I mentioned a moment ago.  All told, both theory and data 

sugges
t that the uncertainty shocks that I believe are holding back
 our economy today really 
should be seen more as adverse shocks to demand, which monetary policy should aim to offset. 
Turning to inflation, the medium-term outlook has not changed.  I continue t
o expect 
overall PCE inflation to remain below 2 percent for the next few years, and I view the risks 
to the 
inflation forecast as balanced. 
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 
           
   
                           MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like Presi
dent Lockhart, I
™m going to 
keep my remarks on economic conditions particularly brief today because I believe that we have 
more agreement on the outlook than we have on the policy implications of the outlook, which 

means 
that 
I™m not going to be as brief in my comments on policy 
tomorrow. 
My 
District 
business contacts remain concerned about the risks to the outlook, yet they are generally 

reporting only small changes in activity levels in their own businesses.  A few of my business 

contacts point to either a coming slowdown or a coming acceleration in their sales.  Their 

comments are consistent with the holding pattern around today™s 2 percent growth rate.  
In my 
current outlook, I expect the recovery to remain in this holding pattern for the rest of this y
ear 
and then generally pick up to a GDP growth rate of a little more than 2½ percent in 2013 and a 

little more than 3 percent in 2014.  In order to achieve these projected growth rates, I assume that 

we provide further policy accommodation by extending the period of very low rates into 2015. 
Among the data released since our last meeting, the August employment report stands 
out.  It was particularly disappointing in that the BLS confirmed that the economy had made very 

little progress in labor markets over 
the summer. While the month
-to-month swings in the 
household survey make the progress on the unemployment rate difficult to interpret, the decline 

in the employment
-to-population ratio to essentially its post
-recession trough makes it clear that 
there has
 been little sustained progress in labor markets.  Nonetheless, as GDP growth picks up 
over the next two years, I am expecting that we will make gradual progress on unemployment.  

As mentioned in the memo on economic slack, the Cleveland staff has taken a close look at the 

flows into and out of unemployment to examine the natural rate of unemployment.  This research 

finds that the trends of flows into and out of unemployment, often referred to as labor market 

churning, have been f
all
ing for several years.  This decline in labor market churning implies that 
             
                   
  the current path to full employment will likely be slower than in past cycles. 
Some 
commentators treat the slow progress on reducing unemployment as evidence that the natural 
rate 
is far higher.  However, in the Cleveland Fed model, a faster pace of GDP growth does 

lower the unemployment rate more quickly.  While this result is supportive of monetary policy 

accommodation, it doesn™t answer the question of the effectiveness of our no
ntraditional 

monetary policy tools. 
Turning to inflation, I have made only small changes to my outlook for inflation.  I agree 
with the Board staff that we
™re likely to see more disinflation in core PCE rates, but my forecast 
doesn™t get quite as far away 
from the 2 percent rate as the Tealbook anticipates. 
The risks to my economic outlook remain primarily to the downside for GDP growth.  
Although market participants seem to be taking a more optimistic view that Europeans will solve 
their problems, a 
crisis
 in Europe remains a large risk to 
the recovery in the U
nited S
tates
.  In addition, the fiscal cliff poses a significant risk of 
a dramatic slowing of the U.S. economy.  
These risks to growth imply that unemployment could end up higher than anticipated.  On 

inflation, I continue to see the risks tilted toward the downside, given th
e significant downside 

risk
s to economic activity and 
the
 low levels of 
some measures of 
inflation expectations.  In my 
view, these risks to growth, unemployment, and inflation make the outlook more uncertain than 

normal.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Following our July meeting, the key question 
was whether the incoming data would finally begin to show substantial and sustainable 

improvement in labor markets.  It™s pretty clear that the answer to that question is no.  Without a 

doubt, 2012 will go into the books as another year of unsatisfactory economic performance.  This 
                    
         
         
           
  
 is the third year in a row 
of growth around 2 percent.  This pace of growth leaves 
resource slack 
quite large. 
At the same time
, the inflation outlook is not threatening, and numerous theoretical 
and empirical analyses show that there are ways to provide additional accommodation th
at will 
improve this economic situation. 
In terms of recent developments, the problems that we™
ve characterized as downside risks 
earlier in the year have materialized into actual headwinds.  They are gathering in strength. 
My 
business contacts noted that 
their current operations are being adversely affected by increasing
ly negative forces in the U.S. and around the world.  Similar to some comments that President 

Lockhart made, apparently CEOs are sharing their gloomy outlooks with their fellow CEO 

interlo
cutors, and this has the potential to reinforce downward expectations and spiral into even 
softer spending and hiring.  
For example, one of my regular contacts repeated comments he had 
heard from the CEO of a major U.S. conglomerate, 
who was a former Fed Bank chair 

somewhere.  According to my contact, this CEO instructed all of his business units to plan for 

the possibility that the U.S. will experience a lost decade
, like Japan.  I think that™s disturbing.  
With regard to Europe, many of my contacts thought the odds of truly awful outcomes had 

declined, and that™s a positive comment.  The recent ECB announcements regarding outright 

monetary transactions give the fiscal authorities somewhat more time to maneuver, but the 

additional bond buying will be condit
ioned on fiscal consolidation that likely will be difficult to 
achieve and bad for growth in those countries.  And without stronger growth, the periphery 

countries are going to face repeated crisis events over the next several years. As one financial 

contact we spoke to put it, 
ﬁAll the Europeans have done is transform an acute problem into a 
chronic one.
ﬂ  The other elephant in the room is the U.S. fiscal cliff.  On the upside, my contacts 
say 
that 
surely the parties in Washington will find a way to limit 
the damage after the election
.           
                       
        But on the downside, many currently see uncertainty over the cliff weighing on activity, and no 
one can rule out the possibility of a messy outcome that would result in very significant fiscal 

drag hitting us around the turn of the year. 
One bit of positive news is that I™m hearing commentary that indicates monetary 
accommodation is helping.  Several financial contacts say that today™s low rates are leading them 

to increase investment, and that should facilitate futu
re activ
ity. 
For instance, we heard 
comments on how funding for distressed properties has increased and capital is being redeployed 

to the residential sector. Indeed, there™s been a 
lot of talk about residential construction 

improving, as several have noted.  Furthermore, refinancing continues to help firms strengthen 

their balance sheets, putting them in a position to increase investment or pass on funds to 

someone else more likely to spend them, as you pointed out at our last meeting, Mr. Chairman.  
I should 
note that while lo
w rates are pushing some to undertake more investment, our financial 
contacts do not say that 
they are seeing excessive risk
-taking or anything approximating 
financial 
froth
.  And in the past, they™ve not been shy about pointing that out when they have seen that. 
As I said earlier, condition
ed on our current policies, the outlook for 
economic 
growth is 
unacceptable.  It™s unacceptable in part because recent data reinforce the obvious point that high 

inflation is not a concern, certainly not relative to our long-run objective and certainly not within 

our balanced approach strategy.  And it™
s unacceptable because mainstream monetary analysis 
clearly indicates that there are means of providing more accommodation that can improve these 

outcomes
.  The Board staff analyses clearly demonstrate this.  The LSAP memos had simulations 
that pointed that out, FRB/
US™
s optimal control simulations and 
the nominal-income-
level
-targeting simulations point that out, too.  Mike Woodford™s careful analysis in h
is Jacks
on Hole 
paper showed the same. 
       
    
        
           
    
    
   
               
  
        While I™m at this point, let me make a couple of comments about DSGE models, which 
were discussed earlier today. It is certainly the case that we are presented with results from four 
models that are currently being l
ooked at: 
the 
EDO model out of the Board, our Chicago model, 
Philadelphia™s model, and New York™s model.  A 
question that President Lacker was asking was
, in the context of these models, how big 
is 
slack, 
and 
how is it measured
?  At some level within 
the 
context of these models, this is a bit of a red herring.  For instance, if you look at the 

projections, all of the inflation forecasts coming out of these models are under our 2 
percent goal, 

and that™s true through 2015.  So, 
even
 in a model that™s lookin
g at whatever measure it is that™s 
holding back inflation, 
there is no
 inflationary pressureŠand some of the models have much less 
inflationary pressure than others.  The second point is that the theory in these models is really 

about marginal costs.  That
™s the fundamental variable.  The firms in these models are faced with 
the following question: W
hen I get to change my price and I™ve seen things change, what™s my 
margin
al cost structure that tells me how much I should increase my price, given that I won
™t be 
able to do it next time for sure? What have 
I face
d, w
hat am I expecting others to face, and 
things like that? 
Slack i
s often viewed in these models as a useful proxy at best.  I
f there™s a lot 
of slack, then your marginal costs won™t be rising
; they™ll be low, and things like that.  But the 
fundamental is really about marginal costs.
  And so, when you think about that, these models are 
really looking at the inflation data and everything around those data and saying, ﬁWe just don™t 

see inflationary pressures.ﬂ I can™t tell you exactly what the resource slack is that is embodied in 

that, but we don™t see inflationary pressures, and that™s coming out of all four of the models that 

we™re presented with quarterly. 
Another point that President Lacker ra
ised is, if sticky prices are really what™s 
fundamental here, why haven™t they adjusted already
?  And you hear that a lot.  In these models, 
                     
   
  
     
    
         
      
     a lot of asynchronous price adjustment for whatever reason is 
given
, and John Taylor has 
contributed importantly to exactly that point going way back over the last 20 or more years.  
But 
even allowing for the fact that maybe there would have been adjustments already, I think it™s 
reasonable to assume that we™ve been hit with a sequence of negative aggregate demand shocks 

along the lines 
that I 
believe 
President Williams™
s comments were pointing at.  At least we™ve 
certainly been surprised the last three summers in a row that output has been lower than we were 

projecting, s
o something different is at work.
  And then it™s 
also the case that 
inflationary 
expectations matter in these pricing equations and models.  This is a little more delicate and 

subtle.  Apparently inflation expectations are stable in all of these models, but there 
are
 subtle 
modeling choices at work in each of them about what the stochastic process is for marginal cost 

pressures and how they™re updated and what inflation expectations are.  This gets at a point of 

dissatisfaction
Šwhen I talk with various people in the Federal Reserve, they might say, ﬁI do
n™t 
like looking at the FRB/
US projections because I see all 
of 
this monetary accommodation 
coming, and I don™t see inflation coming, a
nd why is that?
ﬂ  I talk to people, and they worry a lot 
about inflation.  
We aren™t able to model that
Šapparently not sa
tisfactorily, 
because they all 
come back to the same place, which is
, expectations are well anchored or the stochastic process 
is 
mean
 reverting at some level, and so we just don™t see things getting out of hand.  I want to 
point out 
that this is not 
a FRB
/US question per se, but it™s a statement about how much we 
really 
know within the context of well-articulated macro models.  It™s way beyond just FRB/
US. 
All of our DSGE models have that same feature. 
So the bottom line, Mr. Chairman, 
is that this is the
 third summer in a row that economic 
growth has failed to achieve escape velocity, and the economy™s liftoff has fizzled on the 
          
                 
               launching pad.  It seems clear that the outlook crosses the threshold that justifies more action.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Thank you.
  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When we were in Jackson Hole, 
we got to hear you, Mr. Chairman, talk about the tools we have available.  You described our 

asset purchase tools and our communication tools, and so I™d like to give you some feedback 

from the 
Ninth District about how we™re doing on the communication front.  I get the same kinds 
of questions, I would sayŠusually from different people, but they sometimes come from the 

same person
.  The first comment is
, as the FOMC 
considers its date to keep rates low through 
late 2014, people are concerned, 
why is 
it that 
the Fed 
is 
committed to keep
ing 
rates low for two 
years
?  How could the Fed commit like this without thinking about the fact that the world could 
change in some fashion
?  And the second 
comment is
, by saying that interest rates are going to 
be low for that long or 
are expected
 to be low for that long, the Fed is signaling that conditions 
will be weak, and that
, in and of itself, is suppressing demand.  Now, of course, I say to them, 
ﬁNo, you misunderstood what the FOMC is intending to say to you.  It is meaning to 

communicate that the economic conditions threshold for raising rates is now higher than you 

might have thought.  The recovery has to be further along than you might have thought.ﬂ  A
t this 
stage, my questioner says, 
ﬁWell, that makes sense, but why didn™t you guys just say that?ﬂ  A
t that point, I usually turn the conversation to something about fracking 
[laughter] because that 
seems to work.  To me, this kind of dialogue suggests 
that 
we need to communicate more clearly 
about our reaction function.  And communication about our reaction function is sometimes 

motivated in terms of accountability and transparency, and these are, I think, good motivations.  
      
       
    
                           
       But as my brief summary of my 
Ninth District colloquies indicates, communication about 
our react
ion function is also an 
essential
 ingredient to the effectiveness of policy. 
Now, the changes that have been made in B(5) relative to what was in the previous 
FOMC statement in July
ŠB(5) 
now represents even more of a commitment because actually the 
conditioning clauses have been removed, although 
many readers were not paying close attention 
to those conditional clauses anyway.  I think the lead-in sentence to B(5) is much better, but I 

have to say, most people don™t read the words that carefully in the FOMC statement.  Their 

takeaway is the year.  That™s the main thing they™re hearing. 
So before we communicate 
our reaction function, we have to start thinking about how we 
formulate one, and as I™
ve m
entioned before, I think that a good reaction function should have at 
least two inputs
: some measure of inflationary pressures and some measure 
of labor 
market 
underutilization.  These inputs would capture how well we™re doing in terms of our two 

mandates
, and our policy stance, I would think, should evolve as these inputs change.  
I see this 
as the basis for the approach that President Plosser, President Williams
, and I are following in 
our alternative policy statements.  The K
PW statements emphasize only those changes of the 
data that are viewed as leading to changes in measures of inflationary pressures and labor market 

underutilization.  
And then the KPW statement
s translate those changes in inflationary pressure
s and labor market underutilization into 
the rationale for the 
Commit
tee
™s policy decisions.  
At this 
point, I™ll digress briefly to say that I think we™ve completed our cycle of going through the 

parallel FOMC statements, and President Plosser, I believe, will bring forward the KPW 

approach to t
he 
subcommittee on communications for further consideration.  So I™m sure the 
subcommittee members are glad to hear that.
  That said, just like the FOMC statement itself, the 
               
                    KPW memos are very oriented around changes in monetary accommodation and how they 
relate 
to changes in conditions. 
Ultimately
, though, 
a Committee reaction function has to translate the level of 
inflationary pressures and the level of resource utilization into a decision about the level of 
monetary accommodation.  A 
key challenge we
™ve
 struggled 
with is that it™s much easier for us 
to reach accord about the changes in these variables than it is for us to reach accord
, at least 
qualitatively, about the levels of inflationary pressures and the levels of resource utilization.  A
s we saw fr
om submissions of the consensus forecast, there are very different views around the 
table on that.  Some might see this heterogeneity as precluding the possibility of developing a 

Committee reaction function, but I think this is where the consensus forecas
t process is a very 
useful way forward.  It provides a way for us to come together behind a 
Committee view about 
the medium-term inflation outlook and about the economy™s performance relative to the 

employment mandate, conditional on our current policy stance now and as anticipated.  
Then we 

can usefully formulate the Committee™s reaction function as a mapping from that consensus vi
ew into policy choices.  ﬁMedium-
term inflation is too high relative to target
ﬂ:  That would say you 
should contemplate reducing accommodation.  ﬁThe unemployment rate is too high over the 

medium run relative to 
mandate
-consistent levels
ﬂ:  Then the Committee should contemplate 
adding accommodation. 
Mr. Chairman, the Committee™s consensus view about the economy seems clear, and it™
s been described in many recent FOMC statement
s. The Committee expects inflation to be at or 
below target over the medium run and unemployment to continue to be elevated fo
r some time 
relative to mandate
-consistent levels.  That consensus viewŠ
inflation 
running too low; 
                 
        
                         unemployment, too highŠimplies a need for additional accommodation, accommodation that 
would lower unemployment while keeping inflation near target. 
I open
ed by discussing a public desire, 
at least in the Ninth District
, for greater clarit
y about our reaction function.  In the next go-round, 
I™ll describe how
, by fulfilling that desire
, we 
can also provide additional accommodation.  And I™ll return to the question being posed to me 

implicitly by my Ninth District interlocutors
:  Under what conditions 
will
 the FOMC begin to 
raise the fed funds rate? I will argue that our communications often suggest the FOMC is 

unwilling to tolerate low unemployment, even if that low unemployment rate is not translating 

into medium-
term inflationary pressure
s.  And I think p
aragraph 5
 of 
alternative B offers us an 
opportunity to clarify our attitude toward low unemploymentŠthat we™re not against low 

unemployment 
if it doesn™t lead to medium
-term inflationary pressures. Maybe that clarification 
could provide stimulus that™s appropriate in light of the Committee™s consensus outlook.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
The 10
th District economy continues to 
expand at a moderate pace. Our retail, restaurant
, and auto contacts reported higher sales and 
expect gains in coming months, particularly those in the auto sector.  
Energy activity expanded 

further as gains in oil drilling outpaced declines in natural gas drilling.  Housing marke
t conditions continued to improve, and construction activity increased for both residential and 

nonresidential sectors.  
Manufacturing activity in the 
District expanded at a slightly faster pace in 
August.  The number of contacts in our manufacturing surve
y who 
were expecting higher levels 
of production and shipments in six months moved notably higher, and expectations of 

employment gains remained in positive territory. 
One component of our survey that has softened 
      
    
       
                           over the past several months is the expec
ted level of new export orders.  The number of contacts 

reporting higher levels has been declining but still outweighs those expecting an outright decline.  

So far this year
, total 
District exp
orts remain above their level a year ago, though exports to 
Eur
ope have been decreas
ing. 
In terms of the D
istrict labor market
, initial claims for 
unemployment insurance have declined notably over the past few months, and layoff 

announcements have been modest.  Still, employers remain quite cautious about expanding their 

payrolls.  
In terms of ag
ricultural
 conditions, U.S. net farm incomes are 
projected to reach their 
second
-highest level in history despite the worst dr
ought in three decades. Farm incomes are 
being supported by higher crop prices and crop insurance payments, 
which are offsetting 

declines in production and livestock profits.  In addition, the persistent, strong demand from the 

ethanol and export sectors continues to strain low crop inventories and could 
place upward 

pressure on prices heading into 2013 as reflected in futures markets. 
Turning to the national outlook, the recovery has been progressing mostly in line with my 
expectations.  Overall, I take a similar view as the 
Tealbook in that incoming dat
a since the last 
meeting ha
ve not materially affected my outlook for 
economic 
growth.
  For the second half of 
this year, I anticipate 
that 
firms will remain reluctant to undertake large expansion projects or 
aggressively add to payrolls because of the near-term risk.  In particular, I noted in the most 

recent NFIB survey that small businesses cite taxes and the regulatory landscape as their most 

pressing problems, with poor sales third on the list.  These issues are reaffirmed when I talk with 

my business contacts, 
and suggest that monetary policy may find it particularly challenging to 

offset headwinds of this nature.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 
                    
                         MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Incoming information since our last 
meeting suggests that economic conditions in the 
Third
 District have continued to improve 
modestly.  Although labor markets and manufacturing remain subdued, the housing sector and 
retail
 sales have strengthened notably.  Housing markets in the D
istrict are 
showing their 
strongest signs of recovery since the recession began.  House prices are up significantly in the 

second quarter in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.  Housing permits driv
en mostly by multifamily
-sector housing have been on an upward trend, and residential builders and real estate agents both 

reported increased activity in August.  
The commercial real estate market is also showing 

continued signs of strength.  Tightening in the office market in C
enter 
City
, Philadelphia, 
is 
placing upward pressure o
n rents.  
Retail sales in the region have grown somewhat faster over 
the intermeeting
 period, and auto sales have continued to increase at a good pace. 
Turning to the nation, based on incoming information, my forecast for the second half of 
this year is not terribly enlightening. It™s modest
, and I think it will continue to be over the 

coming six months.  
How
ever, my medium-term and longer-term forecasts have not changed 
very much and, indeed, point to a continuing modest recovery.  Given the large size and nature 

of the shocks that hit the economy, a slow recovery, 
as we™ve heard
, is actually the most likely 
outcome.  It™s not necessarily evidence that our monetary policy stance is inappropriate.  Indeed, 

many of the rules reported in Tealbook 
B suggest 
that policy is about right.  Political and fiscal 
uncertainties at home and abroad still cloud the outlook and are holding back business 

investment.
  Overwhelmingly, 
the anecdotal evidence suggests that business leaders
™ reluctance 
to invest and hire i
s driven by uncertainty, not excessively tight financial conditions.  Households 
continue to deleverage, and that™s holding back spending as saving remains high.  My concern is 

that 
none of the
se headwinds will likely be ameliorated or substantially affected in the near term 
                
    
                             with further monetary easing or the 
further 
easing 
of 
financial conditions.  That doesn™t seem to 
be a constraint. 
I know I™m not alone in having wished for a stronger employment report last Friday.  
The 
payroll increase in August and the downward revisions to June and July were disappointing.  
Despite the strong actions that the Fed has taken, the unemployment rate remains above 

8 percent.
 This has generated a discussion about whether the continuing high levels of 
unemployment are structural or cyclical in nature. I actually don™t find this conversation very 

useful, particularly for policy.  Rather, 
I believe 
it™s better to think about whether the high level 
of unemployment can be addressed by further easing of financial conditions, whic
h is what 
monetary policy would entail.  
It seems to me that before we conclude that unemployment calls 
for more monetary policy accommodation, we must understand more about the nature of the 

shock that™s caused high unemployment and its unwelcome persiste
nce.  This is consistent with 
President Lacker™s observations.  It™s not about whether unemployment is 
cyclical, structural, 
permanent
, or temporary, necessarily.  It™s about understanding the nature of the shock that™s 
causing the problem that we observe. 
There™s still a lot we don™t understand about the labor market and its ongoing struggles.  
Academic and public debate expresses a wide range of views, and we should be humble about 

our state of knowledge.  We™ve discussed, for example, the difficulty of t
ransferring skills from 
one sector to another.  Those who lost their jobs in construction will have a hard time going to 

other industries.  But this type of unemployment cannot be solved by monetary policy.  

However,
 it™s not the only source of mismatch.  
Skill mismatch can occur within sectors, not just 
across sectors. 
Jai
movich and S
iu point to what™s called job polarizatio
n.  Job opportunities in 
middle
-skill occupations, which tend to be focused on routine tasks, 
are disappearing because of 
                
                  
          changes in 
technology and other things, while low-
skill
 and high-skill job opportunities are in 
fact increasing.
  The employment share of routine occupationsŠthis middle group, which 
includes jobs 
such as machine operators, meat
-processing plant workers, and 
office a
nd administrative supportŠ
has been decreasing since the mid
-1980s.  At the same time, the 
employment share of nonroutine cognitive occupationsŠincluding surgeons, lawyers, and, 
of 
course, economistsŠand that of nonroutine manual operationsŠ
whether it be janitors, 

gardeners, bartenders, 
or 
home health care
Šhave been rising. 
In other words, there appears to 
be a polarization in the job market to
ward the low and the high, 
or the tails of the distribution
, and away from the middle.  During the three jobless recoveries since 1991, the level of 

employment in these routine occupations has never recovered to pre-
recession levels.  The 
absolute level appears to fall and fall permanently.  The fact 
that 
this job loss seems to occur 
sharply during rece
ssions makes it appear to be cyclical, but it does not recover.  This is a 
phenomenon that cannot be addressed by monetary policy.  
For t
hose who point to low w
age 
growth as evidence against mismatch
, it™s interesting to note that real wages in the tail of 
the 
distribution actually seem to be rising modestly, unlike in the middle of the distribution.  Again, 

we do not have definite answers to what™s happening in the labor market, but we need to 

consider that evidence exists that the problems may not be amen
able to monetary policy 
or easing of financial conditions. 
The FOMC has applied a high level of monetary stimulus during this recession and 
recovery.  The fed funds rate has been effectively zero for four years, and we 
have said we 
expect 
it to remain 
there 
at least through late 2014.  We have implemented two rounds of asset 
purchases, followed by the maturity extension program.  Yet unemployment remains high.  

Given this evidence, one could draw two possible conclusions.  One is that monetary policy is 
         
    
    
                   
  
         
   
   
   the right tool, but we just haven™t implemented a large enough program.  Given the sluggish 
employment response to date and the large amount of stimulus that has been supplied
, it seems 

as though 
it™s increasingly plausible that further monetary accommodation
 is not going to be 
effective in quickening the pace of recovery to 
a higher 
level
 of employment
, much as we wish it 
could. 
One still might argue that because high unemployment is very costly and we are 
uncertain about the effect of more monetary policy accommodation, we should try it.  What do 

we have to lose?  Well, in my view, 
we have a lot to lose. The large
r the balance sheet becomes
, the higher 
are 
the risks to the economy that we will not be able to exit in a way that preserves 
price stability, maximum employment
, or 
our own credibility.  Ever-more-
aggressive action 
increases the r
isk of poor outcomes in the not-too-distant future or maybe the distant future.  
To avoid this, we are going to have to be relying on tools that are not guaranteed to work.  Inflation 

expectations, while stable, are stable 
until they™re not.  Should inflation begin to rise quickly, we 

may have to contract our balance sheet at a very fast pace or perhaps raise IOER very rapidly. 

Will that be disruptive to markets? We won™t 
know until we face that situation.  If our policy is 

not very effective at influencing unemployment rates, then inflation could begin to rise well 

before unemployment has shown much of a decline.  Will we have the fortitude to take the 

necessary actions to reduce accommodation
, and if so, how well will we be able to communicate 
our rationale?  Would we disrupt markets? Would we reverse the progress on unemployment? I 

have grave concerns that we are sowing the seeds of a very complicated exit for little or
 no benefit to the unemployment rate today.  
We say these exit risks are manageable, and I™d like to 

believe that they are, but we really don™t know that.  Given the unprecedented nature of the 

actions we™ve taken, how manageable these risks are is really 
unknowable at this time.  
We are 
       
      
                 
         
    
     
     
   
       and will be in uncharted waters.  That™s one reason I strongly urge us to be prudent.  To my 
mind
, at this point, costs of further action greatly exceed expected benefits.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank 
you.  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, just as 
President Lacker was 
a straight man for President 
Lockhart, in a 
way
, President Plosser has been a straight man for me
.  L
ike President Pianalto
, I will interlocutate 
[laughter] 
more tomorrow than I plan to do today. 
President Williams made a very important point. 
He talked about how uncertainty has 
paralyzed most businesses and how uncertainty acts as an aggregate demand shock.  I agree with 

that analysis. I hear that from my contacts.  The ques
tion is, is monetary policy effective in 
offsetting this form of uncertainty?  President George mentioned the National Federation of 

Independent Business.  She cited some data.  What she did not cite was that 93 
percent of that 

sample makes clear that they
 do not wish to borrow, 
either because of uncertainty or because 
they have access to capital that
™s abundant and cheap.  In my own surveys 
as preparation for this 
meeting, I asked a simple question
: If the actions we were to take at this upcoming meeting 
were 
to reduce your cost of capital by 25 basis points or more, what would it do in terms of your 

investment plans? I deliberately sampled larger companies because that™s 
where cap
-ex come
s from.  Employment comes from small
 and medium-sized businesses.  
We assume that, just by 

sheer wei
ght of numbers, significant cap-
ex come
s from large corporations.  And I would say 
that 
9 out of 10 said it would not change 
thei
r investment plans, even if we took action that led to 
a reduction 
of 
1 percent or more in the
ir cost of capital.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 
                       
     
                           
    
        VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  First, I want to make a comment on President Fisher™s 
last remark.  My understanding is that capital spending has never been particularly i
nterest rate 
sensitive.  It™s really driven by demand and capacity utilization, things of that nature.  So I 
wouldn™t expect that to be a really strong channel by which monetary 
policy stimulates the 
economy. 
MR. FISHER.  Can I just make a point to that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
.  Sure. 
MR. FISHER.  At least in the drafts 
of our statement, we were 
saying that 
business fixed 
investment was weak.  The question is, are we affecting business fixed investment?  And, more 

important than 
that, are we affecting employment? 
My point is that in the responses I™
m getting 
to anecdotal 
inquiryŠ
not systematically organized, although the systematic surveys that we see, 
through the NFIB and others, show 
that it is questionable whether or not we are ac
tually 
affec
ting employment.  The question is, 
are we affecting employment 
over the short term or the 
long term?  We have a wealth effect.  The Chairman has made that a very strong argument, 

including 
at the last meeting. 
If you™re advising 
a corporation about what to do with the savings 
that they can achieve through cheaper capital
, they can invest it in greater plant or equipment 
expansion, they can buy back their stock, or they can increase their dividends.  And I would 

argue that the former would have 
a more immediate impact on employment creation than the 
latter. 
Excuse me. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
My point was that I don™t think very many people in the 
room would debate the point that capital spending is not going to be very influenced by small 

changes
 in interest rates.  So I don™t think that™
s something that we have a big disagreement 
about around the table. 
                    
             
    
          
           
    
    As far as the outlook is concerned, since the last meeting, I think there™
s been very little 
change with respect to the U.S. data.  Some data are 
a bit better
Šthe retail sales data, the motor 
vehicle sales data.  Some are 
worse
Šlike the ISM, which fell below 50, and the components of 
the ISM were particularly weak. 
Inventory strength actually held up the ISM, which is a little 
concerning.  T
he cap
ital goods orders have clearly been weak.  I™ve noticed that, if you look at 
the nondefense capital goods orders ex air, the rate of orders now has 
fallen below the rate of 
shipments, and this is actually not a positive indicator for what™s going to happen 
to capital 
spending going forward. In terms of payrolls, I was prepared to come into the meeting, if we had 

a strong payroll employment report, to argue how noisy the data 
are
 and how we can™t take a
ny signal from 
that
. But the reality is, if you really
 look at the trendŠand understand that there™
s a 
lot of noise in the 
series
Šthe last two months, 118,000 per month
; so far this year
, 139,000 per 
month
; in 2011, 153,000 per month.  Now, there™s noise month to month, but if you look at the 

longer-
term tren
ds, 
what you see is basically either a flat trend or maybe a gradually slowing 
trend.  So that™s what I would take away from the payroll data. 
There are 
also two other negative developments that I think are really worth highlighting.  
First, I think the external environment continues to worsen.  We™ve talked a lot about Europe, but 

we haven™t really talked very much about China.  ChinaŠif you look at the 
official GDP growth 
numbersŠ
is still okay; 7.6 percent, I think, 
was 
the number for the last quarter.  But if you look 
at the actual indicators coming out of China
Šlike 
trade
, for exampleŠ
it would not at all 
surprise me if it turned out that the Chinese sl
owdown was much more substantial than what the 

official indicators 
show.  
We™re also going to be seeing a further shock to real income over the 
near term from higher oil, gasoline, and grain prices.  T
he grain price effect is going to be 
particularly probl
ematic for the EMEs
, where f
ood is a much larger share of the consumption 
          
  
      
          
        
        
     
    
 basket.
  Also, as many other people have noted, the risks in early 2013 are tilted to the downside 
given what
™s going to happen on the fiscal front.  I don™t think any of us knows 
with any 
certainty what
™s going to happen, but the uncertainty between now and then is negative for the 
outlook.  And I think most of us 
believe 
that we
™re probably going to end up with some greater 
degree of fiscal restraint in early 2013 than what we have 
right now. 
So to me, the economic outlook calls for us to do more.  Now, I agree that the tools we 
have are not that powerful.  But rather than concluding from this that we shouldn™t use them, I 
conclude that we should use them more forcefully.  I think 
a failure to act forcefully at this 
meeting would be very damaging to confidence; 
it would imply that we
™re out of ammunition or 
almost out of ammunition
; and it 
also 
might signal that we were cowed by the political 
environment, which I think would be very u
nfortunate.
  When I consider the risks to action 
versus inaction in an uncertain world, I also view the outcome very much as quite 
asymmetric, 
with the bias clearly on the side of action.  
Consider two alternatives
:  We do more, and the 
economy is stronger 
than expected
; versus, 
we do very little
, and the economy disappoints.  
Which creates the greatest disappointment? Surely the latter. 
I would be very happy if we did 
another round of LSAPs, extended the guidance, et cetera, and the economy turned out to 

surprise us and did better than expected.  In that case, we could cut off the LSAP program early, 

and the balance sheet wouldn™t have grown very much.  In contrast, if we do nothing and the 

economy disappoints, I think we will rue that as a lost opportuni
ty. I also think the timing is 
right.  The ECB did something very forceful at their last meeting, and following on right behind 

them might actually provide a firmer underpinning or momentum to confidence and market 

sentiment. 
       
         
             
           Now, what
™s the lesson of the past few years? Well, I think the lesson of the past few 
years is 
that 
we™ve been consistently disappointed on the 
economic 
growth side of the equation.  
There are two explanations for this.  One is that the headwinds were greater than what we 
thought, but there™
s another explanation as well
Šthat maybe monetary policy is not as 
accommodative as we thought.  And this goes back to President Williams™s 
comments. 
I™
m pretty convinced that monetary policy stimulus effects probably become attenuated over time, 
because part of the way that monetary policy works is by affecting the timing of spending 

decisions.  We don™t really have an experience where we
™ve had a period like this in which 

monetary policy has supposedly been very loose for many years in a row.  A
nd I expect what 
we™re seeing is that the monetary policy impulse to the growth side is actually lessening over 
time.
  Regardless of whether you say it™s consistent disappointment because of headwinds or 
consistent disappointment because monetary policy is not as 
stimul
ative
, as we thought, I think 
either way
, they both imply that we should do more.  
We™ve essentially foreshadowed forceful 
action in the August FOMC statement, the minutes to that meeting, and the Chairman™s Jackson 

Hole speech, so I think it™s time to follow up on what we™ve foreshadowed with action at this 

meeting.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anybody for coffee?  Coffee is available.  Why don™t we 
take 20 minutes and return at 3:10? 
[Coffee break] 
CHA
IRMAN BERNANKE
.  This i
s a prompt group.  I like this. 
MR. 
LACKER
.  Thanks to Debbie.  Thanks to the Deputy S
ecretary. 
MS. DANKER.  Happy to help. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  All right.  Governor Yellen. 
      
    
      
           
                     
     
  
    
MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The two employment reports we have 
received since our last meeting confirm that the economy is growing too slowly to generate any 
meaningful progress in improving labor market conditions.  They™re consistent with an economy 
that is expanding at or near its potential.  And although I was heart
ened by July™s strong reading 
on consumer spending, I agree with the staff™s reluctance to make too much out of one month of 

better data.
  Taking a broader perspective, incoming data provide no evidence of any 
fundamental change in the outlook for the better.  I agree with the conclusion, too, of the staff 

memo for this meeting that the preponderance of evidence points to a large margin of labor 

market slack. 
If payroll gains are sustained at their recent paceŠaround 125,000 per month in 
July and AugustŠ
there
™s a good chance that we will look back on a lost decade.  The SEP 
forecast I submitted this round shows unemployment hovering above 7 percent at the end of 

2014, even with substantial additional policy accommodation.  Moreover, continued progress at 

the pace we have seen recently is a big ﬁif.ﬂ 
Readings from some forward
-looking indicators, 
such as the expectations component of consumer sentiment and new orders for nondefense 

capital goods ex aircraft, do not bode well for household and business spending in the months 

ahead. 
Amid the search for explanations of the painfully slow recovery, there™
s been a lively 
debate about the role of economic uncertainty.  Now, there are many different sources of 

economic uncertainty, but many of you have highlighted uncertainty about economic policy, 

especially about European policy responses and about the outlook for U.S. fiscal policies.  

You
™ve noted that this policy uncertainty has been restraining household and business spending.  
And several of you have hypothesized that this might account for the weak spending and hiring 

we saw last spring. 
If uncertainty about economic policy as opposed to uncertainty about the 
                      
     
                    broader economic outlook, accounts for why employers were deferring hiring and investment 
decisions, then a lifting of that uncertainty might arguably provide a significant boost to 

spending.  Under a favorable scenario, for example, we could see some resolution of fiscal policy 

uncertainty in the months after the election.  My own view is that policy un
certainty has been 
exerting some negative influence on aggregate demand.  Some systematic evidence of its 

influence comes from empirical work by Nick Bloom at Stanford.  Bloom and his coauthors have 

developed a high-frequency measure of economic policy uncertainty, and they™
ve related this 
measure to key economic variables, such as payroll employment growth.  They show that 

increases in economic policy uncertainty foreshadow declines in output, employment, and 

investment, and that high levels of policy uncertainty in recent years, such as uncertainty about 

future tax policies and the debt ceiling, have hampered the recovery. 
But economic policy uncertainty is only one of many factors relevant to the economic 
outlook.  And the evidence, as I read it, strongly suggests that an uptick in policy uncertainty 

cannot account for last spring™s slowdown.  Bloom™s index of economic p
olicy 
uncertainty 
spiked up in the summer of 2011, but by March it had fallen back two-thirds of the way toward 

pre
-recession levels. 
It remained at low levels in April and May, at the very time when the 
economic recovery was sputtering.  On the premise that economic policy uncertainty affects 

economic activity through consumer and business sentiment, it™s also worth noting that several 

ind
exes of consumer sentiment and business optimism peaked in April or May.  
So an increase in 
economic policy uncertainty does not seem capable of explaining the spring slowdown.  This 

suggests to me that spending is unlikely to surge, even if policy uncerta
inty were to diminish in 
the months ahead.  Unfortunately, our current economic malaise has substantially deeper roots 

than just uncertainty about the future direction of economic policy, and these headwinds are 
           
       
    
        unlikely to soon subside. Uncertainty, broadly defined, does, however, influence my thinking 
about monetary policy.  Uncertainty provides a reason why we should act forcefully now to 

strengthen the recovery, rather than trying to keep our powder dry.  Given the downside risks to 

the current outlook, and the constraints on our ability to provide stimulus while the funds rate is 

at the lower bound, the best we can do at this point is to ensure that the economy is as resilient as 

possible in case we are faced with fiscal gridlock, a European debacle, o
r other negative shocks. 
Another argument for strong action relates to h
yste
resis.  We face the worrisome risk that 
the longer the economy operates with such high levels of slack, the more likely it is that the 

downturn will have a lasting negative impact on employment and potential output.  I™
ve seen no 
strong evidence for h
yste
resis effects yet, but our current situation is unprecedented, at least in 
recent U.S. history.  
In the early 1980s, the unemployment rate fell almost 
4 percentage points 
over the 2¾ years following its late 1982 peak, to 7 percent.  By contrast, since its most recent 

peak in October 2009, the unemployment rate has fallen less than 2 percentage points.  

Moreover, h
yste
resis effects may become evident not only in the unemployment rate, but also in 
labor force participation.  As the Tealbook box shows, the participation rate remains far below 

the staff™s estimate of its demographic trend rate, and persistently poor job-finding prospects may 

well leave a permanent imprint on the particip
ation rate.
  Taking this argument one step further, I 
would argue that just as there can be permanent costs of allowing unemployment to remain high 

for an extensive time, there can also be permanent gains in output and employment in a high-

pressure labor market.
  We saw some evidence of this in the late 1990s, when h
yste
resis seemed 
to be working in reverse by pulling population segments into the labor force that for a long time 

had been excluded.  Chronic labor shortages induced firms to invest more heavily in training, 
         
        
       
                        
and it fostered upward mobility as firms moved employees up through internal job ladders more 
rapidly. 
Hyste
resis provides a rationale for 
a more expansionary monetary policy.  The argument 
runs as follows.  Our usual loss function is symmetric around 
the 
NAIRU.  It thus assigns equal 

costs to given size deviations of unemployment above and below 
the 
NAIRU.  But with 
hyste
resis
, the penalty for a deviation of unemployment above 
the 
NAIRU should be greater than 
that for an identical deviation of unemployment below 
the 
NAIRU.
  The implications of such an 
asymmetric weighting of unemployment gaps for optimal monetary policy in the present 

circumstances are substantial.  Bob Tetlow, a staff member in the 
Board™s 
Division of Research 
and Statistics, has been exploring optimal control simulations where the loss function depends on 

the squared deviations of a transformation of the unemployment rate from the NAIRU, rather 

than on the squared deviations of the unemployment rate itself from the 
NAIRU. 
This is a 
tractable technique for, in effect, assuming an asymmetric loss function.  In Tetlow™s 

simulations, the only policy tool available is the path of the federal funds rate.  His results 

showed that even a moderately lower weight on unemployment undershoots below the NAIRU, 

relative to overshoots, could postpone the timing of liftoff substantially. 
Based on all of these considerations, in tomorrow™s policy go-round or maybe this 
afternoon™s, I will argue that strong policy action is called fo
r at this meeting. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was going to make comments about my 
forecast compared 
with
 the consensus, but I™m not entirely sure which one of the consensus 
forecasts to compare it 
with. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You pick. 
[Laughter] 
          
              
                      
        
       MS. DUKE. I
™ll just say that I think it
™s not inconsistent, but there are four assumptions 
that are a little bit different in my forecast than in the Tealbook and
, maybe
, in the forecasts of 
some of you.  Th
e first one 
is that there is an underlying strength in the fundamentals of the 
economyŠ
such as balance sheet strength, debt service capacity, and credit supply
Šand that this 
strength is being masked by low levels of business and consumer confidence as well 
as concern 
about risks posed by Europe and the fiscal cliff, but that whenever loan demand picks up, 
the 
credit supply will be fully available to meet it. 
The second
 one is 
that it
™ll be especially difficult 
to interpret data over the second half of this year and the first half of next year, as investment and 

purchase decisionmaking is increasingly either paralyzed or distorted by uncertainty about 

federal tax and spending policies, and that, on balance, the uncertainty itself will depress activity 

and lead to weaker outcomes for 2012 and 2013.  Third, the one place I do still see a potential for 

an upside surprise is in housing, and I 
believe
 purchasing mortgages might be helpful here, but 
not necessarily in the ways that you might think.  And, finally, I 
have assumed that we choose 
alternative B today
.  Furthermore, in light of my assumptions about the fiscal cliff, we™
re more 
likely to face deteriorating conditions than simply unsatisfactory progress as we approach the 

end of the year; 
and that the deter
ioration will lead us to continue asset purchases well into 2013. 
In recent meetings
, I™ve talked at length about my belief in the first assumption, and I™
m not going to repeat that today.  But I™d like to discuss assumptions 2 and 3 in this round and 

rese
rve comments about assumption 4 for the policy round.  
Beginning with my pessimism about 

the rest of this year and the first part of next, almost every conversation that I™
ve had with a 
business person or a banker recently has ha
d the same theme: 
Things s
eem pretty much the 
same
Šslow, steady improvement in business fundamentals, but with a new tendency to put all 

long-term investment or expansion decisions off until after the election.  Oddly enough, these 
                     
             
                  
businesses have the luxury of postponing decisionm
aking precisely because things have 
improved.  They™ve strengthened their balance sheets and found ways to grow the bottom line 
even in the face of sluggish top-
line growth. In fact, their profitability
-improvement efforts are 
likely at least partly 
responsible for the slow improvement in labor markets.  Indeed, the business 
investments that do get the green light are mostly directed at saving labor, and no one mentions 

any plans for hiring.  I believe the marked slowdown in business spending that we™
re already 
seeing is 
a direct result of a wait
-and
-see attitude. 
As we get closer to the end of the year and the expiration of tax cuts, implementation of 
expense sequestration, and expiration of fixes for doctors and alternative minimum taxes, 

businesses 
and individuals will have to start making adjustments for what could happen, whether 

or not it actually does.  For example, contractors who expect that they™
ll have to cut staffing if 
their contracts are affected by sequestration are legally required to is
sue layoff notices in 
advance, even if the spending is not ultimately cut and the layoffs don™t actually happen.  Those 

who receive the notices will surely adjust their spending accordingly, and this potential pall on 

holiday spending has to be making retailers nervous about their inventories.  Those same 

retailers are having to pull the trigger now on their inventory decisions in the face of a potential 

shutdown of E
ast 
Coast ports by a longshorem
en™s
 strike.  So who could blame them if they 
decide to shav
e a bit off their purchases just to be sure? 
Health
-care companies are especially 
cautious as they plan for both sequestration and implementation of health-
care reform.  Simple 
operational changes, like tax withholding tables, have to be put in place for all businesses.  For 

individuals, asset sales decisions, especially for sales of businesses, will have to be made soon to 

ensure the current capital gains tax rate. I had the personal experience of doing a new will 

recently, and my lawyer explained to me 
that things would be very different if I died this year or 
              
                
        
   
         
 in January [laughter].  For these reasons, I believe that the fourth quarter is going to be 
affe
cted 
by the fiscal cliff regardless of its ultimate resolution as businesses
, in particular
, hit the 
brakes. 
And I ca
n™t convince myself that a lame
-duck Congress will somehow resolve all of the fiscal 
issues by the end of the year, no matter how the election turns out.  In fact, the best case I can 
construct is a temporary extension that pushes the poli
tical wrangling well into the first quarter 
of next year.  And after the debt ceiling brinkmanship we saw last time, I think a perfectly 

plausible scenario is a plunge off the fiscal cliff
, on the assumption that some sort of deal will be 
easier to construct after the damage becomes more obvious.
  So I think we have to make 
contingency plans for how we can shore up confidence in the face of a really bad outcome, 
rather 
than thinking just about 
how we react if the recovery stays unsatisfactorily slow.  For these 
reasons, I
™ve taken on board a bit of a lean toward the 
ﬁFiscal 
Cliff
ﬂ scenario in the near
-term 
portion of my forecast. 
In contrast, my continued optimism about housing and the underlying strength in the 
economy shows through in my medium-
term foreca
st.  I think 
that 
the inventory factors that 
began to emerge early in the year are now taking full hold in house price movements, and that 

the momentum arrow is pointing up.  This makes a difference.  
The s
taff estimates that roughly 
3 million households, 
almost 
one-
fourth
 of underwater households, moved from a negative to a 
positive equity position in the second quarter.  The Tealbook baseline forecast assumes a 

5 percent increase in house prices this year that
™s already pretty much baked in, 
followed by a 
leveling
-off.  But some models are predicting continued strong gains in house prices.  Staff 
forecasts of house prices and residential investment are on the conservative side, tempered by 

concern about foreclosure pipelines, 
the elevated level of vacant h
ouses, weak household 
formation, and the tepid pace of 
the 
housing recovery so far. 
                                  Here I think there™
s reason for more optimism. 
Foreclosure pipelines are full because the 
exits are still clogged, but the pace of new delinquencies has slowed markedly.  
The exits are no 
longer clogged by national moratoriums or retooling for new modification programs.  The 

current backlog is more closely tied to state
-specific or operational issues that seem to me 
unlikely to suddenly clear and release a flood of foreclosures onto the market.  
As for the vacant 

inventory, a large portion of the vacant homes not listed for sale 
is outside of bank REO 
inventory.  
Becaus
e we don™t know why they™
re held off the market, I
™m not sure we can make 
assumptions about their sudden return to the market.  I view the potential for pent-up demand to 

show through in faster household formation and put upward pressure on house prices as even 

more likely than the potential for a surge in foreclosures to hold prices down.  At some point, 

demographics win.  Those kids now living at home with their 
parents will not stay there until 
they™re 40.  
[Laughter] 
And when they do form households, they™re going to require housing 
units, whether rental or owner occupied. 
MR. 
FISHER
.  We™re going to hold you to that. 
MS. 
RASKIN
.  Ship them to Betsy™s house.  [Laughter] 
MS. DUKE.  To me, this represents the one area of dry tinder in the economy that could 
be lit with a spark of confidence.  To be sure, mortgage lending conditions are still extremely 

tight, but some recent developments should help.  The specte
r of putback risk has reportedly 
been holding back loans to borrowers at the lower end of GSE standards.  
The 
FHFA has now 

committed to reducing putback risk beginning in January 2013 through better front-end quality 

control and time limits on liability.  Wit
h house prices on the rise, fewer loans should fall 

through 
because of
 appraisal issues.  Regulatory uncertainty should clear, 
as new regulatory 
               
     
                  
      
          requirements for loan origination, securitization, and servicing are likely to be finalized in the 
coming month
s. Probably the biggest drag on lending is the shrinkage of loan origination capacity.  The 
industry is showing signs of strain in what looks to be only a tri
llion
-dollar origination year, 
compared 
with 
a peak origina
tion of $3 trillion not that many years 
ago. 
But if high profits are 
the best fertilizer, we should see more banks entering the business.  I want to investigate actual 

data, but anecdotally, the bankers I spoke with this time 
who
 were in the mortgage business were 
actually having record profits, while those who weren™t in mortgage origination were wondering 

about their survival.  I™
m talking about the difference between a range of 
0.5 to 0.6 ROA, 
for 
those with no mortgage business, versus one of 1.30 to 1.50, for those with a mortgage business.  

So, for all of these reasons, I think there™s a lot of meat left on the house price and housing 
finance bone, and I™
m optimistic about that part of the forecast.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO
.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Because
 John captured my views on the 
economic outlook, I™m going to jettison most of what I would have said.  In fact, I think John 

captured my views better than I had captured my views.  So I thought I™d turn back to labor 

markets
, moved by some of Charlie Plosser™s comments.  The first comment I™d make 
is that it™s 
important to distinguish between cyclical lab
or market conditions and longer-
term labor market 
issues.  I don™t think there™s any doubt that we™ve got some chronic labor market issues in the 

United States.  There
™s been evidence of declining dynamism in U.S. labor markets for well over 
a decade.  There certainly is a substantial sense tha
t people currently taking lower-
income 
service
-sector jobsŠ
if they had better ed
ucation and trainingŠwould be available for jobs that 
might then 
be created with higher value added. 
What Charlie referred to as polarization is 
                         
     
                   
  
     
   undoubtedly true, but again, a chronic issue rather than a cyclical one.  I actually think that 
unlike so many other questions, there™s been a substantial convergence of viewsŠnot entirely, 

but a substantial convergence of viewsŠaround the proposition that a relatively small portion of 

the big jump in unemployment that we™ve seen is attributable to structural fact
ors. There
™s been, 
as you all know, substantial, good, and careful work from the Federal Reserve Banks of 

Cleveland, New York, 
and San Francisco over the past several years that
 has supported that 
conclusion.  A
nd I think among academic researchers, the c
onvergence is also manifesting itself
, as shown most recently in Ed Lazear™s paper at Jackson Hole, following on, by about five 

months, Jesse Rothstein™s paper, 
which surveyed much of the same material and came to many 

of the same conclusions. 
Jeff
, at the last meeting
, suggested that a paper done by Richmond Fed research staff was 
a dissonant voice on this basic proposition that structural unemployment was not a big part of the 

story.  This paper, of course, starts from a very different perspective on long-
term unemployment 
than the literature I just referred to a moment ago.  The Richmond Fed paper argues that an 

unobserved heterogeneity among unemployed workers means that newly unemployed workers 

have inherently different exit rates
, and that over 
time, the composition of the pool of the 
unemployed shifts toward workers who started with the lower exit rates.  I looked at the paper 

after Jeff talked about it at the last meeting, and I spoke with others here at the Board about it, 

and I actually don™t think it establishes a case for structural unemployment. There are a lot of 

empirical and technical questions about the paperŠ
it™s certainly interesting 
and may well have 
significant merit
Šbut I actually don™t think it™s making a structural argument, at 
least not if we 
think of ﬁ
structural
ﬂ as referring to nontransitory unemployment that can™t be affected fairly 
directly by fluctuations in aggregate demand.  It would be unsurprising to learn that firms are 
                
      
        
  
          more likely to lay off relatively less
-valued employees whose lesser perceived abilities may 
mean that they™re less likely to be quickly plucked up by a firm that is hiring.  That phenomenon 
is entirely consistent with 
a demand
-driven increase in unemployment.  
More generally, the 
Richmond Fed model attempts to decompose the variation in the pool of the unemployed over 

time.  So it addresses the reasons for fluctuations in unemployment over historyŠin recessions, 

but also in recoveries.  The reasons for unemploym
ent increases also explain the reversals that 
take place during recoveries.  That is, as there are fewer unemployed
, firms cannot afford to be 
as demanding and thus are more likely to turn to the pool of the supposedly less 
valuable 
workers. 
This seems
, to me at least
, more a 
cyclical than a structural explanation
, and thus, 
again, whatever the ultimate merits of the paper, I don™t think 
it really undercuts the consensus 

reached in the papers to which I referred earlier. 
One final thought on structural unemployment, 
and this relates a bit to what Janet was 
saying a moment ago.  The Richmond paper describes something as the ﬁtrue duration 

dependence
ﬂ position, as opposed to the ﬁunobserved heterogeneityﬂ position that it takes.  The 

true duration dependence position is that, quite apart from any inherent worker qualities, the bad 

luck of being unemployed for an extended period will itself begin to erode the overall 

employability of enough workers that there 
will 
be macroeconomic effects. As Janet said, 
histo
rically
, we haven™t seen much evidence of this in the United States, though many, myself 
included, have thought that the severity and duration of the current employment problem could 

produce some observable h
yste
resis effects this tim
e around.  L
ogically
, one would think that at 
some point these effects would manifest themselves.
  But I have to say, 
to date
, there still isn™t 
much indication of any such effects.  And indeed, I think if one looks at what™s been happening 

to long-term unemployed, you might sa
y there™s actually been a little bit of an improvement in 
                                       
their performance, which would suggest that we™re not sliding closer toward h
yste
resis, but that, 
once again
, for reasons not entirely understood, the U.S. 
labor market seems relatively insulated 
from those effects. But again, as Janet said, basically
, whether you believe that h
yste
resis is 
around the corner or not doesn™t change your policy prescription.  If you think that it hasn™t 
clicked in to date but it might, that™s an argument for greater stimulus now in order to stop it 

from happening.  If you think that there™s unlikely to be h
yste
resis and thus the cyclical 
explanation dominates, then obviously the unemployment should be susceptible to increased 

aggregate demand stimulus.  So, in that sense, I think 
these arguments
 happily converge around 
the same policy prescription.  And for me, 
this all, again, reinforces the view that the story of the 

economy is still one of inadequate aggregate demand.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  First
, I™d like to thank Governor Tarullo for reading the Richmond Fed 
paper
.  Second, I™d like to point out 
that
Šin terms of the distinction I was making before 
between what the unemployment rate would converge to in the long run and the reference rate 

that™s relevant for current policyŠ
a shock that hits the economy today, if it™s a structural shock 

that™s permanent and long lived, 
it is going to affect the longer-
term normal rate of 
unemployment
. But whether it™s permanent or transitory is irrelevant for whether it affects the 
policy-
relevant rate today.
  See what I™m saying? It doesn™t matter if it fades out right away or if 
it™s going to last a long time. It could affect the policy
-relevant rate to
day either way. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How does that handle policy lags?  Monetary policy doesn™t 
work for 
a while. 
       
                     
                 MR. LACKER.  I think that™s orthogonal.  I think that™s tangential to this question.  In the 
models, you™ve got policy lags.  Policy tak
es effect over time, but it™s still the case that you™re 
carrying around this reference rate
ŠPresident Bu
llard talked about a flex price equilibriumŠ 
and it™s affected by both transitory and permanent shocks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook has not changed materially since 
the JulyŒ
August meeting.  Maybe incoming data ha
ve been mixed, but forward-looking 
indicators still remain consistent with an economy growing in the near term in 
a range between 
1½ per
cent and 
2 percent. 
Similarly, the fact
ors shaping the medium-term outlook have not 
changed significantly
; the general contours of my outlook remain the same.  Yes, some of the 
incoming data during the interme
eting period suggested modest increases in household spending 
and employment, and the household sector showed some further slight signs of improvement.  

But no data 
are 
yet showing a basis to believe that these modest increases will be sustained to 
such an extent that faster momentum might be expected
.  Indeed, other data, such as those for 
business spending and consumer confidence, remain soft.  It is not yet obvious that this path, 
or 

even
 a couple of months of stronger-
than
-expected economic activity
, could reduce the amount 
of slack in labor market
s or alter the trajectory of expected inflation to a degree that would 
obviate the need for a further easing of monetary policy.  
Last week™s employment report
Š payroll employment only 55,000 higher than reported in July, 
after taking into account 

revisionsŠdoes not suggest above-trend 
economic 
growth or a declining trend in the 

unemployment rate.  It suggests, 
instead
, that the unemployment rate is likely to move sideways 
with no sign of a substantial and sustainable strengthening in the pace of economic recovery. 
               
                          And this unsatisfactory modal projection is what exists 
before
 even considering downside 
risks to the outlook.  One particular downside risk that remains quite elevated relates to what 
we™ve been talking about
Šthe depressed level of labor participation and the enhanced level of 
long-
term unemployment. 
The decline in the labor force participation rate since the
 beginning of 
the recession is ominous, and although the Board staff predicts that over the next couple of years 

the labor force participation rate will flatten out, the recession
, as Governor Yellen described, 
may well have permanent effects on the labor force participation rate
, just as the high-
pressure 
labor market of the late 1990s pulled people back into the labor force 
who
 had been excluded for 
a long time
Šonly now, unfortunately, 
in reverse. 
In addition, with a substantial and growing 
proportion of unemployed workers having been jobless for long periods, we face an elevated risk 

that such a high level of long-term unemployment will persist long enough to permanently 

depress labor supply and potential output.  Unlike downside risks emanating from the European 

crisis and U.S. fiscal policyŠ
which
, were they to occur, 
theoretically can be addressed with 
accommodative monetary policy after the fact
Šthe potential h
yste
resis created by drops in the 
labor force participation rate and increases in long-
term unemployment will prove intractable to 
address with accommodative monetary policy that isn™t inflationary.
  So I find the particular 
downside risk of h
yste
resis to be especially pernicious because it™s difficult to address after the 
fact. 
But
, more optimis
tically, it is one downside risk that monetary policymakers do have some 
ability to mitigate prior to its occurrence. 
Similarly, I wonder about the permanent or transitory nature of household and business 
expectations.  The economic outlook appears damped by some form of pessimism.  Look at the 

Michigan survey question on the proportion of households expecting unemployment to improve.  

Earlier this year
, that number had recovered, but now it has dropped down again.  
Similarly, 
      
        
     
                         
  households™ income expectations for the coming 12 months have hardly recovered at all since the 
recession despite the fact that actual income has somewhat increased.  On the business side, 

expectations for business conditions six months hence as measured in the Empire State and 

Philadelphia Fed surveys have dropped back sharply again.  In the case of the Empire State 

survey, they™re back close to levels seen during the recession.  Capital spending plans also don™t 

look great.  Surveys from the National Association 
for
 Business Economi
cs show capital 
spending to have dropped sharply in the second quarter.  Surveys from the National Federation 

of Independent Business show capital spending to be gradually rising, 
but still remaining at less 

than half of 
its pre
-recession level. 
It™s diffic
ult to project whether these expectations will 
transition from being temporary blips to permanent shifts, but the fact that these expectations 

have tried to recover from the recession before but been knocked back, sometimes more than 

once, might be a facto
r that could keep households and businesses from getting too hopeful 
again. The longer we have an economy that looks bleak as far as the eye can see, the more this 

bleakness gets built into expectations.  Households and businesses now see a recovery slow to 

materialize.  They assume that things will get better because they always have, but then th
ings 
don™t 
get better
.  So households and businesses start to wonder if this is just a delay or if it™s just 
the new normal.  If they think it™s the new normal, it could become just that.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In terms of the outlook, I™m reasonably close to 
the consensus forecast you put forth, and just a shade more upbeat than I was at ou
r last 

meeting
Šthat is to say, maybe a tenth or two lower on the unemployment rate for 2013. 
I™ve 
interpreted the incoming data since the last meeting inclusive of the jobs report on Friday as 

approximately a 
wash and feel 
as though the situation in Europe looks just a bit brighter.  So, 
             
       
     
   
                    
  
 overall
, I would say it appears we™re still about as 
ﬁstuck in the mud
ﬂ as we have been over the 
last several months, and I agree with Governor Tarullo™s characterization that it™s largely an 
aggregate demand phenomenon. 
In trying to think about the factors that are leading demand to be so sluggish and about 
the channels by which monetary policy might be able to help, I™ve been struck by a few pieces of 

survey evidence.  Now, they turn out to be the s
ame pieces of survey evidence that Governor 
Raskin was just referring to, thereby scooping a fair portion of what I was going to say. 
MS. RASKIN.  It happened to me for a long time.  [Laughter] 

MR. STEIN.  I™m going to 
just start juggling next time. 
Anywa
y, just to underscore, 
really
Šon the Michigan survey, we had a very interesting briefing a few weeks ago by Claudia 
Sahm,
 in R
esearch and 
Statistics
, who
™d been looking carefully at these data.  And the gist of the 
finding is, not only 
is it 
low, but 
also, basically
, it fell 
from
 2007 to 2009, and it really hasn™t 
recovered since.  Moreover, it™s not well explained by household characteristicsŠt
here™s a large 
negative residual there in a way that seems different from previous experience. 
In a similar vein 
but mu
ch less scientifically, I looked at a different survey, the Conference Board™s Consumer 
Confidence Index, which also fell in August.  Very much to your point, they do a breakdown of 

the index into views of the current situationŠ
a present situation in
dex
Šand a future 
expectations piece, and all of the drop was coming from the future expectations piece.  
So I was 

curious.  I went back and compared it 
with
 previous peaks of unemployment that we™ve had.  
The ones I looked at were May 1975 and December 1982.  W
hat you see is
, at those times when 
unemployment was also very high, if you ask
ed people about the present situation, it was dismal, 
but if you ask
ed them about future expectations, it was not nearly so bad as it is today.  These 
are 
just a couple of data points, but 
they™re 
consistent with what I take to be the spirit of Claudia™s 
                  
             
         
    
 work, which is, it™s as if, given where we are today and given the current situation, 
people feel 
the future is considerably more pessimistic
.  And again, I think this is pessimism as opposed to 
uncertainty, which has a slightly different implication because it™s less clear that, if the fiscal 

cliff resolves itself, this kind of thing gets fixed. 
Another survey on the business side
: I just yesterday got a s
urvey that Duke University 
does in conjunction with 
CFO 
magazine
, where they talk to 900 CFOs of U.S. firms.  One of the 
new questions in there this time
ŠI think, 
actually
, Steve Sharp
e helped them design this 
questionŠasked the firms if they would in any 
way change their capital spending plans for a 
given change in interest rates.
  Here
, it is strikingly like a large
-sample version of President 
Fisher™s CEO conversations, where only 3 percent of the firms say they would in any way 

change their capital spen
ding for a 50 basis point movement in rates.  
Now, I take Vice 
Chairman
 Dudley™s critique here.  First of all, in this one, unlike consumer confidence, we don™t 
have a benchmark
, so I don™t know what people would say in normal times
.  But as a Bayesian
, I™m inclined to think that there™s something going on here, even though I wouldn™t say it™s a huge 
thing. 
So, putting this together
Šnow, 
this part is very impressionistic, but I gue
ss the overall 
feeling I get 
from 
looking at these various pieces of survey e
vidence is the sense that when we 
make a policy move now, we™re playing more for whatever effect we can have on consumer and 

business confidence than for the normal hydraulic 
effe
ct we would have on financing conditions 
per se.  That is to say, we may know more about how to move interest rates than about how to 

influence confidence, but it™s the latter that, in some sense, is the dragging anchor.  This is not an 

ﬁalways
ﬂ situation.  I think it™s, in some 
respects, 
the opposite of where we were in 2009 at the 
                     
                    
  
  time of QE1
, when really the thing to do, the imperative, was to fix financing conditions, and 
people would figure it out one way or the other. 
I don™t know if this has any implications for policy. I
t strikes 
me that
, if this is right, it 
should color particularly how we think about the communications aspect.  I, 
like many others 
here
, believe
 that the need for action is clear, but I think, less so than usual, the bond market is 

not really our primary audience.
  So maybe when we think about policy, 
we want to worry less 
about putting together the biggest, most inclusive package that has the maximum bond market 

impact
, and worry more about, how do we deliver a simple and coherent message that normal 
humans can understand, as opposed to mainly Fed w
atchers
?  I think we™ll have a chance to talk 
about some of these issues.  I™m not sure if this concept is fully operational, but I have this 

conviction that we really have to think about our audience as being business m
anagers and 
householdsŠ
more so 
than at other times
.  There™s so much talk about, what are the Fed watchers 
expecting us to do
?  And I think we don™t want to get overly caught up in delivering just to them.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Than
k you.
  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
It does seem to me that there™s a decent 
degree of agreement
, or at least overlap
, about the status and outlook for the economy, and that 
the real question is, what can monetary policy do, 
and
 what should it do going forward?  And 
I™m going to defer that to tomorrow. 
In that spirit
, I propose to deprive the Committee of my 
detailed recitation of intermeeting events and proceed to 
the executive summary part of it
, which 
is, 
really
, that we™ve b
een on a round trip.  We had positive news early in the intermeeting 
period, which 
was a trip to hope and back, and it left me very much in the same place where I 
started
:  I see an economy with a substantial amount of slack that is growing at about 2 
percent
;          
                     
        
       inflation that is bouncing around just below 2 percent on commodity effects, 
but close to target
; and better financial conditions for now.  But as Europe improves, the fiscal cliff begins to 
approach in a serious way, and what I am hearing is that there is little to no hope of action in the 

lame duck.
  Of course, that depends on the arrangement of forces after the election, s
o it™s 
completely unknowable. 
Ultimately and most important
, there is little, if any, reason to expect 
significant improvement in job creation in the coming months. 
My conversations with a group of about 10 diverse industrial companiesŠ
this is not 
auto
s, so it™
s away from one of the real strengths
.  The other parts of the industrial sector, 
let me 
say
, are pretty weak
, and they s
trongly confirm that last point about employment.
  Outside of a 
couple of bright spots like housing and li
ght
 vehicles, it™s soft everywhere, especially in Europe.  
Big customers are postponing orders
; they™re not canceling them.  It™s nothing like from 2008 to 
2009, but the softness that began about six months ago is now the new normal for these 

companies.  The game is about share gain and taking out costs.  It™s 
a low
-growth environment.  
All new projects are on hold, and there is no hiring.  In fact, the 
entire goods
-producing sector of 
the economy lost 16,000 jobs in August.  If you look just at the manufacturing piece of that and 

go back over a quarter, there was a net creation of 15,000 jobs, and two-thirds of that is auto.  I 

want to say that you hear, 
ﬁUncertainty, uncertainty
,ﬂ 
from all 
of 
these people, but they™re really 
talking about two different things.  These are not people who roll over at 4:00 a.m. to check 

Twitter for the latest news from 
Karlsruhe
 on the German decision.  A 
particular compan
y in the 
beverage manufacturing business had a big order from a German OEM for a beverage line, and 

that order has been pushed out at least a quarter.  That™s uncertainty.  It™s about demand.  
As far 

as Europe relates to these companies
Šand 
these are pretty global companies
Šit™s really focused 
on demand.  The fiscal cliff is something different.  There™s a sick feeling in people™s stomachs 
                   
  
     
  
       
              
 that this is really bad, that this is our country not being able to function, and 
it™s like last August 
on steroidsŠnot that there™s anything wrong with steroids.  [Laughter]  They™ve been very 
helpful to me lately. 
Let me say where that leaves me
.  The question that looms isŠ
and I™m going to
, again
, leave aside monetary policy
Šwhen do we break out of this
?  And I really do believe that we 
will.  We always have. 
I can 
remember many of these cycles where you really wonder if this is it 
and we™re never going to get out. I really do feel that
 if you look at our own projections, 
essentially
, all of us project that we™re going to have those 3 
percent, 
4 percent catch
-up years.  
They™re now scheduled for 2014 and ™15, but really, there™s a ton of uncertainty around that.  So 

I™m going to share this highly anecdotal evidence in an effort to end on something of a high note. 
I talked to both private equity investors and hedge fund investors, and it™s always very 
interesting to compare the two of them.
  The hedge fund investors are in a really difficult 
environment.  They™re traders who get marked every quarter, 
and
, in a world that has very few 
ways for them to make money, they™re generally very conservatively positioned, and their 

investor base seems to be fine with that.  
Private equity firms are feeling quite differently about 

things.  They basically think about creat
ing value over a three
-to five
-year period, and many PE 
firms right now, large and small, think that this is a great time to buy. In fact, a str
ing of large 
industrial properties, which would ordinarily have been expected to trade to corporations, 
has 

trade
d to private equity.  T
here are three reasons why the private equity firms are feeling 
aggressive.  First, the
ir natural competitors
, these big companies
, are all frozen on the sideline
s, 
sitting on their cash, ruled by risk-averse public boards, and out of the game.  If anything, 
they™re 

going to wind up being net sellers as the recession goes on.  Second, leveraged 
finance markets, 
as Andreas was discussing this morning, are very attractive
, with low rates and issuer-
favorable 
            
                                    
      
   terms that are just about
 reminiscent of the bubble days, and all 
of 
that provides critical 
flexibility in case deals don™t go well. 
Third
Šand really the one that™s relevant for this policy 
exercise
Šprivate equity firms think about the medium term, and they see the future as bett
er. 
These large private equity firms 
are completely global; 
they 
each own hundreds of companies in 
every major economy and 
in 
every vertical
; and they systematically mine the data that they get 
and they™ve got the talent on board to do that.  This is not the private equity industry of 20 years 
ago.
  So they™re seeing something.  They really are.  It™s pretty consistent, and what™s holding 
back the volume of deals is only supply.  There was quite a similar pattern back in the early 

2000s after the dot-
com c
rash.  In that period, as many will recall, the S&P lost about half of its 
value.  We had a very soft economy in 2001 and 2002, a stri
ng of corporate accounting scandals 
leading to Sarbanes
ŒOxley, and a deflation scare in 2002.  Across the board, 
net sellers of 
businesses were
 on the sidelines, and the private equity firms were extremely aggressive during 
that period.  Those deals turned out to be, 
in many cases
, some of the best investments in the 
history of the industry.  It turned out to be a great time to buy.  I would also add that they were 

net sellers in 
2005 and 2006.  So the question is, 
why take any signal from this, right? I realize it 
doesn™t tell us anything at all about the next few quarters
.  B
ut I will say that it™s a bit of a sign
al to me because this is a group of investors with very successful and, in 
some cases
, long track 
records that were looking ahead to strong growth in the medium term, 
and they were willing to 

put more than just an opinion on the line in that belief.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Could I ask the Governor a question?  Geographically, 
do they express any preferences about where they want to have the business? 
MR. POWELL.  Yes.  T
he hedge funds are, as 
a staff mem
o from Matt and Fabio
 pointed 
out, unanimously not believing a long-run solution in Europe.  They™re just very pessimistic.  
I                  
            
       
          
would say the private equity firms are 
in the same place.  You see very little private equity 
interest in Europe.  There™s great uncertainty 
and
 that kind of thing.  
In t
he United States, you see 
a lot of activity
Šagain, restrained only by a lack of supply.  When there™s a good company 
that™s out there, the bidding is furious, and they™re all saying, 
ﬁThis is the time.
ﬂ  This happened 
10 years ago. 
And Asia
ŠI can™t really give you any call on that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  I see I have two hours now.  
[Laughter] Let me summarize and just make a few comments.
  Participants didn™t see much 
change in the o
utlook, on net, during 
the interme
eting period.  Economic grow
th is still sluggish. 
The near
-term growth outlook is modest, and the recovery is in a holding pattern.  Output and 
employment growth are falling short of levels needed to reduce unemployment.  Headwinds for 

recovery include fiscal policy, deleveraging, tight credit, and international factors, including not 

only Europe, but also slowing in China.  
Some felt that we risk a lost decade, but another view is 

that recovery has been consistent with previous experiences with banking and financial crises, à 

la Reinhart and Rogoff. 
Recent labor market reports have been weak, although unemployment has fallen in the 
past year.  Some decline in unemployment is due to reduced participation, and employment-
to-population ratios are at post-trough lows.  H
yste
resis is a risk and a possible rationale for action.  
Retail sales data were a bit better, and households continue to deleverage, but consum
er confidence is soft, and people are unusually pessimistic.  
Real 
estate activity is improving in a 
number of D
istricts.  Sales are up
, permits
 and 
prices are also rising
, inventories are low, and 
delinquencies are falling.  Rising prices may stimulate further sales.  There is some strength also 

in commercial real estate
.         
   
           
  
       
      With regard to measurements of slack, there was, again, discussion of the issue.  Staff 
analysis concludes that slack is high, and it was noted that inflationary pressures remain low.  
Some argued that measurements of slack should distinguish the long
er-run normal rate and the 
current equilibrium rate
, or natural rate, which varies over time.
  Discussion of the structure 
of 
the labor market noted that routine jobs are disappearing, but 
declining dynamism may be more 
chronic than cyclical, and the long-
term unemployed are not completely shut out of the labor 
market. 
Uncertainty remains an important issue for businesses, holding back investment and 
hiring.  Job growth is particularly weak.  Small businesses are concerned about taxes and 

regulation.  The fis
cal cliff is a particular risk, as is electoral uncertainty. Some research 
suggests that higher uncertainty acts like an aggregate demand shock.  Policy uncertainty is a 

headwind, but not the only one, as the Bloom index suggests.  
In agriculture
, the dro
ught will 
impede GDP growth over the next several quarters.  However, farm income has been supported 

by high prices and crop insurance.  Energy activity is expanding.  Manufacturing reports are 

mixed.  Auto sales are up.  Firms are focused on gaining market share, but among financial 

firms
, private equity is more optimistic and aggressive. 
In the financial sector, long-
term interest rates are very low
, with negative real yields, but 
it was noted that the equilibrium real yield in the economy may also be neg
ative.  Financial stress 

ind
exes are not particularly worrisome, and financial froth has not been reported.  
Firm balance 
sheets are strong
, and credit supply is available when loan demand strengthens.  The ECB™s 
actions have again helped calm Europe, but further progress requires action by governments.  

Risks remain serious, 
and economic 
growth on the Continent should remain weak. 
                    
  
   
   
          
         
              
  
 With respect to inflation, the outlook has not changed much.  Inflation seems likely to 
remain near or below 2 
percent in the m
edium term. Low inflation is also predicted by DSGE 
models.  Businesses are not particularly concerned about their costs.  Inflation expectations are 
stable, and there™s little evidence of disinflation. 
There was a good bit of premature discussion of mone
tary policy
, which covered, among 
other things, the effectiveness of possible actions, the risks and benefits of actions and inaction, 

and issues of communication. 
Any questions or comments? [No response] 
I come after Governor Powell
, so I have an 
even 
more difficult task. I™ll try to respond a little bit to some of the comments that were made 
today.  The basic outlook is, as everyone has pointed out, that we have an economy 
that 
is 
growing very slowly, at or below trend, and, by the usual Okun™s l
aw re
lationships, we™re not 
seeing very much progress in the labor market. 
Unemployment is about the same 
as in 
January, 
and I note that aggregate hours 
are 
also only about ½ percent higher than 
they 
were
 in January.  
President Bullard noted that there was a p
eriod of improvement in the unemployment rate around 
the turn of the year.  One interpretation of that is that it was a one-
time payback for the rapid 
drop in jobs during 
the recession. 
In any case, 
economic 
growth, if anything, is slowing relative to earl
ier in the recovery. 
Now, how do we explain, understand, and interpret the very slow growth we™ve been seeing? 

That was also 
discussed in the go-round.  One possibility is that there™s been a once-
and
-for
-all 
level shift, that we™ve dropped down to a lower level and 
are 
continuing a
t trend at about the 
earlier pace.  So the suggestion there is that we are close to potential and output 
growth going 
forward will remain trend
-like.
  This interpretation does not look implausible if you eyeball 
graphs for GDP or consumption growth.  It is consistent with some 
earlier episodes of financial 
      
               
        
           
     crisis, and
, among others, the IMF has given this perspective a little bit of support.  
The 
alternative interpretation held by others around the table is that we remain well b
elow potential.  
I think it™s perfectly possible to rationalize that.  First, there have been ongoing headwinds, both 
endogenous and exogenous.  The endogenous ones include 
financial balance sheet, financial 
accelerator type
s of 
effects 
and the exogenous ones include Europe, fiscal, and the like.  So 
there 
have been continuing headwinds, and, of course, 
sticky prices
Šas was pointed outŠ
are part of 
overlapping price-setting coordination issues and the like.  I think both of these interpretations 

are conceivable, and they probably both have some truth in them.  
As President Bullard 
mentioned, I don™t think it™s very likely that we™ll return to the pre-
crisis trend. 
Now, on the permanent drop in the level, I™m a 
little bit bemused by the appeal to 
Reinhart
ŒRogoff because the
irs is a strictly reduced
-form observation, 
it has no structural 
interpretation, and it could involve any number of reasons, including uncontrolled factors 
such as 
poor policymaking.  So I don™t take that as a very convincing answer unless I understand better 

what the rationale is that is explaining the slower growth.
  The second story does provide a 
rationale, does provide an explanation.  Notably, labor utilization does appear to be exception
ally 

low, and I won™t repeat Governor Tarullo™s comments, but Eddie Laz
ear, who I don™t think is 
necessarily inclined to find 
a cyclical source of unemployment
, is just the latest of the majority 
of studies in this area 
to find a significant cyclical compo
nent.  It™s true that the short-
term 
equilibrium unemployment rate can vary.  There™s no question about that.  S
taff 
members have 
tried to include some of that in their analysis.  B
ut we need 
a story.  It™s possible, based on that 
kind of analysis, 
that the equilibrium unemployment rate is 
above the long
er-term natural rate at 
this point.  We don™t know.  I want to emphasize that on all of these thingsŠon the economy, on 

the effects of policy
Šwe™re incredibly uncertain, and we have to make decisions under 
                 
   
            
      
    
       
   uncertainty.  We can™t let waiting for certainty be the condition for taking any action.  We have 
to make the best choices we can, given a very uncertain situation.  
So, in that kind of world, of 
course, there are 
type 
I and t
ype 
II errors.  This is similar
 to what 
the Vice Chairman was saying. 
We are close to our inflation objective.  We™re quite far from our unemployment objective, at 

least the long
er-run unemployment objective.  Arguments 
have been made that staying far away 
from the long
er-run unemployment level for a protracted period has its own costs 
besides the 
temporary costs of the cyclical unemployment. 
In terms of our policy tools, I do agree with President Plosser that having a good grip on 
the costs and the risks of those tools is very importan
t, and that™s one reason why we have been
, in some ways, not as quick to use the tools as we might have been if we were using short-
term 
interest rates as our policy tool.
  But I feel that I™d like to thank the staff for the work that™s been 
done over the last couple of interme
eting periods. I think the work on market functioning, the 
work on financial stabilityŠ
all 
of 
those things have made me more comfortable, 
at least
, that we 
can manage the costs of these 
unconventional policy tools. 
Now, I might as 
well take the advantage to talk a little bit about the policy tools and some 
of the issues that have been brought up.  I have great admiration for Michael Woodford.  I hired 

him, I coauthored with him, I was his colleague for many years, and I think he™s a 
terrific 
economist.  And I think a lot of what he said in his paper at Jackson Hole was very useful.  I do 

think that he understates the consensus in the literature about the impact of unconventional tools, 

particularly asset purchases, on the economy.  I won™t go through an extended discussion, but I™ll 

make just a couple of observations on the empirical side.  
He focused primarily on the event-
study evidence.  He came to that with a M
odigliani
ŒMiller type of financial markets perspective, 
which has a lot of theoretical appeal but obviously is not empirically very successful.  It doesn™t 
                  
    
    
                 
     explain a lot of premiums
, a lot of volatility
, in actual financial markets.  So
, using that 
perspective, he was inclined to dis
miss the results from the event
-study research. 
But this 
research does tend to find, 
almost uniformly
, that asset purchases do have effects on financial 
conditions, notwithstanding the fact that it™s very difficult to measure the surprise component of 
a change in asset purchase policy. I was very
 much involved in the literature on measuring the 
effects of surprises in the federal funds rate, and there at least you have a futures market that can 

tell you what was expected.  Obviously, 
that™s very difficult in the case of asset purchases, and 

theref
ore you w
ould expect the event
-study literature
, if anything
, to bias down the findings, the 
impact of asset purchases on financial conditions.  But beyond that, in looking at only the event 

studies, Woodford™s paper ignores two other major literatures.  O
ne is a substantial literature on 
the effects of relative supplies of 
Treasuries on term premiums.  I would cite, for example, 
Kutt
ner
 (2006) and Greenwood and V
aya
nos (2010), and this appears also in work by Ga
gnon, Hamilton and Wu, and others.  
And a sec
ond line of research is based on no-
arbitrage term 
structure models, such as the 
Li and Wei
 paper that has been used a lot here at the Board.  So 
there have been 
a number of different approaches, and again, I do think that the bulk of the 
evidence is that 
these tools do have effects on financial conditions.  Obviously, 
there are issues 
about the transmission to the real economy, and I take some of the points that have been made, 

but there are factors there working in both directions.  For example, to the ex
tent that credit 
markets are becoming less tight
Šstandards and terms are becoming less restrictiveŠl
ower 
interest rates will have more effect rather than less effect. 
The central message of Woodford™s paper, though, which I do agree with very much, is 
that expectations management is really critical to managing monetary policy at the zero bound. 

And I agree with Governor Stein that the language is very important.  How we present what 
         
    
              
         
      
   
           
  
    we™re doing is going to be very important.  I
n particular, 
and 
we™ll talk about this tomorrow, 
trying to signal that the Fed, rather than being pessimistic, is determined 
and 
that the Fed will be 
supporting the economy.  We™ll be there.  We™ll be a backstop.  We™ll provide confide
nce. I 
think that™s a very important part of what our communication should be about.  P
ersonally
, I™ve 
learned something from both Woodford™s discussion and th
at discussion around the table about 
how we should be talking to markets and to the public.  And a very small thing, but in my press 
conference statement tomorrow
, I™m going to try to talk a little bit more to the average person 
than I have been, and try to explain what we™re doing and why it™s helpful more broadly.  So I do 

expect the expectations c
hannel to be very important, but I think I disagree that by itself it™s 

sufficient
. The main problem is that we™ve already said that we™d keep rates low for three years. 
How much further out can we go? 
For example, 
Woodford argues that a nominal GDP targ
et, 
if 
adopted, would allow us essentially to make commitments many years in advance.  I™d like to 

actually raise the question once again to the group because we looked very carefully at nominal 

GDP targets more than a year ago now
, I think, and there was 
really no support at that time
.  The 
basic argument is that
, in order to work, people have to be persuaded that you™ll stick to this 
target for a very extended period, many years, even though a nominal GDP target may involve a 

period of inflation well above your normal range of inflation.  Moreover, of course, there™s also 

the risk that, if that happens, then inflation expectations will become unanchored.  So I think that 

was the case against nominal GDP targeting. A few people have talked about it. 
If I™
m missing 
something and you want me to hedge more when I™m asked about it tomorrow, which I™m sure I 

will be, I™d like to hear that tomorrow because, again, the take of this group a year ago was th
at nominal GDP targeting, price-
level targeting, and so on, 
while useful, are limited in 
that they 
             
                 
         
       
     
     require credibility very far in the future. 
And that™s why I think one of the benefits of asset 
purchases is that they can be used as a concrete action, as a commitment device
, to help 
strengthen the expectations ef
fect of announcements and communication so that they really are 
complementary
Šmore than we have given them credit 
for 
and more than I really said in my 
remarks at Jackson Hole. 
So there 
are
 a lot of interesting issues here.  I think what I™d like to end on 
is just to come 
back to the point that I know we™re all in debating mode.  We want to persuade our colleagues, 

and that™s certainly laudable, but the fact is that nobody really knows precisely what is holding 

back the economy, what the correct responses a
re, 
or 
how our tools will work.  A
nd I believe we 
all have to try to think hard about, 
in a Bayesian context
, using information that we have and 
thinking about both the risks of action and the risks of inaction, what the best choices are, 

acknowledging and
 understanding that whatever we do, it™s going to be a shot in the proverbial 
dark.  I think, 
really
, it™s going to be very important for us to pull together, 
in a sense
, to support 
whatever efforts that we make.
  Any questions or comments?  President 
Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thanks for those remarks.  I 
found them very useful in my own thinking.  I, too, thought the staff™s work on LSAPs over the 

last couple of inter
meet
ing periods has been really helpful, but even mor
e broadly, I certainly 
came to the question of the efficacy of the LSAPs from the same M
odiglianiŒ
Miller framework 
that Mike sketched, and I found the empirical work on the asset pricing side very informative.  It 

certainly shaped my thinking moving away from the Mo
digliani
ŒMiller framework. 
Our statements, 
alternative A and 
alternative B
, make reference to continuing to study the efficacy of 
the LSAPs.  Part of that will have to be ongoing work and ongoing study of that linkage between 
                               
        what™s going on in the financial markets and how that™s getting through to the real economy.  
At least for me
, that™s a major source of uncertainty still. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me make one comment on that, which is, 
you 
sometimes hear the following kind of statement:  
ﬁTight monetary policy is not causing the 
problem
; therefore, easing monetary policy won™t help.
ﬂ  That™s a non sequitur.  If, say, tight 
fiscal policy is the problem, if that™s the reason the economy is growing slowly, it doesn™t mean 

that 
monetary policy can
™t mitigate that.  So I think that kind of argument needs to be looked at 
very carefully.
  We are doing a lot.  We are absolutely doing a lot.  There™s no question about it.  
Nobody can blame the Federal Reserve fairly, in my opinion, for being tightfisted and stingy and 

not willing to take risks to try to support the economy.  
But the fact that it™s not our fault that the 
recovery is slow doesn™t mean that we can™t try to help if we think, in fact, that the benefitŒ
cost 

ratio is appropriate. 
What I™d like to do is let Bill English do his introductory remarks for tomorrow.  I™m in 
your hands.  The reception starts at 5:30.  Would people like to continue with the policy round, 

or should we just have Bill and then start fresh at 8:30? 
PARTICIPANT. 
Break
. PARTICIPANTS
.  Fresh. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fresh.  Okay. 

MR. 
FISHER
.  Governor Powell needs to take a nap. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  He™s not the only one.  [Laughter] 
All right.  We™ll ask Bill 
to make his opening presentation and take any questions, and then we™ll recess for reception and 

dinner.  
Bill. 
         
    
  
    
          
   
  
     
          
                                                                         MR. ENGLISH.
7  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think the policy 
alternatives are being handed around right now.  They are the same as the ones we 

distributed earlier this week. I guess I™ll wait just a mome
nt until everybody has 
them. 
The first page of the handout illustrates the effects of three different policy paths.  
The black
 solid lines in the charts depict the experimental consensus forecast, which 
is conditioned on unchanged policy.  The 
red
 dashed lines show the results of a more 
accommodative policy, one 
that™s 
consistent with an a
lternative B that shifts back the 
date in the forward guidance to mid-2015 and, in addition to $30 billion of MBS 

purchases a month and completion of the MEP this year, involves buying longer-
term 
securities at a rate of $75 billion a month through the middle of next year.  The 

balance sheet implications of this alternative are shown at the top right.  So long as 

the public correctly anticipates that the Committee will follow this policy, the result is 

a more rapid economic recovery that takes the unemployment rate to 
6.3 percent by 
the end of 2015, about ½ percentage point lower than in the consensus baseline; the 

inflation rate (shown at the bottom right) is a bit
 higher but remains near your 

2 percent longer
-run objective. 
The 
blue dotted lines show the results of an even more accommodative policy; 
this corresponds to alternative A and includes a new $1.25 trillion LSAP and a shift in 

the date in the forward guida
nce to mid
-2015.  
In this case, the unemployment rate 
falls to 
about 6.1 percent by the end of 2015, and inflation runs a little higher than 
under the other policies. 
If, in reviewing the outlook under 
the 
unchanged policy, the Committee views the 
likely outcomes for employment and inflation as inconsistent with its mandate, it 

might choose to ease policy by strengthening the forward guidance in the statement 

and engaging in additional asset purchases.  Alternative B
, on page 5, 
may offer the 
Committee an attractive approach to moving strongly in that direction at this meeting, 

but without committing now to a large, discrete purchase program.  Alternative B 

completes the MEP and starts buying additional MBS, with an explicit proviso that 

the Committee will c
losely monitor developments ﬁin coming monthsﬂ in deciding 
whether to continue the purchases and scale them up. 
The first paragraph of 
alternative B updates the description of the economy to 
reflect the mixed incoming information over the period.  The second paragraph 

differs from past statements by expressing the medium
-term outlook as a conditional 

forecast, noting that the Committee is concerned that ﬁwithout further policy 

accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained 

improvement in labor market conditions.ﬂ  Then the third paragraph announces that 

the Committee will complete the MEP as planned and will commence purchasing 

MBS each month.  The options you™re offered here are rates of $30 billion or 

$40 billion a month.  The higher rate of purchases would have the advantage of 

providing more impetus to growth, but some policymakers may prefer the lower rate, 
7 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
      
                          
             
      
      
    
              perhaps to allow for some future ramping-up in reaction to shocks, such as a full 

encounter with the fiscal cliff or
 a worsening of the problems in Europe.  Staff work 
suggests that purchases even 
at the higher pace would be unlikely to cause problems 
with market functioning. 
The fourth paragraph signals another decision point coming in the future.  It says 
that if, ﬁin
 coming months,ﬂ the ﬁoutlook for the labor market does not improve 
substantially,ﬂ the Committee will continue its MBS purchases 
and undertake 
additional asset purchases ﬁas appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a 

context of price stability.ﬂ
 The paragraph offers an option to include the possibility 
of employing other policy tools as well.  Participants may find that additional 

reference attractive if they think that changes in forward guidance, new lending 

programs, or a reduction in the inte
rest rate paid on reserves might also be appropriate 
in the future.  The paragraph concludes by noting that, as always, the likely efficacy 

and costs of asset purchases will be taken into account as the Comm
ittee calibrates its 
purchases. 
In paragraphs 5 and 5
, the statement offers two options for restating the forward 
guidance.  Both versions begin by putting the Committee™s decision with respect to 

the forward guidance in a more positive light and in the context of making progress 

toward its objectives by indicating that
, ﬁto support continued progress toward 

maximum employment and price stability, the Committee expects that exceptionally 

low levels of the federal funds rate will remain appropriate for a considerable time 

after the economic recovery stren
gthens.ﬂ  Paragraph 5 then continues by shifting 
the 
date of the expected commencement of policy firming out to mid-2015.  By contrast, 

paragraph 5
 replaces the calendar date with new conditional language that ties the 
timing of liftoff to the path of the
 unemployment rate, subject to constraints on 
inflation and inflation expectations.  Some participants may see this conditional 

language as preferable to offering a specific date because it will allow market 

participants to adjust their expectations for li
ftoff flexibly as information bearing on 

the economic outlook is received. 
The immediate market reaction to 
alternative B is hard to predict, in light of the 
policy expectations currently in the market and the decision point that would be 

highlighted in paragraph 4.  Primary dealers appear to place high odds on a new 

program of securities purchasesŠ
generally expected to increase Federal Reserve 
holdings by around $500 
billion 
to $600 billion by the end of 2013Š
and some see it 
as likely to be described in flow terms.  But it is not clear how they would gauge the 

likely scale of purchases under 
alternative B. An 
al
ternative B in which the 
Committee decided over coming months to purchase $75 billion in securities per 

month during the first half of next year would be roughly equivalent to the 

$500 billion 
to $600 billion now expected.  With most outside forecasts anti
cipating 
only slow improvement in labor market conditions over coming quarters, the market 

may come to expect the purchases to exceed this amount.  With regard to the forward 

guidance, ﬁmid
-2015ﬂ is in line with expectations, but the language in paragraph 5
 might be seen as pointing to even more accommodation.  On balance, a
lternative B 
might prompt a modest decline in longer-term interest rates, higher equity prices, and 
                          
              
                     
  
          
    
        a depreciation of the dollar.  However, the magnitude and persistence of the effects 

will depend importantly on what investors see as the implications of the statement for 

the ultimate size of the SOMA portfolio, as well as which version of the forward 

guidance the Committee chooses. 
Alternative A
, on page 3, 
may appeal to members who see 
the Committee as 
having persistently missed its dual objectives in the same direction and believe that, 

with the fiscal cliff looming and uncertainty about Europe unresolved, the downside 

risks to economic growth are very large.  They may believe that the 
Committee needs 
to send a clear signal that it is willing to substantially increase its holdings of 

securities and extend the forward guidance.  They may be concerned that the 

effectiveness of 
alternative B would be undermined by investor uncertainty about 
both the Committee™s decision to extend purchases beyond the next few months and 

the ul
timate size of such purchases. 
The first and second paragraphs of a
lternative A are close to those of 
alternative 
B.  The third paragraph of alternative A announces a new lump-
sum LSAP 
program, comprising $750 billion of longer-term Treasuries and $500 billion of MBS, 

at a combined pace of about $75 billion per month through early 2014.  The fourth 

paragraph clarifies that the new program replac
es the MEP and that the Committee™s 

reinvestment policy will continue.  The fifth paragraph, as in a
lternative 
B, extends 
the forward guidance to mid-2015.  Alternative A also provides possible language for 

a 10
 basis point reduction in the IOER rate. 
Beca
use $1.25 trillion lies well outside the range of most market forecasts 
for a 
new LSAP program, alternative A would likely lead to a notable drop in longer-
term 
interest rates, as well as higher equity prices and a lower foreign exchange value of 

the dolla
r.  These effects could be increased somewhat and accompanied by some 
decline in short-
term interest rates if a reduction i
n the IOER rate were included. 
Alternative C, 
on page 7, might appeal to policymakers who see the recent 
economic data as consistent 
with the view that the economic recovery is on a 
sustainable path and proceeding about as well as could be expected given the effects 

of the financial crisis.  They may see the elevated size of the Federal Reserve™s 

portfolio as well as the recent rise in 
oil and other key commodity prices as implying 
some upside risk to inflation.  As a result, they may judge that there is no need to ease 

policy through a change in the forward guidance or a new LSAP program, and they 

may even anticipate that the funds rate 
will need to be raised significantly earlier than 
markets anticipate. Other participants may have views that are shaped less by 

concerns about the outlook, but believe that the costs and risks associated with 

additional asset purchases are likely to exce
ed the benefits in terms of improved 

economic conditions. 
The first paragraph in a
lternative C is somewhat more positive about economic 
developments than in alternatives A and B.  The second paragraph is similar to the 

August statement but projects somewha
t stronger growth and higher inflation.  There 
are two versions of paragraph 3:  The first maintains the ﬁlate 2014ﬂ forward 
                                                    guidance, with an option to change the date to ﬁlate 2103ﬂ
; the second version, 

ate
-dependent forward gui
dance 
with language describing 
the factors the Committee would consider in determining the appropriate time to raise 

the target federal funds rate.  The fourth paragraph is similar to the August statement, 

except that it provides a more balanced outlook for policy. 
The markets would be greatly surprised by a statement along the lines of 
alternative C, especially if it signaled an earlier rise in the federal funds rate. Interest 
rates would likely jump higher, and stock prices could drop sharply. 
Draft dire
ctives for each of the alternatives are presented on pages 9 through 12 of 
your handout.  
Thank you
, Mr. Chairman.  That 
completes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there any questions for Bill? 
President Fisher. 
MR. FISHE
R.  Mr. Chairman, if I could ask Simon and the D
esk
Šagain, just to have a 
factual grip here
:  What kind of market penetration will we have on mortgage-
backed securities 
under the 
program of 
$30 and $40 billion per month?  You mentioned this earlier.  I apo
logize. 
MR. POTTER. 
That™s the flow rate relative to gross issuance. 
MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir. 
MR. POTTER. 
If we™re about one-third right now, if we added $30 billion, we™d be 
about 60 percent
; at 
$40 billion
, we™re about 70 percent.  
But i
n terms of the stock, I think that 
wouldŠ
what was that
, L
orie
? MS. LOGAN.  I don™t have the exact numbers for the particular scenarios, but the stock 
would be 25 percent under the $30-
billion
-per
-month pace, and it would be slightly higher under 
$40 billion per month
. I 
don™t have that exact number, and it depends on the length, but just for 
a maximum
, under the $2 trillion scenario that we had run, the maximum was 36 percent.  So 

that gives you the very upper bound. 
MR. FISHER.  And if w
e assume that we finish the MEP at 
year
-end, what will be our 
duration? 
       
      
     
    
        
     
                 
    
 MR. POTTER
.  The duration will be eight years, but we™ll own quite large amounts of 
some of the longer-duration securities.  T
hat™s 
in the Treasury part of the portfolio. 
MR. FISHER.  And of some of the particular issu
es, we have significant
Šabove 
70 percent
.  I
s that
 correct now? 
MS. LOGAN. 
We™ve a 70 percent per CUSIP cap.  So we can™t buy any
Š MR. FISHER.  That™s our cap per 
CUSIP? 
MS. LOGAN
.  That™s the c
ap. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 
MS. LOGAN
.  We™ve only hit the ca
p on ten issues, I thinkŠthe number that we™ve hit 
the 
maximum 
70 percent on
.  And most of those were old bonds in 
very small size. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you very much. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chai
rman. Bill, I just wanted to clarify since we have 
a few minutes here.  When we do this on page 1 here, there 
are 
three lines
, and then 
alternative 
B has a couple 
of 
options in it.  Are you saying that this is a rough guide to what 
alternative 
B would del
iver? 
MR. ENGLISH. Ye
s. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Or 
do you feel as though it wouldn™t make too much difference which 
option is chosen within the subgroups that are proposed?  O
r is it just 
that it™d get too cluttered
? MR. ENGLISH. 
What we tried to do here was write
 down something that seemed 
plausibly in line with 
alternative B. Alternative B has a couple of different choices that the 
Committee would have to make.  One is, 
later on
, what do you do in a few months after you™ve 
observed the economy?  Do you continue purchasing into next year? We™ve assumed that you 
                   
                
    continue purchasing for about, I think, seven months in this.  And then the other question is, 
what do you do with the forward guidance? 
We™ve assumed
, basically
, that the forward 
guidance goes out to mid-2015 and is compellingŠe
verybody believes 
it.  It™s possible, as I 
mentioned, that because market participants™ sense 
of 
the outlook is a bit weaker than our sense 

of the outlook, they may read that 6½ percent unemployment rate as pushing the liftoff even 

later
.  If that were picked up, then you™d get a little bit more impetus to the economy out of that, 
but we™ve not modeled that here. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  And the other thingŠI™ve been concerned about the withering 
of 
alternative C here.
  Alternative C isn™t mentioned in the graphs. 
MR. ENGLISH.  Alternative C would be, as long as you left the liftoff date unchanged, 
pretty similar to the consensus forecast.  What I™m taking out of that is the sense in the words in 

alternative C that mig
ht hint that things could move more quickly than that. 
So the straight 
consensus forecast is no change in the forward guidance, no additional purchases beyond the end 

of the year.  That broadly is consistent with a
lternative C but maybe doesn™t quite get 
the sense 
of what the words in a
lternative C could mean to market participants. 
MR. BULLARD.  Well, when you describe it, 
you say, ﬁ
Markets would be surprised
.ﬂ  
I think 
that™s 
accurate
Šthey
™d be very surprised by a statement like thatŠand that you proba
bly 
would have some 
effe
ct.  Plus, if we were going in that direction, which I guess we™re not, you™d 
have the possibility of moving up the date 
of liftoff
. MR. ENGLISH.  Right. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
One important point here
:  The black lineŠ
the consensus 
forecast
Šimplicitly has in it
 a significant disappointment 
for
 the market because they pull back 
      
           
       
     
               their expectations for liftoff to late 2014, and they 
remove 
their expectations of any furt
her 
expansion of the portfolio. 
MR. 
BULLARD
.  I see.  So I should read this as ﬁConsensus forecast/a
lternative C.ﬂ 
MR. ENGLISH.  Roughly. 
MR. BULLARD.  Roughly speaking.  Well, I guess, Mr. Chairman, 
I have a concern 
whether 
we have three options that are live options.  And I think it™s been hard while the 
Committee has been
 trying to think about ways to ease, and when the Committee shifts in the 
other direction, the same thing will happen.  But I think you want to have some things that are a 

little bit tighter, a little bit easier, and might actually have a chance of
Š CHAIRM
AN BERNANKE. 
We circulate this and ask whether it spans the range of 
views
 so, of course, we always welcome suggestions. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Well, it™s up to you.  But if you try to span the range of views, you 
might have to put something on the table that™s not going to be adopted.  But from my point of 

view, I
™d like to see three live things that we could do and things that we might be able to 
maneuver around. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The other way we
™ve used the alternatives
, of course, 
is to 
try out different lan
guage or alternative language. 
And in the past, 
we™ve co
mbined, mixed 
things together. 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  One is for you, Bill.  
I™d like your help 
with 
understanding the second sentence in B(4).  I™m having trouble with it.  I 
don™t think I understand it correctly, particularly the role of price stability.  So let me tell you 
      
   
     
      
    
                                 what I think it says, the way I read it. 
It says, ﬁIf the outlook for the labor m
arket does
 not improve substantiallyﬂ in coming monthsŠ
so, if that happensŠthen we™re going to do X.  So X, 
I think, 
is, as I read this, ﬁundertake additional asset purchases 
. . . as appropriate until 
such 
improvement is achieved in a context of price sta
bility.ﬂ
  As I think about that, if that 
improvement is achieved but it™
s not in a context of price stability, that seems to say to me that 
we™re going to still keep purchasing assets.  Have I got this wrong? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I want to defend Bill because he pointed out this problem. 
MR. LACKER.  I actually pointed it out to him yesterday. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You
 pointed it out to him.  Okay. 
MR. 
ENGLISH
.  You™re not 
the 
first
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
We have poetic license here. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  You 
don™t mean that literally, right? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It means that we
™re looking for improvement in a context of 
price stability. If we see improvement 
without price stability, that
™s not a good thing, and we 
won™t continue purchases. 
MR. LACKER.  But th
is says you
™re going to wait until you get im
provement with price 
stability. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it™s clear what
Š VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It™
s ﬁsubject to
.ﬂ That™s really what it means. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It
™s ﬁsubject to.ﬂ  W
hen we actually clari
fy this, assuming 
we go ahead and do more in January or whatever, we™
ll be a little clear
er in this kind of language 
here. 
                 
  
         
      
  
          
                 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  The second question I haveŠand I probably should have 
asked this during our first agenda item.  I™
ve asked t
his at times in the past
.  On the table is a 
flow of purchases of mortgage-backed securities.  I™
ve asked in the past 
about the thought 
experiment of buying mortgage
-backed securities versus buying an equivalent amount of 
U.S.
 Treasuries.
  What I
™ve asked 
about is, all right, comparing those two options, undoubtedly 
your forecast, as you™ve said, is that 
mortgage
-backed security yields 
will be lower with 
purchases of 
mortgage
-backed securities than 
with 
purchases of 
Treasuries, and that mortgage 
rates will 
be lower. 
Now, my gut instinct is that some other rates will be higher.  And I™
ve asked 
about this in the past, but did you do any work on that this time? 
MR. POTTER.  Which rates? 
MR. LACKER. 
Aren™t other rates going 
to be higher if we buy mortgage-
backeds rather 
than T
reasuries?  Because presumably
, that means 
Treasury rates will be higher than they 
otherwise would be.  Presumably, some other rates are linked to T
reasuries 
and not mortgage-
backed securities, and presumably, they™
re higher. Isn™t there some other rate that
™s going to go 
up if we buy mortgage-
backed
s rather than 
Treasuries? 
MR. ENGLISH. Not 
go up
, but go down by less. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Go down by less. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I think that™s right. 

MR. LACKER.  Oh, okay.  Well, noŠbut, see, I™m asking to compare buying X amount 
of T
reasuries 
with buying 
X amount 
of mortgage-
backed.  So rates 
go downŠ 
MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we are still buying Treasuries under the MEP in this 
program. 
       
           
           
                      
MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know.  But instead of buying $30 billion of mortgages, buy 
$30 billion of 
Treasuries. 
MR. ENGLISH.  I think the answer to your question is in table 1 in the options memo 
that we sent, which had an experiment where you do $500 billion of T
reasury purchases or 
$500 billion of MBSŠjust one or the other.  T
he term premium effects are a little bit smaller if 
you buy the MBS, so T
reasury yields decline by less.  They still decline. It
™s still a purchase of a 
longer-
term security and still taking duration out of the market and still p
utting downward 
pressure on longer-
term rates, but by less.
  The mortgage rate goes down by more if you buy 
MBS than if you buy T
reasuries, because you
™re pushing MBS down more and mortgage rates 
down by more.  And our estimate of the effects on inflation and output are similar in size.  
They
™re a little smaller for the MBS purchase
, based on our modeling and our assumptions, than 
for 
the 
Treasury purchase, but they™
re in the same ballpark. 
MR. LACKER.  So what other rates go down by less or are higher b
ecause you™
ve 
been 
tilting toward 
mortgage
-backeds
? MR. ENGLISH. 
In FRB
/USŠDave Reifschneider 
will tell me if I™m wrong
ŠI think, 
basically
, that 
other long-term rates, corporate rates or whatever, would go down by more if you 
bought Treasuries than if you bought MBS. 
MR. PLOSSER.  So the MBS would provide 
less pass
-through, in some sense, to 
corporates and other things.  Is that the idea? 
MR. ENGLISH
.  Yes. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Depends on what you think the 
degree of substitutability 
is between 
them. 
          
       
       
    
   
             
     MR.
 ENGLISH.  Yes.  And this really is pushing pretty hard on our ability to model this 
stuff, but that™s what our modeling 
says
. MR. LACKER.  So that takes away some stimulus, right? 
MR. ENGLISH. Ye
s, that™s right. 
MR. LACKER. 
And the MBS, on netŠ 
MR. POTT
ER.  Well, not overall, 
necessarily. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Well, it doesn™t take away stimulus relative to doing nothing.  
It takes away stimulus relative to
Š  MR. ENGLISH. 
Buying
 an equivalent amount of T
reasuries
. MR. LACKER. 
Right. 
MR. POTTER.  On thoseŠ 

MR. 
LACKER
.  In that sector. 
MR. POTTER.  Not necessarily for the economy as a whole. 

MR. LACKER. 
Right.  So the rationale for MBSŠ
is it that
, on net, 
real outcomes are 
better?  Or is it more of a sectoral argument? 
MR. ENGLISH.  The argument we gave in the memo was that you want to have a 
balance across the two so that you can ramp up or ramp down.  We know from the capacity 

memo that we sent the Committee before the last meeting that there
™s a maximum amount
, roughly, 
that we 
were comfortable saying 
we could buy over the next couple of years.  That 
maximum amount 
has a ratio of 
Treasuries to MBS, 
and 
we™ve roughly maintained that ratio in 
these purchase programs. 
MR. LACKER.  I understand.  Thank you. 
                              
                   
      MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
That
™s the main argument.  
There
™s a second argument, which 
is not in the model sims we
™ve run, but a lot of people believe that MBS could have effects that 
the model isn™t picking upŠ
say, large
r effects on house prices
, bigger effects on mortgage 
refinancing, 
or 
something like that
. CHA
IRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart has a two-
hander. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Is there a connection or correlation between lowering mortgage-
backed rates and other securitization vehicles such as auto, student loan, credit card? 
MR. ENGLISH.  There might be in practice, but we™re not picking that up in the 
modeling that we
™re doing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just one observation.  Presumably, the reason why you 
also might want to split it is a market functioning issue. 
You can go 
bigger if you split it 
between two markets than if you conce
ntrate all on one market. 
MR. POTTER.  We are still buying in the 
Treasury market. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
That was just a comment, but I have a question.  It 
seems to me 
as though the key money line in B is, ﬁIf the outlook for the labor market does not 

improve substantially, the Committee will continue its 
purchases of agency 
mortgage-backed 
securities and undertake additional asset purchases.
ﬂ  That
™s the key money line.  
Now, I
™d like 
to get st
aff members™ 
views of what they think people are going to interpret that line to mean in 
light of, say, the SEPs that are going to be put out 
and the Chairman™s press conference 
statement.  How do we think people are going to interpret that line?  That™s c
ritical
Šyou have to 
have a view on that to know what you™re really voting for, in some fundamental sense.  I know 

it™s judgment, but I™d love to 
hear your view. 
                  
    
   
  
     
      
          MR. ENGLISH. 
We™re not sure.  
I think we argued in our memos that it might be 
something like a
 ½ percent
age point 
decline in the unemployment rate that
™s sustained. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, I don™t mean the effects on the macroeconomy.  I 
mean, when people write the articles at the end of the day, what are 
they going to think about 
how big this is likely to be? 
MR. POTTER.  I don™t think it will showŠ 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They
™re going to have our SEPs, and they™
re going to 
have this information that shows that this unemployment rate trajectory
Š MR. 
KOCHERLAKO
TA.  You mean the purchase program itself? 
MR. POTTER.  The total amount forŠthey™re going to try 
to work out an expected date. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  And so I guess I™m asking, what kind of expected 
date do we think they can work out? 
MR. POTTER. 
The SEP will give them some information.  I don™t believe that shows a 
substantial improvement in the labor market for quite some time.  So that means that they
™ll probably be looking for sometime in 2013.  That™
s the way we
™ve been modeling this, I think.  
And the assumption you had, Bill, was something like $600 billion of total purchasesŠi
s that 
right? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Including purchases under the MEP, it was $750 
billion
.  But
, as I said 
in my remarks, it could easily be more.  P
eople might see that the e
conomy is expected to be 
weak for quite a while
; they might carry it out further into 2013 and get a bigger amount. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
For me, the obvious question to you, Mr. Chairman, at 
the press conference might be
, given the SEP and your views, wh
at does the SEP forecast imply 

in terms 
of ﬁi
mprove 
substantially
ﬂ?       
                
                              
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  My answer will be that 
we want to see
Šnot what we saw 
last 
Friday
.  We want to see increases in payrolls.  We want to see some progress
Šnot sh
arp 
progress, but some pro
gress
Šin the unemployment rate
.  And we want to have a sense that the 
economy is moving in a 
direction that will help labor markets get better. 
We used the word 
ﬁoutlook.ﬂ  So a pickup in GDP growth would certainly be a factor in the outlook for labor 
markets, for example. I think we have a fail
-safe here
, which is that if it doesn™t have any effect, 
then we have the efficacy clause here as well.
  But the idea would be that we want to see 
something different from the current 
waiting
-in-place kind of situation where there™s no 
progress, 
the 
unemployment rate stays about the same, and monthly payrolls are 100,000 and 

less. 
And I will emphasize that it
™s not a single indicator or a single trigger number; 
we™re 
looking holistically at the labor market indi
cators and, in fact, more broadly because it™
s the 
outlook for the labor market that matters, not just the current number. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you
™d have to see improvement in the labor market 
that you thought would be sustained in the future. 
CHAIRM
AN BERNANKE.  Right. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
For what it™s worth, the B
lue 
Chip forecasts 
for the 
unemployment rate going into the middle of 2013 are very flat
.  Then, in the second half of 2013, 
they™
re expecting to see a more noticeable downtilt in the unemp
loyment rate.  So that™s another 
way of 
looking at it. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So the market would presumably put in nine months 
or 
more
Šthat
 would be a reasonable guesstimate, 
I guess. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Again, it™s
 the outlook and not the actual. 
VICE CH
AIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Yes. 
                         
                    MR. PLOSSER.  I just want some interpretation of the word ﬁsubstantiallyﬂ here because 
the market is going to ask you that as well.  What constitutes substantial progress? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Substantial progress means that we are seei
ng ongoing 
progress in the direction of improved labor market conditions. 
MR. PLOSSER.  So it
™s not something about 
the magnitude of the rate of change. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It
™s not the magnitude, but really a 
movement in that 
direction 
that 
is, I m
ight 
say, persuasive or indicative that there is now progress in the right 
direction
, as opposed to simply remaining static or 
getting 
worse.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  This is on the same point. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  David Wilcox showed us employment in his forecast summary, and 
when they do all of the seasonal adjustment right, it looks as though half of the improvement we 

got in the labor markets this past winter or the winter before, was spurious, seasonal stuff.  

Would what we saw last w
inter suffice? Would we stop after that? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would think so.  It dropped 1 percentage point between 
August and 
April. 
MR. LACKER. I
™d be on board with that.  But his 
analysis suggests that 
that 
would be 
like another seasonal head fake. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we
™d look at a range of variables.  O
f course, there™s 
nothing that says if you stop, you can™t start again. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No
, but l
ast winter, though, it wasn™t really that 
convincing because, remember, payrolls were strong but GDP was weak, and we had this riddle. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We had this riddle.  Yes, that™s right. 
                    
          
     
             
     
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And so you could argue that you wouldn™t necessarily 
stop 
last winter
, because 
you didn™t have the GDP growth to support the 
labor market. 
MR. POTTER.  I don™t think our outlook changed that much.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We basically want to see progress in terms of the key macro 
labor market variables. 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  Well, let me ask Bill Dudley™s question again.  What do you 
want the 
USA 
Today
 headline to be? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
ﬁBernanke, 
the Hero
ﬂ? [Laughter] 
ﬁFederal Reserve 
Says 
It Will Support Economy.ﬂ 
MR. 
FISHER
.  That™s the 
sports section, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. 
PLOSSER
.  ﬁFederal Reserve All In.ﬂ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
ﬁFederal Reserve Will 
Provide Support to Labor M
arket.
ﬂ MR. 
LACKER
.  By buying 
MBS? 
MS. 
DUKE.  And housing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Housing.
  People understand that. 
MR. 
LACKER
.  Okay. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  D
id you have a question, 
President 
Pianalto? 
MS. PIANALTO.  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, you made some comments about the 
6½ percent unemployment trigger in 
alternative B, paragraph 5
. You said that some forecasters 
have slower progress on the unemployment rate, so they may view 
what is in alternative B 
as more accommodation than markets expect.  If you look at your page 1, 
ﬁAlternat
ive Monetary 
Policy 
Scenarios,
ﬂ that 6
½ percent rate, as you mentioned, is about mid-2015.  I know we™
re 
            
      
         
                      trying to get away from the date, but you made those points.  You didn™t say very much about the 
inflation rate, because here it says ﬁ
no more than a half percentage point above the Committee™s 

2 percent objective.ﬂ  When you look at those scenarios, with alternative B, we don™t get 

anywhere close to 2
½.  We™re just slightly above the 2.  At one point, we looked at some 
language that said ﬁclose to the Committee™s 2 
percent objective.ﬂ  And I see that 
alternative 
B, 
and even a
lternative A, is 
close to our objective.  What are some of your thoughts
?  J
ust as you 
had
 some thoughts about the 6½ percent being interpreted by some as being more aggressive, 
would that 2½ percent objective be viewed as, again, more aggressive, and is it necessary given 

the scenarios that you™ve laid out here? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLE
Y.  It™s not an objective, though, right? 
GOVERNOR YELLEN
.  It™s not an objective. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It™s not an objective.  
It™s just a tolerance level.  That™s 
quite different. 
MS. PIANALTO.  But it™s 
a matter of
 perceptions also.  We™
re talking 
about 
communications.  And we™ve made a lot of progress and laid out a 2 
percent objective.  What are 

the advantages? 
Using
 ﬁclose to 2 percentﬂ 
would still 
give
 us the 
flexibility that
™s laid out in 
these scenarios
, but we
™re not communicating to the pub
lic that we
™re throwing out ½ 
percentage 
point.  I
t seems 
as though 
we™re throwing out a number, 
whereas
, ﬁclose toﬂ gives us some of 
that flexibility. 
MR. ENGLISH.  I think the ½ percentage point buffer was intended just for clarity.  If 
you said ﬁclose t
o,ﬂ everybody would ask the Chairman at his press conference, ﬁWhat do you 
mean by 
‚close to
™?
ﬂ and t
ry to extract that information.
  People will be looking at the SEP, and 
the SEP shows inflation below 2 or at 2, roughly, but not going above.  So I don™t think they™d 
                                      
    misread the 
½ percentage point buffer as suggesting an intention to set out to push inflation 
above 2.  It would simply be seen as a buffer.  There could be transitory shocks that would 

change the inflation outlook for a time, and the Committee could look through those and say, 

ﬁOkay.  We™re going to go up as high as maybe 2½ 
for a little while, but after that
, we think 

inflation is going to come back.  In the end, we™re getting to our objective, and that™s okay.ﬂ 
But 
whether you want to say e
xplicitly ﬁ
½ percentage pointﬂ or ﬁclose toﬂ is a question of 
communications.  It™
s a little clearer to say the number and not use ﬁclose to.ﬂ  But this is a 
communications issue for the Committee. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Can I ask one more press conference 
question?  Suppose somebody says, ﬁWe get to the end of 2013, it™s December 2013, and we™
re 
exactly where we are today.
  So 
the 
unemployment rate, job growthŠeverything is pretty much 
exactly where we are today. 
Do you envision that we™
ll still be continuing asset purchases at that 
point?ﬂ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  As we go through time, as the balance sheet grows, as we 
observe the effects on the economy, we™
ll be 
continually reevaluating the efficacy of the program 
and the costs that it is imposing.  And if we feel that we
™ve 
reached that point and the program is 
not being effective, then we w
ill have to stop.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes. I
™ll just add on to what you said, Mr. Chairman.  This 
question is an important one, but I think there 
are 
just 
two ways you could end up being in the 
same place.  It could be that there were a lot of bad shocks and the asset purchases helped you 

stop that, or maybe not.  We™
ll have to make that call at that time. 
                                 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
We have overnight
.  If any genius around the table would 
like to come up with better language, I would be more than happy. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I counsel you against 
offering 
that
.  [L
aughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  Are we all set?  [No response] 
Bill, 
what do you want us to do with these handouts? Do you want us to take them home and bring 
them back? 
MR. ENGLISH.  You have lots of Class 
I informat
ion in your Tealbook, so you 
can 
keep 
them. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right. 

MR. ENGLISH.  But please don™t leave them on the subway.  [L
aughter]. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Don™t leave them on the subway.  So 8:30 tomorrow 
morning.  T
he reception is available at 5
:00 p.m. 
[Meeting recessed] 
        
    
           
     
      
           September 13 Session 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We should have a reasonable 
amount of time.  We need to get the statement in by 11:30 and close the meeting by noon.  But 
first
, to get started
, why don™t we begin our policy go-round
? I have President Williams first on 
the list. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B with the forward 
guidance on the funds rate in paragraph 5
.  The case for further action is clear. In the absence of 
significant additional monetary stimulus, progress toward our policy goals would remain stalled.  

Such an outcome is simply inconsistent with the notion of appropriate monetary policy and, in 

my view
, is unacceptable. 
We must aim for a
 path that brings us measurably closer to our goals 
over the forecast horizon, and we must take concrete actions that get us on that path.  
Open
-ended purchases of MBS represent a substantial step in that direction.  With this action, 

unemployment will fall more quickly and inflation will return toward 
2 percent faster than under 
the status quo. 
The flow-
oriented asset purchases in 
alternative B also provide flexibility that™s 
particularly valuable, given all the uncertainties of the economy, the fiscal cliff, and Europe.  

They serve as a useful automatic stabilizer as market expectations about the ultimate size of the 
program adjust in response to changes in economic conditions 
and
 the outlook.  
If the 
labor 
market shows signs of substantial improvement sooner than expected, the program can be 

curtailed.  In contrast, if the recovery falters, the program can provide additional needed support. 
There would be similar benefits from incorporating such an automatic stabilizer into our 
forward guidance of the future path of the funds rate.  The language in p
aragraph 5
 does just 
that.  Incorporating this language into our statement would allow us to finally get the calendar
-                   
                        
 date monkey off our back and provide better guidance on our policy reaction functionŠ 
importantly, at least, on economic conditionsŠ
for funds rate liftoff that 
is both clear and 
consistent with our dual-mandate objectives.  It™s also flexible enough to handle a variety of 

future paths for the economy and inflation.  Indeed, the beauty of this approach is it provides 

guidance for contingencies where our forecasts go wrong, which they inevitably do. 
Finally, I continue to favor lowering the interest on excess reserve
s rate, the IOER rate, to 
15 basis points.  We should be using all of our tools in the same direction.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
.  Thank you very much.  
President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support 
alternative 
B with the 
$40 billion per month mortgage purchase program and prefer option 5
 which moves us away 
from dates and fo
cuses on the economic outcomes we seek to achieve. 
Inflation is quite low, and 
unemployment is quite high, and most of our forecasts for the past nine months have 

overestimated how quickly we would see improvements in 
either element of our mandate. 
Altern
ative B embraces the sense of doing what it takes to move the economy at an 
acceptable pace toward full employment with stable prices. 
Alternative 
B continues to take out 
duration, provides some direct support to housing, which is just beginning to recover, and 

extends guidance on the funds rate liftoff, which, given our lack of progress toward our mandate, 

seems appropriate. 
I strongly support the $40 billion rather than the $30 billion monthly 
mortgage purchase program. 
I would also prefer to include economic targets rather than date targets in our guidance.  
Thus, I would prefer the conditionality language in 5
. The language has two advantages.  
First, 
the conditions for changing our policy stance are clear and observable to the general public.  

Second, 
date
-conditional language can be subsequently undercut by Committee members™ 
                 
                       
   
 comments that suggest a different date may be appropriate, thus altering the effect of policy 
relative to the intent of the consensus reached 
by the Committee. 
Because 5
 conditions the 
policy on observable outcomes, the public can adjust its expectations automatically to changing 

economic circumstances, and there is less likelihood of perhaps inadvertently diminishing our 

policies™ effectivene
ss due to Committee disagreement. 
There seem to be two arguments against taking action at least as strong as B at this 
meeting
.  F
irst, that it would be ineffective.  Estimates in Boston are that following 
option A 
would reduce unemployment by approximatel
y 0.8 percent by the end of 2015.  This is roughly 
in line with the Board staff memos and the consensus policy submissions from three other banks 

that reported a preferred policy that was close to A.  
If accurate, this implies creating more than 
1 million jobs relative to doing nothing at this meeting. I do not view that as de minimis. 
The second argument against more aggressive action is that it will cause inflation.  Again, 
the consensus forecast exercise is instructive.  Among banks that provided numeric submissions, 

those that assumed further easing assume underlying inflation will remain well anchored.  This 

assumption is consistent with the Boston forecasting model.  Two of the Banks that provided 

numbers and assumed earlier tightening than we do have 
virtually identical unemployment rates 
with and without tightening, but a dramatically higher inflation rate under the baseline policy.  

This is markedly different than the staff forecast, the DSG
E models that we have seen, 
and the 
models used by B
anks as
suming the need for easing.  It would be interesting to discuss the 
theoretical basis and empirical evidence for such an inflationary process, which I presume is tied 

to dislodging of inflation expectations.  However, absent a strong empirical basis for su
ch an 

inflation process and with inflation tracking below our target and roughly consistent with the 

staff forecast in models that assume expectations remain well anchored, I view the risks of 
                      
     
    
           
 inflation as being well contained through 2015, even with a more aggressive policy than in 
alternative 
B.  Thus, I support B but would strongly prefer the forward guidance in the language 
of 5
 and the larger mortgage purchase amount.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the Committee™s outlook 
and overall assessment of the economy, I would say that additional accommodation is 

appropriate.  I think the question then becomes what form that accommodation should take. 
Alternati
ve A and 
alternative 
B offer 
the Committee the opportunity to do large-
scale 
asset purchases.  As you said in your Jackson Hole speech, Mr. Chairman, and 
as the staff 

analysis indicates, the benefits of large-
scale asset purchases are still under study and 
still 
uncertain.
  And the question is, how do we deal with that?  How do we deal with the 
issue that 
we don™t know exactly how much the benefits are, even though we might feel confident about 

the sign?  Governor Yellen and the Vice Chair
man
 said the right things yesterday about this, 
which is to act forcefully 
and
 to enhance the benefits of our large-
scale asset purchases as much 
as possible. 
How do we enhance our purchases as much as possible?  Well, the stimulus from our 
purchases hinges critically on th
e forward guidance.  They work together.  If you buy assets and 
hold them for one day and then sell them the next day, they are providing no stimulus.  If you 

buy assets and hold them for 10 years, they™re providing a lot of stimulus.  T
he stimulus 
that 
the asset purchases are providing the economy depends on the timing of exit.  T
o enhance the benefit 
of our large-
scale asset purchase
s as much as possible, 
we need the best possible forward 
guidance, and I would say that B(5
) as opposed to B(5) provides that forward guidance. 
                 
  
              
       
  
      
         
 I talked yesterday about the ambiguities that come 
by trying to communicate our reaction 
function with a date.  Today I™ll focus only on the economic aspects of B(5
. One, 
it provides 
an automatic stabilizer against macro shocks.
  Two, 
it offers protection against inflation.
  And, 
three, I want to talk about the mechanism through which it™s offering stimulus. 
The automatic stabilizer feature of B(5
 is relatively clear.  We talk a lot about downside 
risks in this room.  We have a bad shockŠ
and there 
are 
many possibilities out there
, I won™t go 
through them all.  If unemployment goes up 
and we have B(5) in place, which is date guidance, 
people 
will
 wonder
:  What is the Fed going to do?  How are they going to respond to that shock? 
With B
(5
 in place, 
if 
unemployment goes up
, it means automatically it™s going to take us longer 
to get back to the 6½ percent.  That means that people know th
at interest rates are going to be 

low for longer, andŠ
this is important because the extra accommo
dation that™s going to be 
provided at this meeting is likely to take the form of asset purchasesŠ
the assets that are being 

bought are being held for longer.  So a bad shock automatically translates into more stimulus 

because of the explicit numerical marke
rs being provided in the guidance. 
I™ve painted this as an ex post story of why B(5
 is preferred, but it actually has an ex 
ante component to it.  Essentially we™re offering insurance to the economy against bad shocks, 

and that means that people have less need for saving 
to deal with those bad shocks, and that 
stimulates spending.
  We™ve talked a lot about uncertainty.  H
aving the Fed have a reaction 
function in place that 
it has 
communicated clearly helps reduce uncertainty because people know 
how the Fed is going to react to those disturbances.  That™s the kind of stabilizer property that™s 

in B(5. Let me talk a little bit about inflation protection.  It™s a part that matters a great deal to 
me.  I™ve been and remain concerned about the possibility tha
t the long
-run natural rate of 
            
     
   
                          unemployment may well exceed our current estimates.  Here™s how I™ve been thinking about this 
issue.
  Suppose we only had one mandateŠprice stability.  How would we go about 
operationalizing that goal?  Well, presumably we would choose monetary policy so as to keep 

the medium-term outlook for inflation close to 2 
percent. 
Now, we have to struggle a little about 
what ﬁclose toﬂ means, and I™ll talk a little bit more about this later, but for me I™m willing to say 

that 50 basis points is close enough.  I would say that if you had a price-
stability mandate, 
then 
promoting price stability means keeping the medium
-term outlook for inflation within 50 basis 

points of target, 50 basis points below or 50 basis points above.  
This is 
only the price-
stability 
mandate, and this is exactly the language about inflation in B.  In other words, the way I read 

alternative 
B(5
) is 
it™s saying that the Committee has the option of raising the fed funds rate if it 
ever perceives that it is not satisfying its price
-stability mandate because inflation exceeds 
2½ percent. 
Now, this is not a trigger, to be clear.  And we should be clear when we talk about this 
that it 
is not a trigger.  It™s a threshold, and it™s a threshold for conversation.  At that point, 
the 

forward
-guidance commitment is no longer operational.  In some sense, we™d be back to business 
as usual in this Committee.  The Committee would have to weigh the cost of violating its price
-stability mandate against whatever performance it™s ac
hieving on the employment mandate and 

decide what to do.  And those conversations would inevitably be interesting ones.  
I actually 
think that B slices through what might appear to be a very challenging problem.  It provides 

valuable accommodation while al
lowing the Committee to be able to protect its price
-stability 
mandate. 
Let me turn now to how it does that.  What™s the magic behind B(5
) that allows it to give 
us this protection against inflation as well as providing the accommodation? It comes from t
he 
                 
    
    
       
    
       
   
      
           fact that a lot of our estimated rules of past behavior, like a Taylor rule, have us raising interest 
rates just because unemployment is too low.  The mechanism behind B(5
 is to say we don™t 
want to raise interest rates just because unemployment is to
o low, w
e want to raise interest rates 
because we™re worried about inflation.  If it turns out that unemployment is low but inflation is 

under control in the sense that our medium-term outlook is within 50 basis points of 2 
percent
, there™s no reason to raise interest rates just because unemployment is too low.  The way B(5
) is 
providing stimulus is by saying 
the 
FOMC will tolerate low unemployment. 
There™s a lot of talk about how we should stimulate the economy by having high 
inflation.  That is not what™s going on in B(5
. What™s going on instead is 
that 
the FOMC is 
going to hold off on raising rates until unemployment is lower, and that provides stimulus 

because people know that we won™t be choking 
off 
the party
, as it were
, before it™s really under 
way.  This willingness to tolerate low unemployment is exactly how the optimal
 control 
exercise 
works in FRB/
US. 
If you look at 
the o
ptimal 
control exercise 
in 
FRB
/US, in the fourth quarter 
of 2015, unemployment is 5¼ 
percent
, the outlook for inflation is 2.3 percentŠthat™s not what™s 
providing the stimulusŠ
and you get liftoff at that time. The Committee in that FRB
/US simulation is holding off on raising rates, and that stimulates a faster return to low 

unemployment, 
to the natural rate. 
For those of you who are suspicious about FRB/
US, it™s 
obviously just one of many models, but you get exactly the same mechanism in a N
ew Keynesian model.  
Iván Werning 
has a great paper along these lines.  High future output after 
you leave the zero lower bound stimulates high output at the 
zero 
lower bound.  
There™s no extra 
inflation at all in 
Werning™s paper because actually prices are fixed. 
It™s all about the 
commitment to deliver on lower unemployment and higher output than you would otherwise 

think. 
               
       
        
                      
  If you™re liste
ning to me about the mechanism, you should be thinking
: If you™ve got 
such great inflation protection and low unemployment provides good stimulus, why not have a 
lower unemployment threshold than 6½?  I would agree with that.  I think we should be willing 

to consider that.  President Pianalto raised a concern that maybe 50 basis points was too large a 

spread.  As I said, I™m willing to go that far out, 50 basis points, but maybe one way of shaping a 

compromise along those lines is to have a lower unemployment threshold.  That™s a good thing
; it provides stimulus.  And then have a tighter inflationŠnot even tighter, j
ust say 
ﬁclose to
ﬂ 2 percent, which actually
 is vague enough 
that
 it could allow for 50 basis points.  But I put that 
on the table as possibly one way to shape a compromise.  I think B(5
 is very valuable in this 
context. 
Alternative 
B(5
 provides an economic stabilizer, it provides inflation protection, and 
it™s a credible mechanism. It™s a way to provide a credible mechanism to say we™re go
ing to be 
willing to tolerate low unemployment. 
Yesterday Governors Raskin and Stein talked about low expectations in the economy, 
that really what we have to be thinking about is ways to bolster expectations.  Communication 

along the lines of B(5
 is goi
ng to be very helpful 
in that regard
.  We often pay a lot of attention 
to the words in this room, and the words are important in what we say, but in something like 

B(5
 the numbers 
appropriately are 
going to be the main focus.  How do we explain these 
numbers to the public?  I certainly have thought about this.  I
t™s very easy to communicate the 
idea that we have a target, 
2 percent, but we need a tolerance around that target.  I think every 
businessperson, 
at least
, will understand you have targets for 
performance, but there™s some 
tolerance that you have around that as well.
  Some people are going to say 50 basis points is too 
large, but we should be able to make a case about why we feel 50 basis points is appropriate, 
                             
   
                   
 given the kinds of shocks that could hit the economy on an ongoing basis, but the idea of having 
a tolerance is a very reasonable one. 
Why 6
½ percent? 
As I™ve suggested, we could go lower, but I think 6½ 
percent says 
we™re trying to minimize the possibility of being in breach of our tole
rance range.  We have a 
tolerance range
Šit doesn™t mean we want to exceed it.  We™re very prudent about minimizing 

the possibility of any breach of that. 
I will wrap up at this point.  We™ll hear, I™m sure, from others that the LSAPs have costs, 
and 
I shar
e some of those concerns about those costs.  I think the response to that is to try to 
make the benefits as big as possible, and the language of B(5
 is the way to go along those lines.  
I offered a suggestion for changing B(5
 yesterday. I™ll offer tha
t up for the Committee™s 
consideration.  I do worry, 
as written in the draft statement that the staff circulated yesterday
, that t
he last sentence is a little confusing.  At least I found it so, but if we feel we could go out 

and explain it to people, I™m happy to live with that; however, I hope people are willing to 

consider my suggested alterations.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
We™re going through at a rapid pace. 
We™
re going to be done within the hour here, I think. 
MR. TARULLO.  Don™t bet on it.  [Laughter] 

MR. BULLARD.  I have just a few comments here on policy, so I just wanted to follow 
up on my comments from yesterday a little bit. I do not think that this is the right juncture to 

unveil a large and aggressive easing program.  I think the road ahead this fall and winter could be 

rocky.  We would be better served to take a more opportune time to take such an action.  
We are 

looking at economic data that 
are 
middli
ng.  We™ve got financial stress, which is relatively low, 
             
               
       
     
        
         
   at least for now.  Our counterparts in Europe, not us, are the ones in recession, and, in my view, 
should be the ones that are easing aggressively.  U.S. equity markets suggest continuing faith in 

U.S. expansion.  Long-
term rates are exceptionally low. 
We may also be playing down the costs around the table here of walking farther into the 
woods than we already have on balance sheet policy.  President Plosser has emphasized those 

costs, and I think rightly so, and he has done a good service to the Committee in emphasizing 

those costs.  One thing that hasn™t been mentioned very much 
is that there is a distinct possibility 

that we would be feeding into commodity price increases, which is part of what happened during 

the QE2 episode and was a bit counterproductive.  We could argue about that.  We haven™t 

talked about it a lot, but I am a little bit concerned about that based on the action that we are 

likely to take today. 
I am not one that buys into the critique that monetary policy has been a long ways off 
target in the 
past five years. It is true that the economy is not performing as well as we would 
like.  There is a clear hypothesis for that based on the fact that we are dealing with a collapsed 

housing bubble and the aftermath of a financial crisis.  
But the Committee, by all accounts, has 

done a lot.  Much of it has been quite innovative, and the call of the Committee and of the 

Chairman has been essentially correct during the 
past several years.  So 
I am not one that thinks 
that we are 90 degrees off from where we should be or could be at this juncture. 
For our action today, as encapsulated in option B, we can cite two things that do make 
some sense and that I am sympathetic with as a rationale.  One is that we do have a global 

slowdown.  I am concerned about it.  I think it is very legitimate to worry that that slowdown is 

going to 
affect the U
nited State more than it has so far, and that that is a compelling argument for 
getting ahead of that and tak
ing aggressive action here.  T
hat is one reasonable rationale. 
And I 
                           
     
                        also think we have some room to maneuver on the inflation front, but only some.  I think 
it is nothing like 2010 when all measures of expected inflation were down a lot and trending down 

further. 
We can cite these factors.  I don™t think we have as good a rationale as I would like to 
see for a move of this magnitude. 
Within alternative
 B, I do think it is a good moment to adopt a meeting-
by-meeting 
approach to balance sheet policy that I have been advocating for a long time.  I hope that this will 

put us more into a mode that is similar to the one we are in under normal interest rate policy 

where we
 can sensibly adjust the policy at each meeting, given the change in the outlook and the 

change in the economic situation.  T
his will likely serve the Committee pretty well going 
forward, and I appreciate that 
alternative B has that feature. I am satisfie
d with the formulation 
in B with respect to that dimension. 
On paragraph 5, I definitely support 5 and not 5
. As many of you know, I have argued 
that explicit mention of an unemployment number is a tactical mistake
 that may not serve the 
Committee very well.
  As Governor Yellen remarked yesterday, hysteresis in unemployment 
cannot be ruled out in the U.S.  And I might remind the Committee again that Europe has not 

seen 6
½ percent unemployment for a couple of decades.  Today it is over 11 percent in Europe, 
despite some major countries undergoing structural labor market reforms. 
I am concerned that 
we are telling the public that we can do more about unemployment than we really can.  It is more 

labor market policy than it is monetary policy, and it could possibly throw monetary policy off 

for a generation to tie explicitly to unemployment and to promise that monetary policy can do a 

lot about unemployment. 
The story in Europe is exactly that there are structural problems that 
developed over time.  Unemploym
ent 
has remained very high for a very long time, and the 
structural reforms have not been undertaken by the various governments across Europe.  It is one 
                 
      
                         
    thing to have bad labor market policy.  It is another thing to have bad monetary policy because 
you ha
ve bad
 labor market policy.  I am concerned about this, and I™d advise against going in 
that direction. 
In addition, I think there are hazards of tying to any particular measure of economic 
performance because all of our metrics have clear deficiencies, and many of them are mentioned 

around the table here.  One of the 
deficiencies 
for unemployment is that unemployment can fall 
for the wrong reasons.  W
e were just citing yesterday that the unemployment rate did fall, but it 
didn™t fall in a way that we thoug
ht was indicative of better labor market performance.  So you 
could have a situation where you feel like unemployment has gone down to 
a relatively low 
level, but you are not very satisfied with labor market outcomes, 
and you still feel like the 

Committee 
should be aggressive in that circumstance.  T
his is a problem that we have with all of 
the economic data that we look atŠ
that each piece of dat
a only tells a part of the story about the 
overall economic performance. 
We would be better off to preserve the 
Committee™s judgment 
on economic performance. 
Outside of the statement it™s fine for various members to say, ﬁI™d really like to see 
unemployment come to here,ﬂ or ﬁI™d like to see labor force participation come to here,ﬂ or 

whatever other metrics 
that you
™d like to see certain types of labor market measures hit certain 
thresholds.  But I™m not sure that you want to tie the Committee™s hands in making a judgment 

about overall economic performance.  So I™d have no problem beefing up the language on labor 

markets, if people feel like we maybe have been insufficiently attentive to this and saying that 

we are going to pay more attention.  That™s fine with me.  But I™m counseling against putting an 

explicit number on this or really any other data, to the extent w
e can avoid it, in the statement. 
         
                     
    
       
                   And, finally, on this paragraph 5
Šand then I have a few more comments
ŠI think 
thresholds or triggers like this draw lines in the sand that we may not want to be drawing.  W
e are all in agreement that if we are inside the 
boundsŠ
say, 2
½ percent and 6
½ percent
Šthat we 
are not going to raise rates.  But if you cross the bound, you are implicitly sending a signal that 
you are going to do something.  I™m not sure the Committee has really decided that we would 

actually do someth
ing in that circumstance.
  Putting on my dovish 
hat for a minute, you are 
creating this thing where you are saying you will act if the triggers are violated. I don™t think we 

have really discussed that or really think that that™s what we would do.  If inf
lation is at target, 
and unemployment comes downŠand President Kocherlakota was at least in part touching on 

this
Šthe Committee may not want to tighten at that juncture.  What if you don™t want to tighten 
at that juncture?  Then why are you giving that 
as the trigger? 
That part to me has not 
been 
formulated
 in a way that I can get my head around. 
Let me comment just for a few minutes on Mike Woodford™s Jackson Hole paper, which 
I do think was a seminal survey of monetary policy at the zero lower bound.  If you haven™t 

looked at itŠand I know many of you haveŠthe paper is divided into 
just 
two parts.  There is 

balance sheet polic
y, and there is policy 
to commit to stay at the zero interest rate for longer. 
If you know Mike, you know that he is very pessi
mistic about balance sheet policy, being an anti
-monetarist kind of guy.  He does not think balance sheet policy is very effective, except to the 

extent that it has a signaling effect and that the Committee is better served by doing something 

rather than j
ust promising to do something. 
I agree with the Chairman™s assessment that Professor Woodford is underestimating the 
effects of balance sheet policy.  I do think QE2 did have a significant influence on the United 

States and especially on expected inflation
 and actual inflation.  The effects to the real economy 
      
           
  
     
         
      
      
           
   are harder to trace out, but those are always hard to trace out.  So I think today™s 
alternative 
B action is a sensible way to manage the balance sheet policy going forward and that policy does 
have s
ome prospect of being effective, so I™m not going to argue against the efficacy of the 
policy. 
Professor Woodford thinks that the only way to provide accommodation, in large part, is 
to commit to stay at the zero lower bound for longer.  I agree also with 
the Chairman that the 

length of time that this Committee may be able to commit to stay at zero gets less and less 

credible as you go farther out in the future.  That is something that is not well captured by the 

model.  If you start going out many years, so many things can happen over that period, in reality, 

that it is not clear that you are communicating anything.
  But the main message I took from the 
paper, and an effective message, was this: 
If you are trying to make this commitment to stay 
lower for l
onger, it is a very subtle matter to get it right.  And he reviews a lot of central banks 
and a lot of central bank actions, some of which he characterized as counterproductive in terms 

of trying to get the right type of commitment from the perspective of 
the model on staying lower 
for longer.  
In fact, 
what 
I took away 
from it 
was
, the main danger is that continuing to commit 
to later and later liftoff could be sending this pessimistic signal
Šif we don™t do it correctlyŠ
that 

the reason we are staying lower
 for longer is not that we are trying to make up for the fact that 
we have been stuck at the zero lower bound, but instead it is that the outlook is deteriorating and 

is continuing to deteriorate in a very negative way.  And 
I think we have to be careful a
bout that, 
and that 
maybe
 we have sent that signal, unwittingly perhaps, in some of our actions. 
I am going to give a suggestion, not a policy suggestion, but a suggestion about the 
proper way to think about this from Professor Woodford™s perspective 
in my interpretation.  T
he 
whole point is you are constrained by the zero lower bound for a period of time.  Then, after you 
               
           
       
                    would otherwise raise interest rates, you stay at the zero lower bound for a time to make up for 
the fact that you were constrained duri
ng the earlier period of time.
  My example about how we 
should think about this is as follows.  Suppose the Committee was committed to a Taylor r
ule the 
way John Taylor likes to use itŠhis is a much more aggressive and 
hawkish 
Taylor 
rule, which 
would even 
call for raising rates today.
  And suppose everyone agreed on that.  This is just 
hypothetical, obviously.  And that rule would call for us to raise rates today, but we would say, 

ﬁWe are not raising rates today.  We are staying at zero today.ﬂ  The reason we are staying at 

zero today is exactly the Woodford reason, which is that we were constrained by the zero bound 

for a couple of years.  T
herefore, we have to stay at zero for a while
.  And it is exactly at that 
point that you gain credibility for the po
licy
.  You are trying to make up for the zero bound 
constraint by st
aying at zero
 even though the data are telling you, according to the standard 
Taylor rule or other Taylor
-type rules
, to be more aggressive at this juncture.  Y
ou are staying at 
zero 
because you need to make up for the fact that you were at the zero lower bound for some 
time. 
I do not agree with Professor Woodford that the nominal GDP targeting approach would 
do this.  My main complaint about nominal GDP targeting is that it ignores th
e possibility of 
what is likely an altered real GDP growth path.  And certainly, if you look at the data, as the 

Chairman was saying yesterday, on levels of real GDP or consumption, it looks like we are on a 

different path than we were. 
So to commit us to
 get back to the previous real GDP trend, which 
is partly driven by 
the 
bubble economy in the mid-2000s, I think would be a mistake. 
However
, for 
price
-level targeting
, I have looked at graphs and tried to get an analysis of 
where we are with respect to th
e price level.  If you look at the price-
level path established 
during the period from 1995 to 2005, which was a relatively successful monetary policy era for 
             
      
    
     
   
       
   
            
the Committee in terms of hitting our inflation target, we are actually very close 
to or right on 
that price
-level path.  And in that sense, that has been a great success of the Fed during this 
episode.  Unlike the U.S. in the 1930s, w
hen policymakers allowed the price
-level path to 
deviate from the previously established path, or Japan in the 1990s, in which, again, they allowed 
the price
-level path to deviate from the one that had been established, we did not do that.  We are 

right on the 1995 to 2005 price-
level path. 
In that sense, policy has been successful, and we have 
not committed the mistakes
 of the past.  That is also one reason why I think we have made 
essentially the right call over the 
past several years. 
I am going to stop there.  Those are my 
thoughts on monetary policy.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes, just a point of clarification.  I view the language of 5
 as a 
threshold, not a trigger.  Threshold language would be, 
ﬁlow rates appropriate, at least as long as 

the unemployment rate exceeds 6
½ percent.ﬂ  A tri
gger would be, ﬁA low rate is appropriate 
only as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6
½ percent.ﬂ  So I think it is written as a 
threshold, not a trigger. 
MR. BULLARD.  Can I respond to that?  I agree that that is the language in there, but I 
think mark
ets will interpret it as a 
trigger.  
Or let me say, as a fair
 way, I think there is a danger 
that markets will interpret that as 
a line in the sand or a t
rigger
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it™s pretty easy for the Chairman in the press 
conference
Šif we
 were to go this routeŠto explain what a threshold means.  I don™t think it is 
that complicated. 
MR BULLARD. If it™s not a t
rigger
, why put the number in? Put a lower number in. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s okay, too. 
       
                
           
               
     
   
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President 
Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to support 
alternative 
B. Having said that, I have some reservations about going down the path of a new LSAP, 
particularly the whole-hog approach that™s in a
lternative A. I am reticent on two
 counts. 
First, I remain unconvinced about the likely efficacy of expanding our asset purchases.  
As I said in the economy round, I think the conditions that made the first two LSAP programs 

successful
Ša lack of liquidity in MBS markets in the case of LSAP1 and elevated concerns 
about outright deflation in the case of LSAP2Šare not present in the current environment.  
This 

time around, it seems to me that we face a more conventional problem of inadequate demand, 

and I am not convinced that lowering general 
market rates will stimulate much credit expansion 
and spending.  
Furthermore, it is not clear to me that credit conditions in mortgage markets have 

eased quite enough to the point that more MBS purchases w
ill have a significant impact. 
Second, I have learn
ed to be humble as regards outlook certainty.  I have not completely 
abandoned the hypothesis that the willingness of businesses to hire and businesses and 

consumers to spend will improve on the other side of the election and fiscal cliff negotiations.  

As I commented yesterday, I believe there is some upside risk.  Though the European situation is 
not rapidly converging to a truly comprehensive resolution, I see some hope that the process of 

incremental steps may cumulatively lead to a large leap in overall confidence. 
I don™t have a 
whole lot of conviction that these optimistic outcome
s will be realized, so I accept the case for 
some policy response to current circumstances 
in the Committee™s outlook. That said, I will 
support 
alternative 
B™s modest pace 
of 
$30 billion per month.  That would be my preference 
for 
expansion of our MBS portfolio. 
      
     
                        
   
          
   
   With respect to the choice between paragraph 5 and 5
, I am sympathetic to the idea of 
replacing calendar dates with economic conditionality.  I have said that in e
arlier meetings. But I 
am not in favor of the formulation in 5
, at least today. 
I have views 
similar to 
President 
Bullard
™s.  The unemployment rate is a partial and potentially misleading indicator of labor 
market performance.  The pace of employment gr
owth needed to attain a given unemployment 
rate can be very sensitive to changes in the participation rate. For example, at current 
participation rates, it will take just over 200,000 jobs a month to get to a 7 percent 

unemployment rate by the end of next year.  I would consider 200,000 jobs a month over the 

next 16 months to be consistent with sustained significant improvement in the labor market. 
But the Board staff, and many on the Committee, have noted that labor force participation 
rates appear to be 
well below the levels that can be explained by demographic trends.  My own 
staff estimates that only 40 percent of the drop in participation rates since the beginning of the 

recession is due to labor force aging.  
If the participation rate were to revert t
o the level it was 
just last September, job gains of 200,000 per month would, everything else being equal, yield an 

unemployment rate that would be barely below 8 percent by the end of 2013.  And I would not 

be willing to say that such an outcome would con
stitute a lack of progress in meeting our 

employment mandate. 
Paragraph 5
, as it is written, contains no reference to broader labor market conditions.  I 
believe there was a reference in an earlier version, but it is has been removed.  I think that this i
s a significant omission, particularly with an unemployment threshold as ambitious as 6
½ percent
.  I™m not comfortable with a number that low, combined with a lack of any reference at all to our 

broader employment objectives.  T
here are enough facets of the 6
½ percent decision to consider 
that it feels a little rushed to me at this meeting. 
      
          
    
      
      
    
             
 As regards paragraph 4, I would include the reference to other policy tools. I think the 
meaning of this paragraph should be that if conditions don™t improve, the Commi
ttee will 
continue the MBS purchase program and may undertake additional asset purchases, 
employ 
other policy tools, or both.  If I misunderstand the meaning of that paragraph, then I would ask 
for a little bit more work on this paragraph and further clarification this morning.  
Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart, in 5
, the very last sentence does 
reference labor market conditions.  Did you note that? 
MR. LOCKHART.  Let me look at that.  I stand corrected.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Resource slack is large, labor market 
conditions lack momentum toward improvement, and the inflation profile in our projections is 

slightly below our long
er-run objective for the most 
part. 
I support strong and meaningful policy 
actions today to address these deficiencies. I accept that 
alternative 
B delivers on these 
requirements.  I think that the $40 billion of MBS and 5
 are very helpful in delivering 
that. I 
will simply note th
at the formulation of forward guidance in 5
 is not quite as strong as I have 
preferred in the past, but I do think that it is a good, careful approach that will in fact boost 

monetary policy accommodation, and I can certainly support that, if it is adopted. 
I think that the wording paragraph 2 is extremely important. It states the monetary policy 
concern 
as follows:  ﬁ
The Committee is concerned that
, without further policy accommodation, 
economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained improvement in labor market 

conditions.ﬂ  That is very important.  It follows through on the minutes from our July meeting, as 

well as your grave concerns
 and 
remarks expressed at Jackson Ho
le, so I favor that. 
                         
         
  
       
    I favor this combination of essentially open-
ended asset purchases, which are flexible 
when you put paragraphs 3 and 4 together, plus the enhanced 
state
-contingent 
forward guidance 
in paragraph 4.  
President Bullard went through this rationale a little bit. Let me just summarize 
and say I put a lot of weight on the research literature that Mike Woodford described.  I thought 

he did a terrific job.  In Woodford™s formulation, clear expectations of forward guidance are 

important and effe
ctive for delivering policy accommodation. 
In fact, I held my breath when I 
read the page where he described when I had talked about the 7
/3 thresholds, and I thought that 
Mike was kind and gentle in criticizing but saying that that type of forward guidan
ce did deliver 
more accommodation than what his best choice was.  In that sense, the language in 5
 would 
indeed be helpful.  The evidence for LSAPs that you mentioned yesterday, 
Mr. 
Chairman
, was 
very important.  The two reinforce each other very well. 
In paragraph 3, as I mentioned, I favor the stronger pace of MBS at $40 billion.  I think 
that paragraph 4 makes this essentially open-ended by conditioning further LSAPs on substantial 

improvement in labor conditions, joint with price stability, and 
with
 policy effectiveness, as you 
mentioned yesterday.  So there are important safeguards there.  It can be flexible and can turn 

around if in fact it is not working as best we would hope. 
In terms of labor market improvement, it would be unambiguously an improve
ment if we 
got something on the order of payroll employment increasing 200,000 per month for several 

months.  If the unemployment rate declined either with momentum or continuous improvement, 

and, indeed, we got 
GDP growth above trend, those would be all of the markers that we would 
expect for a strong recovery that would be associated with an 
improving labor market.  We may 
well not be lucky enough to see all three of those at the same time, so we will have to pay 

attention t
o that. 
       
   
                 
   
             
   
        
      
      
As you mentioned, the l
ast sen
tence
 in 
paragraph 
5 gets at this larger characterization of 
labor market improvement beyond just the unemployment rate, but the unemployment rate is a 
very important marker.  I think that 
the 
paragraph 5
 forward guidance is explicit
ly state 
contingent, and it allows us to remove the calendar date.  I
t is very easy for us to be against 
calendar dates.  I think that most of us are uncomfortable with this formulation, that policy can 

remain low until late 2014 or beyond.  But we are uncomfortable because of the ambiguous 

nature. Is it a forecast?  Is it commitment? It is easy to be against that, but you have to be in 

favor of something in order to actually take it out.  The state contingency in 5
 is very useful.  So 
the 6
½ unemployment rate marker, 
with the 2 plus ½ percentage point on inflation, is a useful 
safeguard.
  Presidents Williams, Rosengren, and Kocherlakota spoke well about how this works, 
and that it is critical to describe our attitudes about inflation above our goal of 2.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by saying something positive 
about alternative B.  [Laughter] I very much like the idea in paragraph 5
of replacing our 
problematic calendar
-based guidan
ce with language that is conditional on future economic 
conditions.  I think this is much needed change.  It focuses our communication, our forward 

guidance, on a reaction function, and reduces the danger that Michael Woodford very eloquently 

laid out that our forward guidance is actually just making people gloomier about the economic 

fundamentals. It™s a very real danger, and I think there is a very real possibility that that is 
the 
effect our forward guidance has been having over the course of the last y
ear. 
Okay.  That was my positive remark.  I would like to move on now to some improvement 
opportunities I see.  [Laughter] I think in 5
 that it would be better if we avoided using a specific 
numerical value for the unemployment rate as a threshold or tri
gger, whatever we are going to 
         
     
            
              
           
   
    do. I took a step back.  T
his is a large change in our statement.  This is a fairly dramatic change 
in the set of language we use 
to characterize our forward guidance. It™s an ambitious statement. 
In view of our experience with the forward guidance earlier this year, where we got 
boxed in for something that in hindsight we could have anticipated, I tried to think of ways in 
which this language could unexpectedly box us in or tie our hands in ways that we don™t 

anticipate now.  I think this numerical unemployment rate is one of them. 
President Lockhart 
was very eloquent about this.  This makes us hostage to labor force participation rates.  W
e would be vulnerable to a scenarioŠhe sketched it outŠin which employment picks up, and that 

starts drawing people into the labor force.  This is not an unfamiliar phenomenon historically, in 

which labor force growth that 
tails off 
and turns negative when the unemployment rate goes up, 
then picks up when employment growth starts rising.  Given the behavior of the labor force over 
the 
past several years, I don™t think we should have a lot of confidence in our ability to project 

how the unemployment rate would behave in a scenario in which employment growth picked up 

a lot.  I think this is a really serious risk.  I
t would be better to write the statement in terms of the 
qualitative language used earlier that President Lockhart was referring to. For example, we 

could say, 
ﬁThis exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least 
until the Committee has seen substantial ongoing improvement in labor market conditions.ﬂ 
I think that formulation would be preferable to the language that uses a specific numerical target. 
The s
econd opportunity I see has to do with the inflation language in the same statement.  
We used the phrase that 
ﬁthis 
exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate 
will be 
appropriate at least as long as
ﬂ blah, blah, blah, ﬁprovided that inflation at a one-
to two
-year 
horizon is projected to be no more than 
a half
 percentage point above the Committee™s 2 
percent 
objective and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.
ﬂ  So the logic is 
                
  
              
      
          
     clear, to give ourselves an out if the inflation picture deteriorates substantially.  Personally, I 
think the ﬁclose to 2 percentﬂ language would be better.  That™s more consistent with the kind of 

standard we described in our consensus statement.  Proliferating conditionality language can be 

confusing.  But there is a deeper problem with this language.  My sense is that it has been true 

for the 
past 20 years in which we have achieved price stability
ŠI believe it has been true
Šthat 
inflation over the medium term, the next couple of years, was projected to be close to 2 percent 

or below that.  I haven™t gone and checked, but I am virtually sure that™s true.  T
his was a period 
during which we achieved and maintained price stability.  I
t is essential to maintain that 
credibility because it can be co
stly to re
gain, but we started this period by moving preemptively, 
before the forecast of inflation moved away from that low rate.  And in the future, 
it is going to 

be important for us to be able to move preemptively. I
f this condition is violated, it is
 in some 
sense too late. 
It
™s not like we are going to go back to the 1970s right away if this condition is 
violated, but I think this sets too low a bar.  T
here is a way to word this that tightens this. 
We 
can say, instead of ﬁprovided that inflation at a one-
to two
-year horizon,ﬂ we could say, ﬁunless 
inflation, at a one-
to two
-year horizon, would be projected to be more than ½ percentage point 
above the Committee™s 2 percent objective.ﬂ  S
omething lik
e that makes clear that we would 
move to keep this condition true, that we are not going to wait until this condition is violated in 

order to move. 
The t
hird suggestion I have for improvement in B(5) 
concerns the last sentence. I suggest 
we delete it. I think it is quite confusing.  This represents the fifth different statement of 

conditionality on the second page, in two paragraphs. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Are you saying the last sentence in 5
?            
          
                                        MR. 
LACKER. 
Yes, , the last sentence. 
It is not clear if it only applies after we get to 
6½. Does it apply before or after that?  It is tempting to think, well, the second sentence is pretty 
strongŠthat must trump it.  But it™s not obvious.  And then, it
™s expressed in terms of the pace, 
and the rest of the conditionality is about the level of the unemployment rate.  So does this mean 

that if we get to 6
½ percent 
but unemployment is not continuing to fall rapidly enough, we are 
going to keep tightening po
licy
? I don™t think you mean that.  I
t just seems unnecessary and 
confusing to me. 
The f
inal suggestion I will make
 is, 
again, the lack of grammatical accuracy in the way 
inflation is referred to in 4 is unbecoming to 
the Committee.  We take a lot of care
 to 

communicate precisely. In something so critical, it is a little disturbing. It just seems like a limp 

and tepid sort of boilerplate reference to inflation.  ﬁ
In the context of price stability
ﬂ has always 
struck me as a little bit vague. 
Why not say 
ﬁunless doing so would compromise 
price stabilityﬂ? 
We are committed to price stability. It™s in the mandate. I would prefer to see something 
stronger like that. 
Let me take a step back here. 
If you look at this language, it™
s complicated.  The 
conditionality is expressed in four or five different ways in various parts of these two paragraphs.  

Just in terms of complexity, I think it™s going to be hard to boil it down and simplify.  
ﬁUntil 
labor market conditions get better
ﬂ is probably going to be the 
headline, but the nuances are 
going to be hard to parse out for people just reading it.  Your press conference is going to be 

really critical here. 
The broad thrust of the language of this thing is to very significantly intensify our focus 
on unemployment.  We have been moving in that direction for some time, but I view this as 

implicitly weakening our commitment to price stability
.  Taking this statement as a whole
, that™s 
        
              
                  
     how I view this.  I know the worry about price stability seems like a remote and distant concern 
right now.  I know that it looks like it is under control.  It looks like we have things covered, 

looks like we are far from breaking out, looks like we have gotten away with it 
the 
past couple of 
years.  We™ve seen inflation rise up and not have it trigger any erosion of expectations.  But the 

potential, if we lose it, is for far more costly effects on the economy than the incremental impact 

of the 1 
million jobs that the staff 
has shown might be associated with today™s actions.  I think 
that shift in focus represents a broad overconfidence about our models; a broad overfocus on 

point forecasts
, forecast means, mean forecast paths
, and their analytics as well as a lack of 
humilit
y that would be appropriate here. 
As for the deeper issues of the day, I cannot support a new asset purchase program.  W
e are fluctuating around a sluggish growth path, and I don™t think we should react to the downside 

wiggles that are of this magnitude.  F
urther stimulus at this time is unlikely to improve 
economic 
growth much without causing an unwanted increase in inflation.  I have talked about that before.  

This will complicate risks, 
creating 
greater complications in our exit strategy. 
The larger we 
make the balance sheet, the more vulnerable we are to small miscalculations in policy along the 

exit.  It just provides so much scope for expansion in bank lending and deposits that it makes us 

very vulnerable.  And the larger we make it, the more vulnerab
le 
we are
. I strongly oppose purchasing more mortgage-backed securities.  Central banks should not 
choose which economic sectors to support.  Doing so, if it has any effect at all, restricts credit 

access in other sectors. And I don™t see how we can defen
d that.  Such allocational initiatives go 
far beyond our mandate.  They undermine our claim to deserve independence for the conduct of 

monetary policy, and threats to our independence have been growing recently.  I think these are 
                                 
    
     
             just going to heighten th
ose threats. 
Buying MBS is bad policy and bad politics.  The only 
circumstance in which I
™d support it is if there weren™t enough T
reasuries out there to buy.
 One final comment.  T
here was some discussion at the last meeting of the slogan ﬁWe™ll 
do what it takes.ﬂ I think we haven™t given enough thought to the possibility that what it takes is 
patience.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I want to comment on one of your observations, 
President 
Lacker, about the last sentence of 5
. I read it slightly differently than you do, and I 
don™t know how 
other people read it. I read the sentence preceding it 
as saying 
that we currently 
anticipate that th
ese are 
the right metrics, but then the last sent
ence says that that current 
anticipation 
could be modified by what we see over time.
  You are basically saying that you are 
not completely locked into the first thing, regardless of what economic information you see in 

the future.  So I think the sentences 
actually do work together in a reasonable way. 
MR. LACKER
.  So the policy we™re adopting here is that an exceptionally low rate for 
the funds rate is going to be appropriate as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6½ percent, 

inflation is well contained,
 or we decide that some other indicator of labor market conditions 
is more appropriate. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We currently anticipate that this is the right range, but 
our view is going to be modified by future information about a broad range of indicators.  
That is 

how I read it.  T
hat seems to be more intelligent than saying we are locked into this, regardless of 
what happens, regardless of what we see, and we are not allowed to learn about anything as the 

economy evolves.  I
t creates a little nuance, 
which is reasonable in terms of how one would 
expect the Committee to operate. 
                 
    
    
     
    
       
         
        MR. LACKER.  Well, then, why not soften the 6½ and use 
more general 
labor market 
conditions. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Because 
you are trying to give guidance about what the 
Commit
tee
 thinks 
at the time, what we think today that might be modified 
or might not be 
modified by future information.  But clearly it would be unintelligent not to modify your view if 
the information strongly contradicted your prior view.  That™s how I read i
t. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Despite massive monetary policy 
accommodation over the past four years, a stronger recovery has not yet materialized, and last 

week™s labor market report was a frustrating remi
nder of this long slog.  Like others, my forecast 
accounts for any number of risks related to Europe, the U.S. fiscal cliff, and 
the 
regulatory 
environment, and does recognize that policy accommodation may need to remain in place for 

some time in order to 
support the recovery.  I understand the case for taking action in order to 
spur the recovery and bring down unemployment faster.  To that end, the Committee agreed to 

undertake additional balance sheet actions only a few months ago.  Today, we contemplate doing 

more.
  Certainly, the data flow since the last meeting was a bit softer than I had expected, but not 
sufficiently so to warrant a further expansion of our balance sheet.  In that regard, I note that the 

Tealbook had pulled forward the timing of the f
irst rate increase since our last meeting. 
As I weigh the cost of action versus 
the 
status quo, I have appreciated the thoughtful 
analysis of Board staff and a number of my colleagues around this table about the effects of 

another asset purchase.  Unfortun
ately, I find 
that the risk
s associated with further action carry 
less precise measurement, but, to the extent they are possible, pose significant cost if realized.  

Impairing market functioning in certain financial markets, the potential for the Federal R
eserve 
                 
             
               
      to experience financial losses in the future, and risk
s to financial stability 
due to the extended 
low rate environment all strike me as significant when weighed against potential benefits.  A 
larger balance sheet also has the potential to further c
omplicate an exit strategy. 
Another LSAP also may have near-term adverse consequences.  Given the recent rise in 
gasoline prices, additional asset purchases could generate a further rise in oil and gasoline prices, 

which would weigh on middle- and lower-
income households and, thus, partially offset 
estimated benefits. 
I also remain concerned that a balance sheet expansion could at some point raise inflation 
expectations.  Longer-
term measures of inflation expectations
, or breakeven inflation, 
appeared 
to re
spond strongly to past LSAP announcements.  Given that current longer-
term breakeven 
inflation measures are consistent with our stated goal, I am concerned that another LSAP 

program could push longer-term expectations above a level consistent with our obje
ctives. 
If this were to occur, we would face a difficult tradeoff between allowing longer
-term expectations 
to drift higher or reversing course by reducing the size of the balance sheet.  Either option strikes 

me as damaging to both the real economy and o
ur credibility. 
In terms of the forward guidance, I agree with those who note the time-contingent 
guidance has been problematic.  And so conceptually I agree that the state
-contingent guidance is 

preferable as long as we can articulate this guidance in a m
anner that is fully consistent with our 
January 2012 strategy statement, including our assessment of risk to the financial system.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 
         
    
  
                 
   
    
        
          MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I mentioned yesterday when I made very 
short comments about the economy, 
I would interlocutate today at greater length 
[laughter], 
so I 
ask you to bear with me. 
We seem to be mesmerized by the siren call of LSAPs. I can™t sing like Orpheus, and I 
know I will have no success in tying you to the mast or stuffing wax in our crew™s ears.  So what 
I am going to do is simply give my very best advice as a loyal officer on your ship.  I believe we 

are getting further off course. I believe we were misled by our navigati
on equipment.  
We have 
very sophisticated models, and we have a superb crew of analysts but, as you yourself said 

yesterday
Šand I quoteŠﬁnobody really knows what is holding back the economy, and nobody 
really knows what really works.ﬂ 
One thing I learned as a midshipman at the Naval Academy was that great battles at sea 
or on land are fought with modern tools, but they are decided ultimately by judgment.  AndŠ 

always
Šone listens to and respects the elements. I think everybody agrees at t
he table that 
inflation is not an immediate or presently foreseeable threat.
  Our desired port, given our 
mandate, is increased employment. I happen to believe personally we are way off course. I 

believe we are ignoring, at our peril, the elements. I ha
ve reported from my watch station again 

and again that the very people we wish to stoke consumption and follow demand by creating jobs 

and expanding business fixed investment are not influenced by our policy initiativesŠ
that is, by 

our LSAPs. 
Small and med
ium-sized businesses are job creators, and yet the soundings, as mentioned 
yesterday by President George, 
of the 
National 
Federation of Independent Business
™ s
urveys and 
others, tell us that over 90 percent of those businesses are either not interested in borrowing or, 

as I mentioned yesterday, 
have no problem accessing cheap financing.
  Monetary policy is not on 
           
            
  
     
    
   
   
        
      
        
 their radar as a concern, except that it raises fears among some 
of future inflationary 
consequences.  Their principal concern, as President Georg
e mentioned yesterday, is with fiscal 
and regulatory uncertainty. 
With regard to fixed investment and job creating 
cap
-ex, as I said yesterday, the math is 
pretty straightforward.  Big businesses dominate that theater, and again and again I have reported 
to this Committee that with some exception
ŠDisney, for example, being one led by a very 
clever contrarian CEO
Š90 percent or so of those I survey will simply not be motivated by 
further cuts in the cost of capital to invest in job-
creating cap
-ex beyond their maintenance needs.  
And 
this 
is 
due to 
the uncertainty of taxes and final deman
d and federal spending prospects. 
This time, as I mentioned yesterday, I asked my CEO contacts if 
their 
cost of borrowing 
were to decrease by some 25 basis points or more, how 
they would 
react. 
Would this induce 
them
 to spend more on expanding payroll or job-
creating cap
-ex?  And the answer 
from
 9 out of 
10 was, you could cut the cost of borrowing by 1 full percentage point 
and 
we™ll use it to buy 
back stock.  That™s what we™r
e being directed 
to do by our board.  Governor Stein mentioned the 
Duke™s Fuqua School survey yesterday, which is even more comprehensive. 
But one of my CEO contacts, by the way, reminded me of the work I used to do for him 
and the company he then managed 
going back to 1975, and our recommendations for strategic or 
green
 field investments.  We focused on ROI:  As long as you get paid back and as long as you 
earn a profit
, you can justify it to your shareholders.  And presentlyŠ
and perhaps because of 
what we 
have already initiated
Šthe cost of capital, as President Dudley mentioned earlier, 
unlike the conditions of 1975, 
is just not part of the calculation.  And if they are going to be 
buying 
back stock, as they are being directed 
to by their boards, there is, 
to be sure, a wealth 
effect.  But 
based on 
the people I talked to, it just does very little to result in
 job creation sooner 
        
        
  
   
   
                       
      rather than later. I™ll give you a specific example. 
This is inside information and off the record.  
A company that ordinarily h
as cap
-ex expenditures between $15 
billion 
and $20 billion a year 
and has the option presently to either lay cable and facilities that would expand their 4G network 
to 90 percent of the country or buy more stock has been directed by their b
oard of 
director
s to 
buy more stock because of the economics that these low interest rates make possible.  Even 

though it strengthens 
their balance sheet, it defers their 
job-
creation capacity. 
Again, I am suggesting, as one of your loyal crew, respectfully, that the effi
cacy of the 
course you are leading us upon is questionable.  M
y best guess is that we will end up this 
program, if we proceed with B, with excess reserves that exceed $2 trillion and money lying 

fallow, unused, and underutilized toward achieving our goal o
f increased employment. 
When we last talked, it was suggested that perhaps my interlocutors were unsophisticated 
and didn™t see the whole picture.  I note now that some sophisticates have come to question the 

efficacy of this LSAP cruise, among them Mr. Woodford, who has been talked about excessively 

at this meeting [
laughter], and my friend and respected economist Bill White, who has not been 
mentioned whatsoever.  Using monetary policy to overcome bad fiscal and regulatory policy is, 

to my mind, not only faulty but a 
pyrrhic
 strategy. It won™t work, and it may be used against us 
in a backlash and lead us onto the rocks. 
Now, all of that said, Mr. Chairman, you™re the captain of the ship.  It appears that you 
and many of our colleagues wish to now plot a course with coordinates outlined in B.  We have 

decided to proceed, and we have instructed our boiler room, 
as we say in the 
navy
, to pour out 
another $750 billion or so in steam, and the boiler room has replied, ﬁ
Aye
, aye.ﬂ
  This is doable, 
and 
the staff h
as indicated that 
ﬁt
he challenges posed by exit remain manageable
,ﬂ though I do 
sense some timidity in their confidence.  There are warnings in the 
memos on LSAPs that exit 
                
    
  
            
      
  
                 following an even larger pro
gram
 can probably not be accomplished without violating what the 
Committee has heretofore said is our exit strategy principle. 
The engine room has replied, ﬁYes, 
we can do it.ﬂ  But there are murmurs among the crew that their conclusions are subject to
Šand 
I am taking words out of the LSAP 
memos
Šﬁsubstantial uncertainty,ﬂ and they c
ouch their 
responses with qualifying phrases like ﬁcurrently judgesﬂ and ﬁwould likelyﬂ and ﬁseems 
plausible.ﬂ  And as I said, listening to Seth very carefully yesterday, his qualifications or his 

disclaimers sounded very much like an Allegra commercial.  But, again, you™re captain of the 

ship; you™ve decided to proceed on a course.  The course is outlined in B.  Bill tells us that it may 

aggregate to another $750 billion or so depending on how much time we let this run.  
I am a 
member of your loyal officer corps.  And even though I doubt the efficacy of what we wish to 

do, and in fact feel that this is most definitely not the right course, and feel that this course may, 

as President 
Lacker just said, compromise the Fed™s security with regard to its independence, m
y job is to give you the best advice I am capable of rendering.  Your decision is to steer us along a 

course outlined in B.  I would say that the least worse of the options in Tealbook 
B is alternative 

B, 
reg
ular B, the first paragraph 5. 
I sent around a memo earlier in preparation for this meeting, and I argued that one could 
make the case that this could help offset the drag from higher GSE fees, 
lower 

mortgage
Treasury spre
ads, even though they are quite low, and help one of the three positive 
durable goods sectors that is assisting the recovery, the others 
being aircraft and motor vehicles
.  It is still operating below long
-run potential, so there is very little danger, in my view, of 
inducing cyclical mal
-investment. 
In addition, the general effects of inducing more refinancing 
may aid housing and households in ways that we can™t quite quantify. 
          
       
          
    
         
  
            
   
 may be laudable in the minds of some at this table.  We™ve heard good 
arguments for it.  But I agree with President Lockhart, andŠ
I believe
ŠPresident Lacker, that it 
is going too far too fast, that we are rushing it, and I would recommend against it.  I am referring 
specifically to the 6
½ percent unemployment rate 
and 2½ percent inflation cap over the one- to 
two
-year horizon
.  You have the phrase that ﬁlong
er-term inflation expectations 
continue to 
remain well anchored
ﬂ attached to that, but my guess is just ooching the now commonly 
accepted medium
-term or longer
-term t
arget of 2 percent 
by o
ne-half percent
age point would 
raise eyebrows and doubts amongst our skeptics, and some question marks, no matter how we 

state it
, in the marketplace. 
If you wish to proceed on this course, Mr. Chairman, my advice is to go with 
the 
Tealbook™s alternative B, not B
. Specifically, I would go with $30 billion, the lesser number.  
As Bill English said yesterday, it allows some ramping up in case the Committee decides, against 

my adviceŠand others™ 
like me
Što do more.  A $30 billion program, if I understood the Desk 
yesterday, 
on a flow rate basis means we are already taking down 60 percent of supply. 
I would edit paragraph 4 to take out reference to ﬁadditional asset purchases.ﬂ I would 
leave it more vague by simply referring to employi
ng 
ﬁits other policy tools as appropriate.ﬂ 

And after the phrase ﬁin the context of price stability,ﬂ I would add ﬁand well anchored,ﬂ another 

great naval term, ﬁand well anchored inflation expectations.ﬂ We have it in B
. I don™t see why 
we don™t have 
it in B
.  This is enough, in my mind, to bind the hands for some time to come for 
all of those who are with you in the wheelhouse of the ship we™re steering.  It is going to make it 

very hard to raise short-
term rates, as I mentioned yesterday, even if we 
end up with a stronger 
recovery 
than we currently foresee or imagine. 
       
     
       
     
   
         
                    
   
      I would recommend, as I suggested in my memo of last week 
and 
discussed yesterday, 
that in your press conference you emphasize that this is to help along the recovery in housing.  I 
would advise that you say that the majority of the Committee concurs, but emphasize that the 

Committee, as you said yesterday you would, will be constantly scrutinizing the efficacy and 

costs of the program.  In other words, Mr. Chairman, I would take ownership of this issue.  It is 

one of the distinct areas of recovery. It is an area where I believe we have had impact. I did 

support the MBS program when it was originally announced.  I think it is vital for regular 

people, not just for economists. 
The headlin
e you should be seeking in 
USA Today
 should be ﬁBernanke Acts to Support 
Continued Housing Recovery.ﬂ  You mentioned yesterday you plan to speak in different terms 

than usual, making it more simple and directed to what you refer
red to as the ﬁaverage perso
n.ﬂ 
I think that™s good.  You™re a great teacher.  I saw you do that most forcefully and effectively 

when you visited Fort Bliss.  And as I mentioned in our phone conversations last week, your 

objective should not be to communicate to a few dozen sophisti
cated economists 
about 
this 
model or that model.  It should be to convinceŠ
what was referred to in the last meeting
Šthe 
unsophisticated interlocutors who run America™s businesses, and the consumers who buy the 

goods and services produced by those businesses, and the press, particularly 
what
 the consumers 
read as opposed to 
the reference literature. 
So, in summary, Mr. Chairman, I disagree with this course.  I think it is a mistake.  I
t steers us closer to the rocks.  But I have offered you my best advice un
der the circumstances. 
I wish you luck.  I will do my very, very best in my public appearances in the upcoming week to 

support what we are going to announce, even if I have to take Allegra to do it.  [Laughter] 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
         
            
   
        
     
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
  Thank you.  President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There are two policy actions under 
consideration today.  One is additional asset purchases, the other is an effort to extend and 
strengthen our forward guidance.  I would like to make 
a few comments about each of these. 
As I explained in the earlier go
-round, I am not in favor of undertaking a new round of 
asset purchases today.  In my view, the forecast has not changed enough to warrant further 

action.  Indeed, many of the Tealbook™s simple rules on page 2, Tealbook B, including the 

outcome-
based rule, suggest that policy is approximately well calibrated. 
Just like President 
Bullard, I do not see the urg
ency 
for large, aggressive actions at this time.  I™ll remind the 
Committee, we didn™t move earlier this year 
as the economy brightened and the outlook looked 
better
.  We did not take action.  We were patient.  
It t
urned out to be the right decision.  The 
econ
omy then weakened.  But we seem to be anxious to do further accommodation every time 
we see weakness and not do the reverse as the economy strengthens.  The message I take from 

that is that 
we 
need to be patient, that we need to not react to short-
run fluc
tuations. 
The recovery is frustratingly slow.  
The u
nemployment rate is uncomfortably and 
tragically high.  But, again, we have been told and we understand there is reason to expect this, 

given the size and nature of the economic shocks that have hit the economy.  The slow recovery, 

in my mind, is not evidence that our monetary policy stance is inappropriate.  The benefits of 

further asset purchase
s in curing what ails the economy are imprecise and tenuous at best.  
Indeed, the Board staff memo lays out numerous caveats and assumptions necessary in assessing 

the possible benefits of further asset purchases. 
While financial participants may be chomping at the bit for a new program, many 
economists throughout this country have raised doubts about the efficacy of such a policy 
       
                     
         
              strategy.  Despite sizable purchases and zero interest rates for four years, unemployment remains 
elevated.  But rather than question the efficacy of the policies, which would seem natural, our 

strategy seems to be to double down.  Now, th
e further sizable expansion of the balance sheet 

carries costs and will greatly exacerbate the challenges we face when it comes time to exit, as I 

talked about yesterday. 
In my view, embarking on another asset purchase program at this time is 
a highly risky strategy.  The consequences may prove very disruptive to the U.S. economy and 

harmful to the reputation and credibility of this institution for years to come.  We should not 

ignore these risks, even for the 
best
-guess outcomeŠa 50 basis point drop in the unemployment 
rate over two years. 
The proposal in 
alternative 
B is for a flow
-based program.  But to me, this seems to run 
counter to the theory of how such purchases are purported to work in the first place and the logic 

we have used in the past. If we 
believe that the effects of purchases are through a 
portfolio 
balance channel, then the public needs to understand the stock of securities the Fed intends to 

buy.
  The Board staff memo on the flow-
based balance sheet policy says
 that the conclusion of 
the 
simulation exercises
, and I quote, ﬁreflects the strong assumptions that investors, price-
setters, 
and 
wage
-setters all understand the Committee™s goals and its
 stopping rule for the flow 
LSAP
.ﬂ  How do we communicate that when we ourselves don™t even know what that stopping 
rule will be? It is remarkable to me that the Committee has not been able to communicate to the 

public our reaction function for setting the funds rate even in normal times.  And now it seems 

we expect the public to believe and unders
tand what our reaction function will be for LSAPs and 
balance sheet rules
.  LSAPs are not a nimble instrument.  If this program doesn™t produce the 
desired results or the predicted outcomes for 
the 
unemployment rate, what will we do? 
I would 
predict that with a 
flow
-based program, if we don™t get the results, we won™t stop.  We will 
            
                
   
        
     
   
   continue.  How will we know when to stop? W
e seem to have convinced ourselves that such a 
policy is effective and important.  Maybe so.  If it proves not to be, and we don™t g
et the desired 
results, will we just keep on buying assets, reevaluating, and say, ﬁOh, yes, it™s going to work.  
We just have to do some more.ﬂ I am not terribly confident of our ability to manage that 

effectiveness and give us a stopping rule. 
If we get
 the reaction function wrong, and we find ourselves with ever-
more larger 
balance sheets, the Fed may face balance sheet losses, no returns, no flows to the Treasury, or 

unacceptably large losses of some kind or another.  This could undermine our ability to 

implement an appropriate monetary policy in the future, to the detriment of both households and 

businesses.  Now, 
if the purpose of the balance sheet expansion 
is as a commitment 
device to 
keep rates low for longer precisely because it makes it harder to exit, then we need to be 

explaining this.  
We don™t tell this to the public.  We need to be more communicative about what 
we expect our policy to achieve and why 
we are 
doing it, and we™re not doing 
that
.  How do we 
expect the markets to understand this 
when we are reluctant to say so directly
 ourselves? 
This leads me to the issue of forward guidance, the other policy tool under consideration, 
either in conjunction or separately.  The intent of our forward guidance is for the Committee to 

commit to holdin
g interest rates lower longer than it normally would after the economy begins to 
recover.  The idea, as President Kocherlakota said, is 
that 
the commitment to do this is supposed 
to signal to households that the future is going to be brighter.  The future is going to be more 

economic 
growth, higher spending than they otherwise might anticipate.  And this helps 
stimulate less saving and more spending today.  The strategy works well in many of our models.  

Agents are completely forward
-looking.  Many of those 
have expectations that are right. 
But 
implementation, in my view, is very tricky. One needs to get the expectations right. 
                   
  
                   
                      We wouldn™t want the public to believe that we will let inflation run away from us, of 
course.  Michael Woodford has argued that t
here are 
way
s to implement this strategy
.  He has 
given us two examplesŠ
an earlier 
one is 
a price
-level
-targeting strateg
y and, of course, recently 
at Jackson Hole, 
nominal GDP targeting. I see the problem with this strategy in implementation, 
not the conceptual idea.  First, it presumes that households and businesses will correctly inter
pret 
our guidance and what it means, and that it means future growth will be higher.  
But it seems just 

as reasonable to assume, and perhaps so far that has been the react
ion, 
that 
they will read our 
actions as a signal that we believe the economic outlook is going to be a lot worse for longer.  

The public does not have that positive outlook, and if we don™t convey that to them in very 

strong language, the strategy won™t work.  It will not bring spending forward. 
This strategy requires us to manipulate the public™s expectations in a very particular way. 
That
™s the communication challenge with this strategy.  To follow th
e strategy requires placing a 
lot of weight on our abi
lity to communicate. You will recall that this Committee decided not to 
adopt price-level targeting not too long ago and did not adopt nominal GDP targeting when we 

had the opportunity to do so.  And we rejected those for a variety of reasons, one was 

com
munication and, of course, 
with nominal GDP targeting
, one of the major issues was 
defining what the right level of real GDP needed to be.  We found those both either risky or 

diff
icult communication strategies. 
What do we think that we have done now that will overcome those problems? Why do 
we think that the thresholds w
ill overcome those difficulties? We seem to be willing to 
implement the strategy in a half
-hearted way.  I™d note that I have been a strong advocate, and 
continue to be a strong advocate, 
for systematic reaction functions. It is very important to this 

Committee. 
But 5
 is not a reaction function.  

 says nothing about what happens, for 
              
          
      
       
   
        
                example, after we pass one of the thresholds.  And this is very important, 
because the 
public 
doesn™t understand what our reaction function is in normal timesŠor we don™t know what they 
perceive it to be necessarily
Šand we are not telling them what it is going to be afterwards
.  L
et™s 
suppose, for example, that the public believes that after 
we reach the 6
½ percent threshold, and 
we say nothing about what we will do after that, they presume we may go back to the Taylor 

rule.
  Well, if that™s what they expect to happen, it would lead perhaps to a view of 
very fast 
tightening of policy after we get to the 6
½ percent unemployment rate.  That would undo some 
of the positive effects that we are trying to gain by this forward guidance.  If that turned out to be 

the case, then this strategy won™t work.  How do we make that commitment?  The public has to 

believe, beyond just the thresholds, how we are going to conduct policy, and as 
of 
now we 
haven™t explained 
that. 
I don™t think we agree amongst ourselves enough about what our policy 
reaction function is, and as much as I desire a more contingent eco
nomic-
based reaction 
function, I don™t think the thresholds help us very much there.  
The language in 
alternative B
(5

 again, says nothing about 
how we will behave afterwards. 
In the end, I agree with Woodford that LSAPs are perhaps ineffective.  But if 
we are 
going to adopt forward guidance and use that as our powerful tool, we need a much more 

deliberate and extended communication strategy to lay the groundwork to explain how our 

reaction function and how our policy strategy 
are 
going to work, and a com
munication strategy 
that convinces the public that we are serious about it, so that they understand how it works, 
if we 

are to get the outcomes that we want. 
Obviously, I am not in favor of B.  But if I had to choose, at this point I would choose 
5 over 5, not because I don™t like the direction that 5
 is headed, I™m just not sure it is ready for 
prime time yet. 
I™ve never 
been in favor of the calendar date.  It has created many problems for 
      
   
          
           
           
           
   us over the last year, and I am anxious to get rid of it.  But we need to get rid of it not by a one-
time change in a statement. 
It is going to take more preparation and more analysis. 
Thank you, 
Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Unlike some of my colleagues, my policy 
statements have usually been on the shorter side because I have generally been supportive of the 

version of the policy alternative that the Committee has eventually adopted.  I™m finding today™s 

policy decision much more of a strug
gle.  So I™m going to take a little more time than usual to 

explain my policy position and to share my views on the benefits and risks of additional policy 

action
s. 
With the unemployment rate at 8.1 percent and the August employment report as 
disappointing as it was, I would like to see the expansion proceed at a faster pace.  I know that 

we all would.  So the question on the table is:  Can additional monetary policy accommodation 

spur economic growth and improve labor market conditions?  And if so, which actions would be 

most beneficial and pose the least risk? 
I agree with the staff assessment that large
-scale asset purchases have been effective. 
Our first LSAP program was effective at the early stages of the financial crisis when financial 

markets were i
n severe distress.
  Our second LSAP program was effective when it was launched 
in 2010, a time when financial stress was still significant, the risk of falling back into a recession 

was high, and the risk of an outright deflation was very real.  
Our LSAP p
rograms provided 
strong support to financial markets and helped to appropriately realign inflation expectations.  In 

today™s circumstances, I see the benefits of another LSAP program as being far more limited. 
                    
       
                       The circumstances that prevailed when we init
iated our previous LSAPs are not evident today.  
Financial markets are not in disarray, and deflation is not a serious risk. 
I also worry that another large
-scale asset purchase program carries the risk of 
complicating our ability to withdraw policy 
accommodation smoothly and in a timely manner, as 
well as the risk of exposing us to reputation risk in the event that we incur large financial losses. 
I commend the staff for doing yeoman™s work to develop exit tools, to identify some of 
the potential 
complications of operating with a very large balance sheet, and to simulate our 
balance sheet under various assumptions.  I know that we™ve taken precautions, but it is 

impossible to be fully prepared for the environment that we might actually face three y
ears from 
now.  So after putting together my thoughts about the benefits and risks associated with the 

available tools and considering my economic outlook, I was not in favor of launching another 

large round of asset purchases along the lines of 
alternativ
e B as it was originally proposed in the 
Tealbook.  That option called for the immediate launch of an asset purchase program until labor 

market conditions substantially improved, and the purchase program was committed to run at 

least through mid
-2013.  That option also called for an extension of the forward guidance on the 
fed funds rate through mid-2015. 
I recognize that the strategy behind this policy option is predicated on the theory that 
additional monetary policy accommodation will only reduce the une
mployment rate substantially 
if this Committee actually commits to act aggressively and persistently until that goal is 

achieved.  I understand why the commitment strategy works so well in theory, but we have not 

had much practical experience to learn from
.  I understand the value of commitment, but 
commitment can take many forms. I think there™s value in waiting a little while longer before 

deciding to initiate another large
-scale asset purchase program. 
The Committee™s better choice 
                  
           
      
   
  
    
           at this juncture is 
to find a way to commit through forward guidance about the federal funds rate 
liftoff and not to launch a significant asset purchase program.  
I™m of 
the 
view that easing 
monetary policy through forward guidance has also been a powerful tool for reducing long-
term 
interest rates. 
As I noted, I think that our first two LSAP programs were successful in countering 
financial market stress and deflationary pressure
s. We may yet encounter a crisis
Šeither from 
the fiscal cliff or from Europe
Šthat once again 
cause
s serious financial market distress or 
deflationary pressures.  We would be better served by using asset purchases in response to these 
kinds of threats or the threat of a recession than to try to eke out a little more 
economic 
growth in 
the current circumstance. 
In coming months we may know more about the prospects for fiscal 
policy and for Europe and about the outlook.  It™s valuable to have the option to respond directly 

to these situations
, and launching a full-blown LSAP program today reduces our flex
ibility. 
For all of th
ese reasons I have preferred to wait for the completion of our maturity 
extension program at the end of the year before deciding whether to purchase more long-
term 
assets.  However, it was clear at our last meeting that many other Com
mittee members judge that 
additional policy accommodation might likely be warranted even sooner, and last week™s 

disappointing employment report seems to have been the decisive piece of evidence for some 

members who have been waiting for more proof of the economy™s lethargic condition. 
While I still have reservations about some of the specifics of the proposal, the version of 
alternative 
B that is now under discussion offers the possibility of an acceptable way forward.  
For one thing, even though 
alternati
ve B does call for expanding our holdings of long-
term 
securities in the next several months, it does so through the acquisition of MBS
.  Because some 
research does suggest the MBS purchases can be more impactful than Treasury purchases, I like 
        
     
                     
    
     
           
this aspect 
of 
alternative B.
  But I would also prefer the smaller amount of MBS purchasesŠ
that 
is, the $30 billion per month. 
One option in 
alternative B also allows for the possibility that the Committee might 
deploy tools other than, 
or at least in addition to
, large
-scale asset purchases if in coming months 
we conclude that additional easing steps are warranted. I was going to suggest some changes to 
the second sentence in paragraph 4.  I preferred that we delete the mention of ﬁ
additional asset 
purchases
ﬂ and in
stead state that 
ﬁthe Committee will continue its purchase
s of agency 
mortgage-
backed securities
ﬂ and is prepared to ﬁemploy its other tools as appropriate until such 
improvement is achieved in a 
context of price stability.
ﬂ  But I do like President Lockha
rt™s 
suggestion that we insert ﬁmayﬂ in front of ﬁundertake additional 
asset purchases and employ 
its other policy tools.ﬂ I think this flexibility of phasing in more accommodation in various ways as 

needed could prove to be helpful. 
In addition to beginning MBS purchases, 
alternative
 B eases policy through forward 
guidance. I like, as many others have already indicated, the state
-contingent concept in 

paragraph 5
, but I regard the 6½ unemployment rate and the 2½ inflation rate to be much too 
aggressive and risky.  If 
the natural
 rate of unemployment turns out to be 6 
percent or larger, I 
think that not lifting the fed funds rate until the unemployment rate falls to 6
½ percent risks some 
build-up of unacceptable inflationary pressures.  I know there 
are safeguards built into the 
forward guidance to prevent 
an unacceptable increase in inflation expectations, but we should be 
more humble about our ability to forecast these conditions with much precision.  
Presidents 

Lockhart and Lacker both laid out so
me risk
s to
 using a number for the unemployment rate, and I 
agree with their thoughts.  But if we decide that we have to include a number, a better approach 

is to set the unemployment rate to 
ﬁat least as low as 
7 percent
ﬂ and to keep inflation at ﬁ
close t
o                                   
  
     
    
    2 percent.
ﬂ  T
hese settings give us more flexibility.  Without that extra flexibility, I do not 
support p
aragraph 5
 and instead I support the language in paragraph 5. 
In conclusion, even though my preference is to wait, I can support a
lternative B with 
paragraph 5 today.  Even though some MBS purchases would begin right away, expanding the 
scope of policy accommodation even further is going to require the Committee to vote once 

again in coming months on the size and the structure of the policy change.  This buys us some 

time to determine exactly what the Committee means when we say 
that we want 
ﬁthe outlook for 
labor market conditions to significantly improve.ﬂ It also buys us some time if the outlook does 

not significantly improve to decide whether additional asset purchases would then be the best 

course of action.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B.  My preference is for 
purchases of 
$40 billion MBS a month, and with respect to forward guidance, my preference is 
for 5
. The data we have received since our August meeting provides yet further confirmation 
that 
economic 
growth is proceeding near or slightly below the economy™s potential, and 
downside risks continue to be substantial.  For quite some time, the Committee has been in 

watch
-and
-wait mode.  We™ve patiently monitored the economy to see whether the MEP 
and
 our forward guidance would be sufficient to produce a stronger recovery.  The verdict now seems 

clear.  Absent further policy action, I see little chance that unemployment will decline in the 

foreseeable future.  We should not delay action any further.  Indeed, I hope we will send the 

message loud and clear that we intend to provide additional accommodation through new asset 
            
                                
   purchases until we observe substantial and sustained improvement in labor market conditions, 
and will maintain policy accommodation for an extended period as the recovery strengthens. 
I support the open-
ended 
and conditional nature of the asset purchase program in 
alternative B. I think it™s very helpful to spell out the goal of the program and to articulate the 
economic conditions we™ll need to observe before halting those purchases.  
In particular, we 
should promise to add accommodation through asset purchases until the outlook for labor market 

conditions has improved substantially, and we would stop doing so only if our outlook for 

inflation or assessment of the efficacy and costs of the program change
s sig
nificant
ly.  The 
challenge with such an open
-ended program is that its effectiveness will depend on market 
expectations of the ultimate size of our asset purchases, and we™re offering no clear guidance on 

how long we expect them to continue.  
In addition, 
we™ve included some escape clauses relating 
to efficacy and costs.  I, therefore, think it™s important that our public communications, including 

the Chairman™s press conference, emphasize our commitment to continue the program until we 

have seen ongoing and sustained improvement in labor market conditions. 
Even though the open-
ended nature of the program creates challenges in shaping 
expectations
, it also has the very desirable property that market participants should adjust their 
expectations about the size of the program in response to changing economic conditions.  And 

this means that the program should induce stabilizing movements in financial conditions as 

expectations adjust automatically to incoming data indicating a stronger or weaker economic 

outlook. 
There™s been quite a bit of debate both inside and outside the Fed about the likely 
economic impact of asset purchases, and there is sizable uncertainty about the effects of LSAPs. 

I appreciate ongoing staff e
fforts 
to refine our estimates of these effects.
  Nonetheless, in light of 
       
     
   
  
              
              the evidence that I™ve seen, I™m persuaded that this program can be a 
helpful 
tool 
for achieving 
our objectives.  And while I™m mindful of the implications of further asset purchases for capital 
losses and remittances down t
he road, these concerns pale in comparison to what I view 
as the 
potential economic and human costs of failing to reduce the unemployment rate as aggressively 

as we can. 
I™m hopeful that a determined commitment to continue providing accommodation 
until we
 achieve more rapid and durable progress in attaining our employment goal may bolster 
household and business confidence 
and
 spending.  Any stimulus provided through this channel 
will boost its 
effe
ct relative to the staff™s estimates. 
I think it makes sense to direct our new purchases to MBS to provide additional support 
to the housing market, and I support purchases at the higher rate of $40 billion per month, which 

is a rate that in the 
Desk™s assessment could be sustained for the next year or two.  Consi
stent 
with the open-ended approach, I™d be prepared to scale the flow of these purchases up or down as 

the economic outlook evolves.  If this flow of purchases is maintained through the middle of next 

year, our holdings of longer-
term securities would incr
ease by about 
$800 billion, which I think 
is large enough to have a substantial economic effect. 
Paragraph 4 of the statement spell
s out the conditions under which we will provide 
additional accommodation through asset purchases.  Paragraph 5, in contrast, 
concerns the 

conditions under which we will maintain the level of accommodation that™s reached when our 

asset purchases end. 
If we end up adopting 5 
rather than 5
, I consider it critical to make clear 
that an extension of the expected calendar date to m
id-2015 is intended as a policy shift to 
improve the economic outlook, and that it does not convey a downgrading 
of our outlook in the 
face of disappointing new data.  Whereas our previous language tied exceptionally low levels of 
               
    
   
      
          
    
 the funds rate to economic weakness, the new language incorporated into the beginning of B(5) 
is much more positive, and I think it™s a very significant improvement. 
As between the alternative versions of 
paragraph B
(5), while I can support B(5) today, 
I strongly 
prefer 
version 5
. We contemplated a formulation along these lines when we introduced 
calendar
-date guidance in August of last year, and we have discussed this formulation 
extensively for many months now.  President Evans, 
in his speeches
, and Presidents 
Kocherlakota, 
Williams
, and Rosengren have explained in detail and very persuasively why a 
formulation like this makes sense.  I don™t want to go over the arguments again that they have set 

before the Committee. I simply think that clarifying the economic conditionalit
y of the funds 
rate path is useful for precisely the same reasons that it™s useful to tie our asset purchases to 

economic conditions.  
And I also think
Ša point that President Kocherlakota emphasizedŠ
that 

the language has the possibility of bolstering household and business expectations about their 

future incomes, and this would be a very important mechanism potentially for supporting 

additional spending. 
In summary, I support the provision of additional monetary accommodation.  I anticipate 
that continuing our additional purchases w
ill be warranted
 well into 2013.  I also support 5
 today 
and hope that if we end up going with 5, 
we will make further progress in future meetings on 

refining our forward guidance. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I prefer 
alternative B.  As I™ve been saying for 
some time now, I believe it™s important for us to take stock of our remaining tools and make sure 

that they™re used to maximum effect.  I do not view reducing the IOER or any sort of discount 
         
    
   
     
           
        window program to promote lending to be viable options.  So for me, 
that leave
s us at asset 
purchases and future guidance about the fed funds rate. 
I find the idea 
that the MEP has just as much efficacy as the LSAPs to be plausible, an
d I 
supported both the original program as well as its extension through the end of this year as an 
accommodation move.  If the MEP does the job on long-
term rates
, without increasing the size of 
our balance sheet or drawing the same criticism as LSAP
s, so much the better.  But in not 
drawing criticism, the MEP might also be less visible and thus less likely to engender a 

confidence effect.  So it™s important to not only use the tool, but to be quite vocal about our 

estimates of its potency. 
In addition to continuing the MEP, I™m in favor of adding purchases of MBS.  There have 
been many discussions in this building about how LSAPs work and the extent to which long-

term rates affect equity prices.  I™m not, frankly, quite sure about the equity effect, but I™
m 100 percent certain that interest rates have a direct effect on real estate prices, and house prices 

are important components of household wealth.  They 
affect the 
number of households 
underwater on their mortgage, 
and, most important, rising prices help
 instill the confidence to 
buy a house either to live in or as an investment. 
Reductions in the yield on mortgage-
backed securities have not necessarily translated to a 
one-
for
-one reduction in home mortgage rates, 
as the primary
Œsecondary rate spread rema
ins 
unusually wide.  So our purchases of MBS could very well translate into additional profit to 

lenders rather than cost reductions to homeowners, but ultimately, 
that addition
al profit should 
entice additional capacity and competition into the market tha
t will reduce the cost and increase 
the availability of mortgage credit.
  And while much has been made of the benefit to the 
economy as homeowners refinance into lower payments and free up cash flow for spending, that 
          
   
          
             
   
       
       
   
 reduced payment for the homeowner translates into reduced income for an investor, and it takes 
some pretty heroic assumptions about the differences in propensity to spend for that channel to 

make a big impact on consumer spending.  Still, I think the confidence 
and wealth effects
, along 
with t
he incentive for increasing capacity
, make this a step worth taking.  I confess that I might 
have been on the fence with this if the employment numbers had been better, but given their 

weakness, it™s hard to argue that we™ve been watching closely and still haven™t seen any reason 

to take action. 
For m
y policy preference, 
I start with the desire to finish out the MEP rather than throw it 
overboard and replace it with something else.  Although it™s something of a coincidence that the 

MEP runs out as we approach the fiscal cliff, it™s also something of an advantage.  It gives us a 

logical point to take stock of 
the consequences of reaching the cliff and its resolution.
  To be 
clear, I don™t view it as a potential stopping point.  On the contrary, I think it hig
hly likely that it 
will need to be a point of escalation, 
and I want to make sure that we have some additional fire 

power left
.  I know this goes against the grain for those of you who believe we should launch 
everything we have as early as possible in ord
er to strengthen the economy enough so 
it can 
withstand potential shocks, but those who subscribe to that idea are probably a lot more 

convinced than I am about the actual power of our tools.  I, frankly, don™t believe these tools are 

powerful enough by themselves to strengthen the economy enough so that it will withstand those 

shocks, but I do believe that, 
in announcing their use, there™s a confidence effect that can change 

expectations and halt or slow a downward slide. 
I a
m willing to entertain the possibility that we are approaching the point where we 
resemble the wizard behind the curtain.  [L
aughter] 
If so, I want us to continue to appear great 
and powerful in the face of economic weakness for as long as possible.  
That
 is, I believe that our 
        
                   
   
     
               
 actions still have the potential to inspire confidence over and above any other possible channel 
through which they can work.  But if confidence is the most potent channel, 
the when
 and how of 
new announcements becomes a tool in its
elf. 
The Chairman was telling us at dinner last night that he had the opportunity to go and 
visit the Washington Nationals
™ batting practice and meet the players, and one of the players 
came up and
, upon finding that he was the Chairman of the Fed, said, ﬁHey, how about that QE3, 
man?ﬂ  [Laughter] 
I think this is evidence that there™s a whole world of people out there who 
have no idea what QE3 actually means or what monetary policy is.  They don™t know the Taylor 

rule, and they haven™t spent much time thinking about the Woodford paper.  [Laughter]  They 

won™t read the whole statement or tune into the press conference, but they will likely know that 

the Fed did something and that that something should help the economy. 
In the spirit of conserving some fire p
ower for what I view as a potential two
-step action, 
I prefer to add only $30 billion per month in MBS purchases.  It establishes the 60Œ
40 split that 

was assumed in the capacity memos and leaves room to escalate the amount of MBS, add 

Treasury purchases, 
or commit to a $1 trillion program as levers to be pulled if conditions 
deteriorate, as I fear they might in coming months. 
My own judgment is that a commitment to a 
large program will prove to be a stronger action, but that we can always change from open
-ended 
to a stock commitment.  It would be much tougher to try to go in the other direction. 
In paragraph 4, I prefer to exclude the mention of other policy tools, as those other policy 
tools could be interpreted as an intent to use the IOER or a lending p
rogram, 
neither of which I 
support. 
I prefer 
paragraph 5 over 5
, especially at this meeting.
  The action of adding MBS 
purchases to the MEP is already going to be a little complicated to communicate.  Have we or 
         
     
     
      
                  
  have we not launched QE3?  So our communication focus should certainly be on that action in 
this meeting. 
Use of a date 
in the forward guidance is familiar and it™s expected.  While I™m sure 
there™s going to be an ongoing discussion, I would still continue to use the date, but over time, 

explain t
hat it represents a departure from our standard policy rules and our own historic reaction 
function.  I found the memos about delaying liftoff until there was a greater certainty about the 

likelihood of return to the zero bound to be very reasonable and explainable, and it would be 

helpful to convey that we are also anxious to get back into a more normal environment. 
I have real concerns about expressing our policy in terms of specific triggers.  We worked 
hard on the statement that put the 2 
percent target out there, and I™d hate to create an impression 

that we™re now raising it. I™m especially reluctant to specify the unemployment rate 
as the single 
employment data point guiding our actions.  First, there™s always the risk that it™s perceiv
ed as 
too high or too low, and one has only to look at the most recent employment report that clearly 

showed weakness, even though the unemployment rate dropped 
two
-tenths, 
to get a little nervous 
about tying fed funds expectations to that single number.  
Indeed, last year as we saw a full 
percentage point decline in the unemployment rate, we were only kind of pleased about it, 

because it didn™t happen in the way we expected. 
Someone commented yesterday that we should begin to focus on how the general publi
c receives our messages, and this is a really important point.  I question whether the public will use 

this guidance formulation to adjust their expectations about policy.  I think they™ll hear these 

numbers as our targets.  But if the consensus is to move to conditioning on economic outcomes, 

we should, 
at a minimum
, take some time to set the table for its introduction. In addition, we 

should agree to leave this set-up task to the Chairman, and the rest of us should refrain from 

taking our own disagreements on the finer points public.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
                 
   
    
   
         
   
                  
  
   
      
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and I™d like to point out 
that 
the 
player™s 
financial portfolio is probably bigger than anybody at this table.  
[Laughter]
  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My reaction when you told me about the 
player in question was he has an awfully good financial advisor.  [Laughter] L
et me begin by 
saying that some people have basically asked the question, why act now? For my own 
perspective, I don™t think there is a particularly compelling reason to act at this moment, but that 

is only because I would have thought that action at any of the p
ast several meetings would have 

been equally appropriate.
  Charlie, in response to your questions, why wasn™t I or why weren™t 
others inclined to act earlier in the year when there was a trio of pretty good employment 

numbers? 
The answer 
is that
 they didn™t seem sustainable, 
just as the little bursts in the last 
couple of years hadn™t 
seemed sustainable. 
If they had been sustainable, that would have called 
for some action.  But here I think we are all seeing that the basic diagnosis of a bogged-
down 
economy over the p
ast few years has become a pretty persuasive one. 
The second thing I would say is I don™t think it is reasonable to oppose further action on 
the grounds that action taken in the past has not produced the complete, 
fast recovery that 

everyone would like to see.  T
he real question is the counterfactual one
: In the absence o
f action, 
in the absence of the LSAPs, what would be the situation now?  And there I think, 

notwithstanding 
the efforts of some to deny that there has been any effect
ŠI am not talking 
about people in this roomŠ
while one can debate reasonably and at length 
the actual amount of 
effect of the last couple of LSAP exercises, it is really hard not to see that there has been an 

effect
, and the 
disagreement seems to be 
over how much. 
Of course, we would all be happier if there had been a more aggressive set of poli
cies to 
deal with underwater mortgages and housing a couple of years ago.  I think in retrospect, as 
         
          
      
   
              
  
           people write the history of the Great Recession following the financial crisis, the failure to 
move 
more aggressively on housing is going to be seen as the biggest of the policy mistakes, even 
bigger than maybe not going for a larger stimulus package.  
But
 it is not up to us to determine 
what everybody else does.  We have to take the world as it is presented to us, and then balance 

the costs and benefits of the actions we can take in light of the good and bad decisions that other 

parts of the government and consumers and firms are themselves taking. 
As Jeremy was suggesting yesterday, there is in any set of LSAP proposals an anticipated 
combination of what he 
termed the ﬁhydraulic
ﬂ effects and some confidence or quasi
-commitment effect. 
I think it is hard to disentangle the two, even as we look retrospectively at 
the first couple of LSAPs.  T
here is some case to be made, as some of the skeptics have 
suggested
, that the conditions 
that obtained at the times of the LSAPs made what I have termed a 
confidence or quasi-
commitment effect particularly salient at those moments.  And th
at may not 
be quite as powerful right now. 
But, again, in the face of all of this uncertainty, which the Chairman alluded to yesterday, 
we do have to make a choice.  And it does seem to me that the costs suggested to date, while 

nontrivial, don™t seem overwhelming.  That is, they are a little bit more speculative than they are 

concrete. 
People are saying
, ﬁwe worry that there may be some effect on market functioning
,ﬂ without specifying exactly what that effect would be, or 
ﬁwe worry that there may at some point 
be some effect on inflation or on our exit capacities,ﬂ 
without telling a somewhat more filled
-out 
story as to what they think those might be.  While I would be shocked if there are not some 

unintended consequences, even of the LSAPs we™ve done to date, that is part of policymaking.  

There are always going to be some unanticipated 
consequences, and the best you can do is try to 
dig in as deeply as possible to spin out as many plausible outcomes as possible, and then make 
         
   
                
      
            
   
  
           that balance. 
Obviously, from what I™ve said here, that balance is in favor of taking further 
action
, as it has been before
.  And so I support 
alternative B.  But I just want to make clear to 
those who have questionsŠSandy and Dennis and othersŠthat I share a lot of the uncertainty, 
and I don™t have enormous conviction that anything we do now is going to be, as Eric put it, a 

game
-changer. 
It is going to be something 
that
 helps, not something 
that
 resolves all problems. 
On the 5 versus 5
 issue, Narayana laid out the two key considerations extremely well.  
First, that the use of the more-
specified forward guidance could maximize the effect of LSAPs. 
That is a very important consideration.  Second, and this was an extremely important point, he 

pointed out that 2½ 
could easily be consistent with a price
-stability
-only mandate just because of 
having toleranc
e around any goal that one is ever trying to achieve.
  To me, that might have 
suggested that perhaps, 
because we do have a dual mandate, there might be a different set of 

targets that would be adopted.  But it seems to me, 
at the very least
, Narayana™s rea
soning 
suggests why 
2½ shouldn™t be problematic. 
I don™t find the potential h
yste
resis argument or the potential rise in labor 
force 
participation to be dispositive here.  I don™t think Janet actually disagreed with me yesterday 

when I said that I had been
 surprised that we haven™t seen h
yster
esis.  And given that we haven™t, 
it™s probably less likely than we all thought.  But even if you thought it was, how would it 

manifest itself? Presumably, it would manifest itself in tightness in the labor market and rising 

wages, which are going to pass through into our inflation projections.  At that point, you™d say, 

ﬁOkay.  We are now seeing that the trigger or threshold has been breached.ﬂ 
There is something to what Charlie Plosser said about the market™s anticip
ation of what 
happens as we approach the thresholds.  When Charlie Evans was talking about this publicly, a 

very acute market observer commented offhandedly to me that he was somewhat sympathetic to 
              
                  
            this approach, but his concern was that there may be some expectation of pent-up and rapid 
increases, which markets would think would be coming depending on 
the circumstances as we 

approached
ŠI think, 
at that time
, Charlie™s numbers w
ere
 7 and 3.  I don™t think that is 
something to disregard.  It is probably something to take into account. 
These are all good arguments piled onto the ﬁwhy we all hate the dateﬂ argument for 
trying to develop something like what is in 5
. Having said that, I would remind all of you of the 
fact that I was initially
Šlate last year an
d early this past year
Šhesitant to move in that direction 
for a couple of reasons.  One, the communications issues, which severalŠ
most recently Betsy
Š have alluded to, are significant here.  But I thought they were significant last spring, even in the 

absence of an LSAP initiative
, which is going to take a little nimbleness to explain. 
The 
confusion with the policy statementŠ
what do these numbers actually mean
Šis a real 
consideration.  T
hough I should say
, at the time, I had some hopes that a revised S
EP could fill a 
good bit of the role of these thresholds or targets.  Those hopes have subsequently been dashed.  

[Laughter] I now see the costŒbenefit calculus somewhat differently, which is to say that the 

available alternative may not be as much of a s
ubstitute as I had hoped.  I would say that, 
notwithstanding my strong 
sense that 
this 
is 
the right direction for us to goŠfor the reasons 
Narayana stated
Šand that optimally we would have been prepared to go that way right now, 
I don™t really think the groundwork has been laid.  C
ertainly not externally
ŠI do think some 
underestimate the communications challenge that will exist. 
Second, I™m not totally positive that we have laid the groundwork internally
.  Maybe we 
did eight months ago, but all of those memos and things are in the archives instead of right in the 

front of our computer screens.  It would be a tougher case for me if everybody had converged 

around 6½ and 2½ 
because in those circumstances I might be inclined to say, ﬁAll right. 
         
       
    
         
           
          Communications ch
allenge
ŠMichelle is going to have a tough week, but let™s take the 6½, 2½, 
which is probably, in the end, right, but that™s not where we are.  I would say that not taking an 

employment number means that you are not actually communicating very effectively a
t all 
because otherwise it is just qualitative verbiage. 
You don™t really achieve what you are trying to 
achieve. 
In addition, 
saying a little bit over 2 is going to create even more communication 
problems because everybody is going to 
ask
,  ﬁWell, how much over?ﬂ I
t doesn™t really solve 
much, if anything at all. 
There is not agreement on these propositions right now.  
It is clear that we don™t have a 
consensus even among those who are going to vote in favor of a
lternative 
B on the numbers 
themselves
, so we are probably not prepared to move in that direction.  But I don™t think that 
should dissuade us from doing a lot of memo writing and communicating over the course of the 

next couple of meetings to see if we can move in that direction together.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Incoming data have been consistent with my 
expectations, reinforcing my view that additional policy stimulus is needed.  The inflation 

outlook is subdued, and the employment outlook is unsatisfactory, so a balanced approach 

requires the providing of significant additional stimulus. 
My comments will, again, focus on the communication channel.  First, I think that some 
marginal monetary stimulus could be 
delivered
, without incurring the costs associated with an 
LSAP
, through the use of forward guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook.  
While I 
appreciate the fact that an asset purchase program and forward guidance are not perfect 

substitutes, I 
like 5
 because it is close to a costless way of providing some accommodation. 
          
      
                    
   But even if we were not in agreement that more accommodation is necessary, I see little 
downside in shedding our adherence to a calendar date.  The calendar date, as we have heard, is 
working against us.  It is communicating that we are continuously downgrading our assessment 

of the future.  Why not, instead, show households, businesses, and markets what we are looking 

for in terms of particular economic outcomes?  Why not offer 
a sneak preview of what we need 
to see before we begin contracting?
  With such a preview and credible delivery, households and 
businesses and markets figure out how we are going to react.  Providing that window, and 

keeping the panes of that window clean, 
reduces volatility and pessimism about our commitment 
to support a recovery.  I
n mitigating this volatility and pessimism, as argued by President 
Kocherlakota and others, we maximize the effectiveness of the oth
er actions being contemplated. 
But we have be
en down this road before, so we ask, why now?  Why move to forward 
guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later? We should 

consider forward guidance 
that is 
dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later 
because 
there could be costs to putting this off.  The primary cost is the permanent downward 

shift in expectations that becomes more probable the longer we wait.  The longer we put off 

these contentious decisions, the greater the probability that we let stand the 
perception that there 
is a new
, lower, slower trajectory of economic growth that we are comfortable with; the greater 
the probability we let stand the perception that the FOMC doesn™t adhere to the statutory 

directive of a dual mandate; the greater the pr
obability we let stand the perception that we act 
forcefully when we are off the price
-stability mandate but not when we are off the 
maximum
-employment 
mandate; and the greater the probability we let stand the perception that 2 percent is 

a ceiling. 
      
           
                               Forwar
d guidance that is dependent on an economic outlook counters these otherwise 
pervasive and erroneous interpretations and perceptions.  The longer we postpone correcting 
such interpretations and perceptions, the more pervasive, credible, and intractable the
y become. 
In short, we want to oxygenate the forward guidance before households and businesses 

permanently harden their expectations about both the future path of the economy and our future 

reaction to it.  All of this argues for moving away from a calend
ar date sooner rather than later. 
We still may not know what the right numbers are for insertion into a formulation like 5
, but we have all seen that in optimal control simulations under commitment in the FRB
/US model, the unemployment rate is around 6 pe
rcent at the time of liftoff, and inflation never rises 
above 2½ percent.  We have seen justification for these particular thresholds.  Moreover, 

6½ percent is still above the Committee™s view of the long
-run rate of unemployment.  The 
forward guidance in 5
 has come a long way since we discussed it in August of 2011.  It now 
contains a firm, definitive, non-vague inflation proviso.  A problem 
we 
debated in the August 
2011 meeting was the risk that moving the forward guidance from a calendar date to one bas
ed on economic conditions would dislodge inflationary expectations.  In the current version of 5
, that possibility seems extremely unlikely. Instead, if inflation at a one
-to two
-year horizon were 
above the small 
½ percentage point threshold of 2 percent, the Committee would be required to 
reengage on the federal funds rate debate, even if unemployment still exceeds 6
½ percent. 
It is, 
to use President Kocherlakota™s phrase, a threshold for conversation.  These are hardly putting in 

place conditions by which inflation can brew silently, unchecked, and unaddressed. 
At the end of this round, there are still some who say that the egg hasn™t been cooked 
long enough.  I might have to disagree, noting that I am not sure what we are waiting for.  


 could be in a form close enough to convince the public that the FOMC is following 
                
       
     
      
      
  
    
  
       
 a different strategy; one that tries to achieve its employment mandate more forcefully than the 
public has perceived thus far; one that more credibly delivers accommodation and, at the right 

time, contraction, than the markets have understood thus far; one that has none, if any, of the 

costs associated with an LSAP; and one that may be necessary now to make the MBS purchases 

in 
alternative 
B more effective. 
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B. I will just comment on 
a few of the specifics.  First of all, in terms of the flow rate of purchases of MBS, I would go 

with 
$40 billion per month, though I can™t say I have a particularly strong view on this. 
With respect to the trigger
- or threshold-
base
d policy described in paragraph 5
, I am 
quite sympathetic to the strategy. 
It has the potential to be of significant help.  I appreciate and 
find quite compelling the arguments that President Kocherlakota and a number of others have 

made. 
There is really quite an appealing intellectual case to be made. 
Now, having said this, I find myself in very close agreement with Governor Tarullo in 
terms 
of whether now is the right time to move forward.  As he pointed out, there 
are
 two issues.  
There is the internal issue.  We have to get this right internally.  We have to really agree on the 

design and on the parameters.  T
he numbers really matter here. 
If we don™t coalesce around a 
reasonably strong version, one in which we make it clear that we have, as President 

Kocherlakota suggested, an ambitious unemployment threshold and some tolerance for a 

symmetric loss function on inflation, the intellectual c
ase for it in some sense starts to disappear.  
That™s one issueŠwe have to get that right. 
Second, the external issue is also challenging, and the communication here is crucial. 
To 
give one example, something that is not clear in
 my own mind is, how would we respond to the 
                       
     
            
     following question?  Have we really deviated from our previous forward guidance in the sense 
that now we are making more of what is really a commitment
, in the spirit of optimal control
, to 

do something that we would stick with, even if 
it™s, in a sense, time inconsistent?  Or
, is it just a 
statement, well, that we™ve introspected, we have thought about our reaction function, and we 

have discovered in our souls that we have a different reaction function than we previously knew 

ourselves to have? 
These are challenging things to explain, and it™s absolutely important to get it right. 
The 
concern, then, would be that if we throw something this consequential and tricky into what is 

already a hard
-to-parse statement in other areas,
 it could end up being somewhat 
counterproductive.  Again, I very much have sympathy for the underlying idea and the 

principles, and I would hope that we could further develop and do more work on it.  My own 

preference would be not to push it out the door in the next hour or two. 
With respect to paragraph 4, this is the part I had in mind when I said it was already a 
little bit hard to parse. 
You get a flavor of this in some of the comments that have already gone 
around.  In other words, it seems like it is really open to different interpretations.  Some of you 

have, as I hear it, read paragraph 4 as a quite strong and open-ended commitment to continue 

doing asset purchases as long as it takes until the labor market improves.  
At the other extreme, 
the way I heard Pres
ident Bullard reading the paragraph was, ﬁWell, it doesn™t really say much 
more than that we will do this for several months and then reassess where we are.ﬂ  Y
ou can 
certainly point to various forms of wiggle room in the phrasing.  I suppose the truth is sort of in 

between and a little b
it in the eye of the beholder. 
For my part, I would align myself quite closely with President Pianalto.  I appreciate the 
commitment arguments. I like the idea of having wiggle room, and that is 
because of
 my own 
        
         
        
    
                    understanding of the costs and the benefits, and that in spite of the fact that I do believe the 
benefits of past programs have been significant, I sense that we are verging into diminishing 

returns territory. 
Moreover, flexibility may be particularly warranted with MBS because there is 
a particular kind of market feedback that we might get reasonably quickly, which is to sayŠand 

Governor Duke mentioned thisŠthere is this issue about the pass-through from MBS spreads to 

primary mortgage rates. 
We will see
, presumably in a few months, whether that pass-through i
s weak or strong
, and one might want to update one™s policy based on that. 
In any event, as we talked about yesterday, given the language in paragraph 4, this makes 
the press conference important.  F
or what it™s worth, Mr. Chairman, I thought that the trial 
balloon answers that you were floating yesterday struck a good balance here, so I was certainly 

comfortable in that dimension. 
Given these two 
earlier
 points, one being that I think it is worth giving serious further 
thought to 5
, and the second being that there is some virtue to not getting overly locked in on 
asset purchases, I also
Švery similar to President Lockhart and to President Pianalto
Šwas 
thinking about whether 
there 
is 
an alternative fra
ming that would work here?  And my thought 
was maybe we can lean just as far forward, or even a little bit further, on the general principle of 

giving accommodation if the economy doesn™t strengthen but be more open as to whether that 

accommodation would t
ake the form of asset purchases or a change in our guidance. 
This could be done, in principle, either by rewording paragraph 4 of the statement or 
simply by
 the way the press conference is handled.  In the former case, if it™s done via the 
statement, you c
ould rewrite the two key sentencesŠ
it™s just a suggestion
Šas follows: 
ﬁIf the 
outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue to add 

further accommodation as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a 
context of price 
               
      
                       
   stability. In determining the nature of such accommodation, the Committee will, as always, take 
appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of the tools at its disposal.ﬂ I
t is less precise
, and I take that to be in the spirit 
of what you 
all 
were thinking as well.
  The intent is not to back 
away from being supportive but to be a little bit more flexible in the tools that are used to 

provide that support.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will vote in favor of 
alternative 
B.  My 
support for 
alternative
 B leans heavily on the language in paragraph 4 requiring us to consider 
the likely efficacy and cost of further actions when and if they are proposed and considered, and 

I join strongly Governor Stein and Presidents Pianalto and Lockhart in an editing of paragraph 4 

that moves very much in the direction that Governor Stein just read. 
I am a supporter of paragraph 5.  I think that the arguments that have already been 
raised 
and vetted about 5
 are dispositive at this time.  I will say that the two things that need to be 
doneŠthe good news is there are only two things.  The bad news is those two things are, first, 

the Committee has got to reach agreement on the desirab
ility of moving to a state
-contingent 
forward guidance. I™m very open to the intellectual appeal of that, but going around the table, 

it™s quite obvious that we don™t fully have that, particularly around the levels in the language and 

the conditionality. 
The second is clearly the public communication aspect.  There™s nothing about it in the 
Jackson Hole speech.  There really hasn™t been any supportive discussion of it by the Chairman 

lately that I™ve seen. 
We could get ourselves to a place where this could be announced.  I
t would 
be the work of some months both internally and externally, in particular explaining how it does 
          
         
     
   
   
  
                   
 fit in with the principles that we adopted in January
.  I
t™s 
not something that 
can happen in the 
next 45 minutes. 
I will also vote in
 favor of extending the guidance to mid-2015 as proposed.  My own 
view of this is that the market moves the estimate of the liftoff date every day, and our proposed 
guidance doesn™t contain any surprise element. 
The idea that the date can contain a negati
ve, 
contractionary aspect is certainly
 plausible in a different setting, but not on the facts we face 
today. 
Let me say a couple of comments
 about LSAPs.  As I look back on the use of LSAPs so 
far, I too believe that the evidence supports the view that the 
effects of any LSAP are highly 
dependent not only on some mechanics, but also on the setting in which it is launched.  The main 

driver of real effects is probably that of enhancing confidence, confidence that bad outcomes will 

be avoided, and that there is reason to hope for good outcomes. 
In this view, it is really our credibility, the design of the program, 
and the setting that 
make it work.  For me, an argument in favor of 
alternative 
B is that it is limited to MBS at a time 
when the housing market is consistently surprising on the upside.  This alternative can be well 

explained and understood by the public as welcome support for housing as well as for the 

broader economy.  
So presented, it stands a decent chance 
to actually be noticed and appreciated 
by people who are neither Fed watchers nor professional market participants nor economics 
bloggers.  I encourage an emphasis on support for housing in our public communications around 

this action. 
My view is that alternative 
B can have positive effects on the 
economy but 
that these 
effects are likely to be quite modest, and I do come to that view without a great deal of certainty.  

It does seem clear to me that LSAPs have affected asset prices, and to deny that does call for
Šas          
                   
                 
   was done in a certain well
-ment
ioned Jackson Hole paperŠ
that most hackneyed of all economist 
jokes that while it may be observed in reality, it will simply never work in theory.  [Laughter] 
But of course, affecting MBS and Treasury prices is just the beginning.  We need translation to 

rates that actually matter for private economic activity and then translation to the real economy. 
Looking at the channels through which we believe our policies operate and 
the caveats, 
confidence intervals, headwinds, 
and multiple uncertainties that surround the estimates so well 

addressed in yesterday™s meeting, my strong sense is that the 
real effects will be quite modest, 
and it is all too easy these days to find credible private forecasts that agree. 
The last two 
forecasts that I™ve seen both from well known, credible sources who happened to be broadly 

supportive of accommodation, point to estimates of unemployment effects of around 20 or 

30 basis points for a program the size of QE2Šuse that as a rough proxy for this.  That would be 

300,000 to 450,000 jobs under those forecasts.  That might be equivalent to bringing the 

recovery forward by a couple of months. 
As far as the costs, I certainly agree that they appear manageable in the near term. 
There™s enough risk and uncertainty about the medium and long term that if the view of the 

likely benefits is right, one 
would have to believe further that the likely costs are close to nil to 
want to proceed with a large LSAP.  I also agree with President Bullard™s point earl
ier in the 
meeting that the problem has not been the lack of aggressive monetary policy.  As a separate 

matter, taking the Chairman™s points from yesterday, I do not feel that additional aggressive 

monetary policy is likely to provide much of a solution. 
I know that every member of the Committee struggles to balance these highly uncertain 
costs and benefits.  I™m supporting 
alternative 
B with a certain lack of enthusiasm, and I am 
somewhat uncomfortable with the road that we are on.  As others have mentioned, this is not 
      
            
          
       
        
  
   
   
          2008, 2009, or 
2010.  We™re now using LSAPs as a straightforward jobs program.  There is no 
credible threat of deflation, recession
, or financial crisis
, any of which could present a 
compelling case for action and the use of all of our tools, including LSAPs if appropriate.  Again, 

these are concerns about the medium and the long term, not the next six months.  My concern is 

that for very modest benefits, we are piling up risks for the future and that it could become habit-

forming. 
Thank you
, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  My preference would be to act forcefully at 
this meeting.  I™d favor a
lternative B, 
paragraph 4 as written, p
aragraph 5
, and $40 billion per 
month of agency 
MBS.  Let me just talk about each of these a little bit. 
With respect to the thresholds, what I hear around the table is that there™s really a strong 
sentiment that thresholds can trump date guidance, and the thresholds that we even have today in 

5 in my 
mind
, trump date guidance. But I do accept the view that maybe we can even do better, 
and so in my mind the tradeoff is really between is it better to do something today to have a 

bigger package or is it better to keep working on 5
 to try to improve the communication and 
have it come later
? I would prefer to do it all today as a pack
age
 because if you do it as a package, it™s going 
to have more force in terms of its impact, but I accept the fact that the Committee is not really 

quite there yet.  I would 
hope that at least that the Committee would commit that we™re going to 

bring 5
 home in the next one or two meetings.  It would be very disappointing if we didn™t do 
that because I think most people around the table view the date as really quite problemati
c. The thresholds, 
as President
s Williams and Kocherlakota pointed out, 
are 
more powerful 
than a date.  The date creates a lot of uncertainty. When are we going to move it?  Why are we 
                     
                             
           
going to move it? When we move it, why did we move it?  Thresholds provide more 
information.  The date implicitly rests on some unobserved variables, and so people essentially 

have to look at the date and then infer what the things 
are 
that lie behind the date.  Why not just 
tell them what those variables are? 
Some of the problem 
with
 the thresholds 
is the limits of the statement.  The statement can 
only carry so much water, and we can™t specify all the parameters that would go into our 

decisionmaking as the economy actually evolves.  W
e have to recognize we™re not going to 
get 
to a perfect 5
 because the statement just can™t carry that water. 
We need to do the best we can 
and see what we can come up with.
  Then lastly, the dynamic nature of the thresholds far trumps 
the date guidance.  The market will adjust automatically, 
and as people have said, that™s an 
automatic stabilizer.
  So I™m reluctant to abandon 5
 at this meeting because it would make the 
action more forceful, but I do accept the pretty strong sense that a lot of people who don™t want 

to do it this meeting would
 actually be pretty inclined to do it subsequently once the work on the 
communication was complete and once they were convinced that they got the best 5
 version that 
they could possibly get.  I think we should keep going on that. 
With respect to the rest of the statement, I would not want to alter 
paragraph 4 because 
it™s critical to 
ensure the paragraph is forward leaning and implies the 
commencement of a new 
LSAP program should the economic situation not improve in a meaningful way. 
As I see it, we need 
to decide now what we will do if the economy continues to 
disappoint.  We™ll do more and how we™ll do more, and communicate this decision now because 

that will reduce uncertainty and support confidence, and that will support the recovery.  In my 

view, if we postpone those decisions about what we™ll do in the future if the economy 

disappoints, we just create more uncertainty about what our future policy actions are going to be, 
                  
   
         
       
            
   
   
   
  and that really undercuts the efficacy of the policy choices.  Deciding today so that people know 
that there™s more coming will actually create greater confidence about the Fed™s willingness to 

support the economy.  That reduces the downside risk and actually means, at the end of the day, 

the prospect i
s that 
we™ll
 have to do less rather than more because we™ll be acting today and 
supporting confidence today by communicating what our future actions will be. 
All that said, I am very sympathetic with a number of people™s remarks that don™t put a 
very high weight on the power of additional LSAPs.  I think L
SAPs have modest effects o
n the 
level of long-term rates, and the drop in long-term rates does feed through partially to the equity 

market and the foreign exchange market but not one-
for
-one as in the staff projections because 
that would contradict the whole portfolio balance framework, which is the basis for LSAPs. 
In assessing the 
effe
ct of past LSAPs, I™m not particularly a big fan of event studies.  I 
think the event studies are too focused on the reaction on 
particular days
.  T
he expe
ctation of 
LSAPs evolves more slowly, and it™s very hard to disentangle all the factors that affect financial 

asset prices.
  When we say that we™re going to do an LSAP, that not only affects people™s views 
of what™s going to happen in terms of financial 
markets,
 but also signals a view about our view 
of the economy, and both 
of 
those things affect financial asset prices.  So trying to disentangle 
what the effect 
is 
of the LSAP from what the effect is of our judgment that we need an LSAP is 
very difficult to determine. 
I also agree with Governor Stein and others that probably one of the more powerful 
aspects of LSAPs is the confidence channel and the signal that we™re willing to do as much as it 

takes.  During the heat of the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009 when we were rolling out all of 

these special liquidity facilities, I was very impressed by how much our policy actions supported 

confidence in market function just because we were showing up, just because the fire trucks were 
       
        
                 
  
    
            
    rolling.
  People, as I think Governor Duke noted, don™t necessarily understand exactly why we™re 
doing what we™re doing, but they feel more confident when they know that we™re acting. 
Some around the table have argued that our tools are not very effective and the core 
problems lie el
sewhere
Šin fiscal, the household balance sheet, housing problemsŠand so we 
shouldn™t act because by acting we™re somehow removing responsibility from others where the 

responsibility more rightly sits, and I think there is some truth to 
that argument. 
In an ideal 
world, other things that are outside our purview would happen that would help the economy.  But 

I don™t think that argument carries the day for arguing against action for two reasons. 
First, nothing in our mandate says that if our tools aren™t powerful, don™t use them; defer 
to others.  There™s nothing in our mandate that says that.  It just says this is your mandate.  Use 

your tools to try to achieve your mandate the best you can.  And second, if we don™t act, it™s not 

as if
 that somehow is going to cause others to act. I really don™t accept the premise that 
somehow our inaction would spur action by others.  If you really believe that, then maybe you 

could actually advance this argument.  But I don™t think many people around the table believe 

that our inaction will somehow spur action by others that will improve the economic outlook. 
On the agency MBS, I strongly favor the $40 billion per month over the $30 billion.  
Being more forceful makes sense. 
At the end of the day the staff has concluded that we have the 
room to do $40 billion rather than $30 billion without i
mpairing market function
, so I don™t 
really see the reason for holding back.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you, and thank you all very much, as always, 
for your good advice. 
Let me make a couple
 of comments.  I think that action is needed.  I don™t think we™re 
being precipitous.  We extended the guidance in January.  In June, we extended the MEP.  Both 
       
                     
     
              
    of those things were viewed essentially as temporizing moves and were discussed in that way 
around 
this table.
  The evidence is that while we are not necessarily facing recession or crisis, it™s 
also true that we seem to have stalled
, and that very serious problems with unemployment are not 
improving.  Given our mandate, I think that requires at least a consideration of action. 
The action that
 is proposed here, and it should be very clear, is a cautious action.  
Governor Duke was very helpful in helping me think about this.  What this a
lternative B actually 
does is make a down payment of X per month of MBS for the rest of the year, and then three or 

four job market reports from now we will consider at that point what the job market outlook 

looks like, and then respond appropriately.  
So it is
, in that respect, emphasizing the 
conditionality of the progra
m and the fact that we will be looking
Šin a way that wasn™t 
conveyed adequately by our fixed-
size LSAP programs
Šat what™s happening in the data and 
what™s happening in the economy.  But I do think there is a basis for expressing our support for 

the economy at this point, to help support confidence and to help give the economy a bit more 

strength in case we do face shocks from Europe or from the fiscal cliff. 
So, again, obviously I propose a
lternative B. I™ll come back to the body of it in a 
moment.
  On 5 v
ersus 5
, there was a pretty clear consensus around the table that there™s a lot of 
hunger for moving away from the date toward some kind of state-contingent guidance.  I think 

one of the lessons of the paper whose author™s name will not be mentioned was t
hat clarity about 
future rate policy is a very powerful tool and one that we should make use of.  I would advocate 

that we continue to work on this because the other part of the consensus today was that we™re not 

quite ready for prime time on this issue. 
So I would propose for now that we retain paragraph 5, 
but with a very strong injunction to the staff and to colleagues that we work to figure out how we 

can put language like 5
 in soon. 
        
              
       
              
              In paragraph 3, I™d like to make the following proposal.  I™d like to propose that we do 
$40 billion a month, but I™d like to add the words ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ 
where it says 
$85 billion a month three lines from the bottom.  T
he 
$85 billion, which is the MEP plus the 
$40 billion
Šof course the MEP runs out at the end of the year, and that™s about the time we™ll be 
looking at how we™re going to proceed from here. The advantage of doing $40 
billion
 is, 
first of 
all, that 
$30 billion 
feels a little underwhelming to me in terms of what we announce today, but 
also it s
eems to me that one of the options we might have in January, 
if we are looking at it
, would be just to continue the $40 
billion
.  To me, $40 
billion 
seems like a more plausible number 
there.
  And we have talked about it with the D
esk
, and the
ir view is that it™s consistent with both 
our operational capacity and with market functioning even if extended for a long period, longer 
than I expect 
that
 we would actually do it. 
In paragraph 4, I would proposeŠand there were views on different sid
es here
Šwe use 
the 
second language, ﬁundertake additional asset purchases and employ its other policy tools.ﬂ 

Governor Duke spoke against this because she mentioned IOER and discount window lending.  

Of course, those are Board tools, but the other tools 
that the FOMC has 
are the statement 
language and the guidance, and certainly that could be part of additional steps that we take in 

January or whenever it is that we begin to review the situation.  If no one has too strong an 

objection, I™d like to use that second phrase 
with
 the understanding, which I will make clear if 
asked, that what we mean by that is communicationŠwhich is the other topic I talked about in 

Jackson Hole.  I don™t want to make any other changes.  We do have the phrase ﬁas appropriate.ﬂ 

That already convey
s the notion of conditionality, the fact that we may or may not take action.  It 
depends on what the economic outlook is, and I think that™s very important. 
           
                
          
         I forgot to say, by the way, on 5Ša point that Governor Raskin madeŠ
that I think the 
reason that there has been in the SEP, as well as in th
e guidance, a fairly sharp movement into 
the future of the expected takeoff date is not really because there™s been a massive deterioration 
in the outlook, but 
that 
the Committee has come to the view that a somewhat 
more extended 
period of low ratesŠfor reasons articulated by the artist formerly known as Michael Woodford 

[l
aughter]
Šcan be helpful in a zero lower bound situation, and I will try to make that point also 
in the press conference. 
To summarize
Šand I look 
around the table, if there are any voters who are extremely 
bothered, please let me knowŠI would propose to choose $40 billion and $85 billion from the 

third line from the bottom, propose to insert the phrase ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ after ﬁeach 

month,ﬂ and then in paragraph 4, I propose to take the second option, ﬁunder
take additional asset 
purchases, 
and employ its other policy tools as appropriate.ﬂ 
Are there any comments? 
President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  May I just ask a question? When we say ﬁin a 
context of price stability,
ﬂ we also mean well
-anchored inflation expectations
, is that correct? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We do.  That™s the phrase.  I recognize it™s not completely 
grammatical as President Lacker pointed out, but the implication is that, of course, at all times 

we™ll maintain that conditionality as we undertake our policy. 
MR. FISHER.  And you will work that into your press conference if it™s appropriate. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, yes.  Absolutely. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  P
resident Lockhart. 
                      
   
                          
         MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
In paragraph 4, just a thought to throw 
on the table, and that is take the last sentence of 5
, inject it after the word
s ﬁprice stability,ﬂ so 
that the effect of the last two sentences would be t
o frame this whole question of continuing 
accommodation
Šin effect, framing the way we™re going to deliberate over this over the next few 
weeks. 
It seems to me comprehensive.  It refers to improvement in labor market conditions 
generally, and also of cours
e, efficacy and cost and all of that.  I can see combining those two 
sentences.  Each begins, for what it™s worth, with ﬁIn determining, –
ﬂ and that might make that 
paragraph a good set-up. I
™ll
 also point out that in all likelihood, the 
minutes 
are going
 to portray 
that we have given some consideration to threshold thinking, and so this would serve to frame 

that for the market reaction over the next few weeks.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Because 
it refers to the time horizon, wouldn™t th
at kind of 
language be more appropriate as we look toward the language of 
5?  In other words, I thought for 
a moment you were suggesting taking that and putting it at the end of 5. 
MR. LOCKHART. I™m actually thinking it might fit in 
4.  I put this on the 
table a little 
bit off the top of my head.  T
he Committee will continue its purchases, undertake additional asset 
purchases
, and employ its other tools until such improvement is achieved in the context of price 
stability.  In determining how long we™re going to do that, we™d take into account the pace of 

labor market conditions and so forth.  In determining the size, pace, and composition, as always, 

we™d 
take into account efficacy and cost.  I just saw that as a boxing of all of the things we would 
take in
to consideration if we go to essentially an open-ended kind of approach. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
In my press conference I™m going to be very clear that 
obviously this is not a numeric objective, and we™ll be looking at a range of employment and 

output indicato
rs, which all bear on the outlook for sustained improvement in labor market 
       
         
  
           
     
     
        conditions and declining unemployment, and I™d rather convey that breadth verbally.  I™m afraid 
we™re getting a little complicated. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Fair enough. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Ye
s, I had the same reaction that you had. I didn™t see 
how it would fit in 4 because you hadn™t really explained the forward guidance yet.  One could 

take the last sentence 
of 
4 and the last sentence
 of 5
 and make a new 
paragraph 6 and sum up.  
Then you™d have the statement about asset purchases, the statement about forward guidance, and 

a summary paragraph that said
, ﬁin determining both these things.ﬂ  That would be more logical. 
MR. LACKER.  A paragraph full of escape clauses, in other words. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Essentially. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I was going to ask a question about something else. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead. 

MR. LACKER. 
In the forward
-guidance lan
guage, we deleted the economic conditions 
clause there.  We™ve had a lot of discussion of Professor Woodford™s paper.  We™ve talked  a lot 

about that in the context of 5
 and that language, but I™m thinking that what you had in mind by 
deleting the economi
c conditions clause was in part motivated by his critique as well, the idea 
that by saying it™s conditions that are pushing the time horizon out, we were focusing on how bad 

things 
are
.  The intention, as I read you, is for us to be communicating more about our reaction 
function. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s right. 
      
    
      
          
         
        
    
     MR. LACKER.  I want to re-
ask a question I asked earlier this year.  When
 we adopted 
this 
language
, we never really got clear on whether it™s a commitment or not.  W
e wrestled with 
different versio
ns of what that meant.  Is this signaling that we™re going to pursue an action that 
later on we would not want to pursue then? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it™s still conditional because it obviously depends on 
the timing of the recovery and so on. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  So it™s contingent. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I mentioned the SEP changes and so on
.  I think we 
around this table have moved to the view that communicating low rates for longer 
in a way that 
may require some credibility is an approach to dealing with the zero lower bound, not in an 

extreme way, but I think there is some of that now in the statement. 
MR. LACKER. 
We have a statement
, and we can walk away from this and each interpret 
it in our own way, 
or we can have a Committee sense of what 
we™re doing. Is policy in the 
future to be conditioned on this?  In other words, as Woodford suggests, is policy going to be 

history-dependent? 
Is t
he fact that we said 
this going to alter future policy
? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In my Jackson Hole remarks, 
I talked about the guidance.  I 
said it was conditional, dependent on the state of the economy.  B
ut in explaining the time, I said 
we look at rules and optimal control and those sorts of things, but we also take into account some 
other factors such as downs
ide risks, the effects of the 
zero lower bound, and implicitly I said the 
possibility that the equilibrium real rate of interest is lower than normal
Šthat is,
 headwinds.  So 
I am conveying, I think, some sense that in order to achieve more stimulus today, 
there™s a bit of 

a commitment element there
ŠI don™t think we™ve gone too far out on a limb on this. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 
              
   
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
                      
                                                              CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Can we go ahead? 
MS. DANKER.  This vote is on alternative B, as amended by the Chairman, and the 
associated 
directive. 
Chairman Bernanke 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
Governor Duke 
Yes 
President Lacker 
No President Lockhart 
Yes 
President Pianalto 
Yes 
Governor Powell 
Yes 
Governor Raskin 
Yes 
Governor Stein 
Yes 
Governor Tarullo 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
Governor Yellen 
Yes 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
We have a few other items
.  We™re going to 
hear a little bit about the implementation
, we™re going to do very quickly the forecast, but if 
everybody is okay, why don™t we just go ahead and tak
e a 15 minute coffee break? 
[Coffee 
break] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don™t we 
recommence
? Let me turn the floor 
over to L
orie 
Logan, who will talk a bit about the operational aspect. 
MS. LOGAN.
8  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I will offer a brief descrip
tion of how 
the Desk plans to implement the Committee™s decision regarding the 
SOMA 
portfolio.  
Consistent with recent practices, the Desk intends to release a statement 
with operational details on this initiative at the same time as the release of the FOM
C statement.  A draft of the Desk statement is provided in the handout for your 

reference, with the exception that we will add the clause ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ 

into the second sentence of the second paragraph. 
Based on the directive, the Desk inten
ds to expand the SOMA™s holdings of 
agency MBS by 
$40 billion per month and maintain the existing policy for 

reinvesting agency principal payments.  Our current projections indicate that through 

the end of the year, paydowns on the agency debt and MBS port
folios will result in 
average monthly reinvestment purchases of roughly $30 billion.  Thus, combined 
8 The materials used by Ms. 
Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 8). 
                                   
  
       
    
        purchases will initially total around 
$70 billion per month and constitute about three-
fourths of monthly TBA gross issuance. 
Should the purchases extend for 10 months, as was considered in Tealbook B, we 
anticipate that the SOMA™s ownership share of the outstanding fixed-
rate agency 
MBS market would grow from about 18 percent to 27 percent, and that™s over a 

10-month horizon. 
In line with the current practice for reinvestment operations, the Desk plans to 
conduct the additional purchases 
in the newly issued securities in the to
-be-announced market, or TBA market.  These securities represent the most liquid sector 

of the MBS market, allowing purchases to be made in large size and are most closely 

tied with the primary mortgage rate. 
The Desk may purchase other agency MBS if 
market conditions warrant. 
The Desk intends to conduct these additional purchases internally as we™ve been 
doing for some time rather than relying on an investment manager to conduct the 

trades on our behalf.  We expect to be active almost every day
, and purchase 
operations will continue to be conducted in a competitive auction format with the 

primary dealers.
  Further, the Desk will continue the practice established at the end of 
last year of margining the unsettled MBS transactions with the primary dealers. 
Given the substantial portion of issuance being purchased and the uncertainty 
associated with MBS supply, the Desk will continue to conduct dollar roll 

transactions when necessary to facilitate the settlement of our purchases. 
Dollar rolls 
can be used to postpone or accelerate the delivery of purchases based on indications 

of the availability of agency MBS for settlement. 
In the reinvestment operations to 
date, the size of dollar rolls needed to postpone settlement have been fairly small, at 

about 5 percent of purchases, though this amount is likely to increase with the 

additional asset purchases. 
We will al
so use coupon swaps, 
if needed
, to facilitate settlement, as was the case 
in 2010.  A coupon swap would allow the Desk to exchange unsettled purchases in a 

given agency MBS coupon for other coupons more readily available for settlement.  

However, we do not envision needing to conduct such transactions, except in very 

rare cases where persistent supply problems suggest that settlement of purchases
, even over several months, is unlikely. 
The purchases of agency MBS securities under this new asset purchase pro
gram 
will begin tomorrow.  We plan to have two separate announcements for MBS 

operations going forward, one for the new purchases and one for the continued 

reinvestments.  The Desk will publish the monthly asset purchase amounts along with 

the announcement of the Treasury MEP operations around the last business day of 

each month.  Given there are only 17 calendar days remaining in September, we will 

purchase a pro rata share of the monthly pace in September of about $23 billion. 
           
   
                    
      
          In addition, we will continue to publish around the eighth business day of each 
month the planned amount of reinvestment purchases for the next month.  Thus, there 

will also be a new reinvestment purchase amount target posted today at the same time 

as the Desk™s operating statement is released.
  That concludes my comments.  Thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
Any questions?  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. 
Help us interpret financial market data going forward.  What do you 
expect?  Because
 our purchases don™t include TIPS, should we factor something in about TIPS 

yields?
  Are they in the habitat, out of the habitat? 
MS. LOGAN.  In our MEP purchases, we purchase TIPS today. 

MR. LACKER.  You do? 

MS. LOGAN.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  O
kay. 
MR. POTTER.  The MEP is still ongoing. 

MR. LACKER.  But we weren™t proposing to do it in the overall asset purchase program, 
were we? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Sorry? 
MR. LACKER.  Include TIPS. 

MS. LOGAN. If we 
had added purchases under a new asset purchase 
program for 
Treasuries, we would have done so. 
MR. LACKER. 
Okay.  You would.  Sorry.  I misread something then.  I apologize.  
Let 
me ask another question.  How linked is the private-
label MBS market to agency MBS yields? 
Do you anticipate this pushing that spread apart? 
MS. LOGAN.  I think 
the way we™ve been estimating these effects is that the MBS 
purchases would affect the Treasury term premium, and to the extent that the 
pass
-through from 
the lowering of interest rates moves other asset markets, equities
, or the private-
label market
Š                
      
   
                  
  we t
alked about what that pass-through is.  There™s some uncertainty, but we would expect the 
channel to be through that form.  I guess there could be some other form because it is MBS, and 
private label is a little bit more closely connected than maybe from T
reasuries to private label, 
but overall we have been expecting the pass
-through to happen through lowering interest rates 
more broadly. 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  R
elative to buying Treasuries, we™re tilting credit from the 
private-
label market to the agency market.  Thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  I™d just like to say something about the private label 
because there has been 
almost no issuance of private label in a number of years because there™s just not much supply out 

there.  There is 
a little bit of jumbo issuance.
  Again, in the spirit of things that are cooking out 
there, the Federal Home 
Loan Banks, particularly I think the H
ome 
Loan Bank of Chicago 
is 
now looking at consolidating jumbo securities from banks across the country, not 
just that are in 
the Chicago 
district
, and feeding them through Redwood to try to generate some more broader 
private-
label issuance
, for
 jumbo and more broadly. 
I would expect that to the extent that that 
happens, it certainly wouldn™t be unhelpful.  It 
might be helpful. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, but what they™re saying is that compared 
with 
buying Treasuries 
only, this is reducing agency MBS yields by moreŠTreasury yields will fall, but not as much as 

what they would fall if we bought Treasuries only.  T
hey™re 
tilting the playing field away from 
everything priced on Treasuries toward agency MBS. 
MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we™re still buying $45 billion of long-
term Treasuries 
in the MEP right now. 
                                                                                                     MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, I know that, but the apples-
to-apples thing 
is 
$40 billion agency 
MBS versus 
$40 billion Treasuries in this setting, and comparing those two, private-
label MBS 
yields are going to be higher, given that we™re buying agency MBS, than they would be if we 
were buying Treasuries only. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDL
EY.  They™re not going to be higher.  They™re not going to 
drop as much, presumably. 
MR. LACKER.  Exactly.  They™re going to be higher than they would in the alternative. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In that respect we don™t care because they™re not being 
created. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, they would be even less created now. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I don™t actually think we know very much about what would happen to 
private-
label MBS yields because there™s so little issuance; there™s so little pricing information. 
It™s conceivable 
that pushing down agency MBS would also push down private-
label MBS 
yields, but I don™t think we know because there hasn™t been much issuance there and we don™t 

have information. 
MR. POTTER.  The stronger the housing market is, the more it should support t
he 
private-
label market coming back and having more capacity. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
9 Let™s go on to the consensus forecast.  This, of course, is 
still an exercise.  We™re still working to figure out what we™re going to do. 
You have in front of 
you the consensus forecast.  If you turn to page 3, and we look at the forecast inclusive of the 

policy action today, that would be best approximated, I guess, by the line 
that 
says, ﬁPlus 
$750 billion LSAP program.ﬂ  That™s the post-
action
 policy forecast, and note th
at it includes the 
jointly determined federal funds rate at the bottom.  What I™d like to do is ask each person to say 
9 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 
6).       
   
                           
            one of three things.  Either you broadly agree with the forecast as given or you agree with 
reservations
Šlet me go back a second.
  As part of our exercise 
the staff, I believe, is intending to 
write up our discussion as if it were a quarterly monetary policy report, and what they will do is 

if you agree but with reservations, they will write up your reservations in minutes 
style 
descri
bing without attribution what the concerns were that people raised about the forecast.  
The 
other possibility is if you just disagree with the forecast, you should say so and explain why, and 

then they™ll write up the monetary policy report with attributio
nŠthat™s the plan
Šand say, 
again, what it is that you disagree about.  Y
es, President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  I don™t understand.  Are these two different plans or are these two 
different options for us? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Two different options. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
  You have three choices.  When I go around the table, you 
have three choices. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  We 
can disagree anonymously or 
with attribution? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree modestly and anonymously. 

MR. LACKER. 
Mod
estly and anonymously. 
CHAIR
MAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree violently and for attribution.  [Laughter] 
MR. 
LACKER
.  And there™s a threshold.  
[Laughter] 
Or is it a 
trigger? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Can I bring up just one more thing? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  For those people who strongly disagree, we™re also asking 
them to submit in the next few daysŠby MondayŠa paragraph or so explaining why, and we 

will eventually put this into a document and then circulate it back to the Committee. 
                           
  
      
  
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is everybody o
kay? 
MS. DUKE.  Can I just ask one question about agreeing with reservation?  I
f we™re 
comparing it with 
the 
$750 billion 
LSAP program
, and in voting for alternative B, I didn™t 
assume that the purchases went past the
 end of the year, w
ould that be a reser
vation? 
I just want 
to know how to characterize 
it.  What does ﬁwith reservationﬂ mean? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
I think you assume
 that you should take the Tealbook 
assumption here, the $750 billion, and say:  Would the economic path shown here be a 
reasonabl
e approximation of what you would anticipate, given the policy action taken?  And if 
not, why not? 
MS. DUKE.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay?
  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Am I agreeing that this is a consensus forecast or am I agreeing that 
this is ac
tually my forecast?  Because I submitted my forecast
. And you can see point for point, 
you know, where they™re different and where they™re not. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We™re trying to determine if it is a consensus, and therefore, 
we™re asking if you yourself find itŠ 
MR. EVANS
.  Is it close enough? 
MR. BULLARD.  I think it™s a good consensus.  It™s not as accurate asŠ 

MR. 
FISHER
.  I™m trying to remember my specific numbers.  All I remember is that 
I was in the central tendency. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So why don™t 
you just report what you reported and say if 
you think it™s broadly consistent with this or not? 
            
            
             
     MR. WILCOX.  This is an effort to ascertain the extent to which participants can affiliate 
themselves with the consensus forecast. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Preside
nt Fisher. 
MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry. 

MR. TARULLO.  I think it™s not unlike what we do with policy statements, which is to 
say everybody would have written it somewhat differently, but in the end can you kind of go 

along with 
it? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Ye
s, that™s what it is.  That™s right. 
MR. FISHER.  You said there were three questions.  Do we agree with the forecast?  Do 
we have reservations?  If so, what are they?
  What™s the third? 
MS. 
DUKE.  Do you disagree? 
MS. YELLEN. Do 
you have a fundamentally different view? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you fundamentally disagree with the forecast?  And 
remember it™s not about whether you agree with the policy action or not.  This is conditional on 

the policy action.  Conditional on the policy action, do you agree more or less with the forecast 

that™s been presented? 
MR. FISHER.  And if we have reservations, we should submit them.  Is that what you 
were saying earlier? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, Janet, would you like to 
comment? 

MS. YELLEN. I
f you broadly agree but have some reservationŠyou™re slightly more 
optimistic about the forecast
, you have a different view on oil prices, but aside from that you 

basically agree this is a reasonable forecast contingent on the policy path
Šthen say you agre
e                  
                   
         with reservations.  And 
the write
-up, as in the minutes, 
will say 
people have expressed some 
reservations, but nevertheless associate themselves overall with the view. 
The staff will write up 
the discussion of what the reservations were.  But those who 
just have a basically different view 
of the forecast should say so, and then there will be a few paragraphs they™ll submit, 
and that will 

be included in the document 
with attribution
.  This would be a portion of a monetary policy 
report where there would be a discussion of the diversity of views.  Think of this as a diversity of 

views and say 10 people supported the forecast without reservation.  Several people had 

reservations of the following sort, and four had essentially different views.  Here are the 

submissions.  In your paragraph, 
you™d describe 
and 
explain why your views are essentially 
different. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Let me just make sure I understand.  We™re assuming the 
policy path, this policy action? 
MS. YELLEN. Yes. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes, tha
t™s what we are doing today. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  So we™re not having individual ﬁappropriate 
monetary policy.ﬂ 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
No.  It™s just given what we passed today, is this a reasonable 
forecast
? MR. LACKER.  Wait.  That™s different than a policy path. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I™m going to suggest something slightly different from what 
Chairman Bernanke said, which is:  Given the policy decision today, if you look at the numbers 

that go along with that 
$750 billion LSAP programŠforget about whet
her the 
$750 billion is 
correct or not because you may think it will end up being $500 b
illion or 
some 
other numberŠ 
                              
     
    
              
 do you think that™s a reasonable forecast? I
s it close enough for talking purposes?  But if you 
think this is the wrong model of the world, the economy is just going to look a lot different, so 
much so that you want to, in effect, dissent, then you™re in the third category.  The middle 

category is a little tougher, but I think the two ends are very clear. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Everybody, this is a trial run.  [Laughter]  W
e™re trying to 
find out what works and what doesn™t work.  We may have already found out what doesn™t work. 

President Fisher, did you have a comment or question or you™re okay? 
MR. FISHER.  I™m fine. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You™re 
fine.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
My question was would it be better to try to have a little 
bit better understanding about what ﬁclose toﬂ is or would 
it be everyone™s personal view of what 

ﬁclose toﬂ is? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It™s your judgment of whether you 
sufficiently disagree that 
you want to have your name 
identified. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it does matter if people disagree
 or have different 
parameters in terms of how close is ﬁclose to.ﬂ  
We can do it either way, but you could argue th
at 
if you think the standard error is more than X, then you should disagree, or you could be a 

perfectionist and you disagree for very minute changes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So all of this is about reporting.  We™re trying to report the 
sense of the Committee
, and so how you would 
like the sense of the Committee reported 
is 
basically the question. 
MS. YELLEN. 
Right.  I
f we were really doing this
, the Chairman would be 
wal
king out 
into a press conference
 with these numbers, explaining the policy action, and pu
tting these 
      
     
                        
             
   
      numbers out to the public and saying, ﬁThis gives you a description of how we envision the 
economy unfolding with the policy decisions.
ﬂ  And the question is:  Would you be comfortable 

with these numbers as what he walks out into a press confer
ence 
with
? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I understand all of that, but let™s imagine that there™s half 
the people on the Committee who disagree for very small tolerances and
 half the people 
have 
very large tolerances. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Then no.  It should be 
meaningful tolerances. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It would be better if we had a more common metric 
about what 
the tolerances are. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, put it this way
:  Are you willing to write two paragraphs for Dave 
Reifschneider?  [Laughter]  That™s it, right? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, no, that™s different.  That™s 
a fundamental 
dis
agreement. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
The way I would put it is this.  I
f the consensus forecast came 
out like this
, and you were the sort of person who 
in a speech 
would say, ﬁI want to make an 
important point that my 
personal 
unemployment rate forecast at the end of 2015 would be one-
tenth lower,ﬂ then you should say you have reservations.  [Laughter]  But if you perhaps feel 

uncomfortable about making a big distinction abou
t one-tenth or so, thenŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There™s a standard error
, though, 
implicit in that. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I think there 
are
 two things.  One, there™s obviously a huge 
confidence interval around this, and so one way to look at 
it is 
that 
many 
differences just blur. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course. 
There will 
always b
e fan 
charts
.          
   
      
             
             
   
  MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  But does it make it a material difference f
or monetary policy, 
and the question might be if it™s 
one-tenth or so off on inflation or unemployment, you would say 
probably not. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s a good way of phrasing it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans, did you have a comment? 

MR. EVANS.  I was just thinking we should probably start [l
aughter]
, and then we™ll 
figure outŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNAN
KE.  Excellent suggestion.  All right.  Who would like to go 
first?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART. I endorse it.
  [Laughter and applause] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Very good.
  Anyone? President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Is it a good consensus?  I do think it™s a good consensus.  T
here are 
issues here about the mix between the forecast and the policy assumptions.  The way I did it was 

I had more inflation coming in the out years, and then I applied the outcome-based policy rule, 

which would then have the funds rate moving in a different way from here, and so the policy 

assumption then starts to also look different.  So I™m not quite sure what to make of this exercise.  

It™s fine as a statement of where the Committee is, and I would endorse it in that sense
.  As a general rule on this whole process, I don™t think 
that it
™s a good thing to get into 
the 
business of 

trying to dissent on a forecast because there are
 zillions of points here and a lot of subtleties here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
This is why we™re having a tr
ial run. 
MR. BULLARD.  Mildly different, I guess. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Broadly endorse. 
       
   
          
    
  
           
      
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Conditional on the policy path, I broadly endorse. 

CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Duk
e. 
MS. DUKE.  I actually normally would endorse, except that the reservation I would 
express at this point is that I think 2013 will be significantly lower because of the fiscal cliff. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MS. DUKE. 
That would be a reservation. 
CHAIR
MAN BERNANKE.  That™s a good example of a reservation.  Very good.  
Anyone else?  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Broadly endorse, but I have a weaker outlook.  So that™s my only 
reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor 
Yellen
. MS. YELLEN.  Broadly endorse. 

CHAIRMAN BE
RNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I see what I would term modestly more inflationary pressures 
than what are in this forecast, maybe one-tenth or two-tenths or three-
tenths more in inflation. 
With that said
, it comes 
back to what the Vice Chairman
 was talking about, that the choices of 
the Committee seem to be averse to those kinds of upticks in inflation.  For my own view, I think 

I would say I see modestly more inflationary pressures than what are in this. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fine.
  Governor Stein. 
MR. STEIN.  
I broadly endorse the baseline.  I™m not sure if I would be a weak deviator 
on the conditional effect of policy in the sense that I think that the incremental effect of the 
          
   
           
               LSAP is going to be roughly half of what it™s projected to be.  I™m not quite sure where that puts 
me. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  You sound like a ﬁ
two
ﬂ to me. 
MR. STEIN.  That feels like a 
ﬁtwo
ﬂ to you? 
PARTICIPANT
.  Do you want to write two paragraphs? 
MR. 
STEIN
.  No, I don™t want to write 
any para
graphs.  I want to hide in the weeds.  
[Laughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren said he broadly endorses.  President 
Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  I modestly endorse it.  It might scare people in terms of my forecasting.  I 
was within the central tendency.  They might want to change their forecast based on where I 

would be, with the exception of the funds rate, and I™d have to think about that.  But generally, 
I endorse.  
I will say this, Mr. Chairman
: Fiscal cliff, no fiscal cliff, et cetera
Šand I said this in 
my write
-upŠgoing beyond the first part of 2013 is largely pure guesswork. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In some positive sense, that™s true.  In a normative sense, 
we do need to find some kind of plan. 
MR. FISHER.  I understand that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We h
ave to have some kind of projection to base our 
thinking on. 
MR. FISHER.  With that caveat, it™s a wonderful exercise. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Obviously, yes.  O
ne of the benefits of this exercise
, I hope, 
is that we will be able to show fan charts that will g
ive some sense of the uncertainty. 
President 
Pianalto. 
        
             
  
       
   
  
               
   MS. PIANALTO.  I broadly endorse the forecast, although my forecast is slightly weaker 
for 
GDP growth and unemployment in the later years 
partly because
, like Governor Stein, 
the 
effectiveness of poli
cy is just a little weaker in my forecast. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good.  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  I broadly endorse, but two things about the process as opposed to th
e substance
.  One, the issue that arose at the outset that Betsy mentioned is somethin
g that people 
are going to have to think about, which is, what if we emerge from a meeting with a policy 

action that really isn™t any of the ones that are listed there?
  And, secondly, this 
category 
two
ŠI have a feeling
Šis going to be problematic in the fo
llowing respect. I have heard several people 
already who might have fit themselves into 
category 
two, a
nd if you end up saying, ﬁWe™ve got a 
consensus forecast
Š14 of the 17 members of the FOMC had qualifications on it,ﬂ I™m not sure 
how powerful 
it becomes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, the interesting question is whether or not a number of 
them had the same qualification. If they™re all nitpicks, 
that™s one thing, but if everybody said, 
ﬁThis doesn™t take enough account of the fiscal cliff,ﬂ then that would be something that should 

be communicated I think. 
MR. TARULLO.  Fair enough.  T
here may be some utility in thinking about moving to a 
binary 
system 
as we do with the statement.  You are either endorsing or you are not, but giving 
people a chance 
to comment, so if they say something like Betsy said a minute ago, it could be 

included in the explanation of the consensus. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s fine. 

MR. TARULLO.  But that™s just something to think about. 
                 
    
     
                  
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  Thank you.  We are looking for suggestions.  Anyone 
else?  Vice Chairman
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I agree with Governor Tarullo.  You don™t have to frame 
it as a reservation.  You can just frame it as where people would prefer to tilt the forecast.  I™m 
with Betsy on the f
iscal restraint. I am assuming that 
we will get some fiscal restraint 
next year
, and it will be more problematic to the outlook, so we have somewhat weaker growth in 2013.  

That said, I think this is a pretty good forecast.  T
hat is why I was getting at t
he point of, how 
much do you disagree? I am pretty confident that the economy will be weaker in 2013 than this 

forecast, but if I take this whole thing in its entirety, I wouldn™t really quibble about it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I 
have a tiny reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, the question is, would you object to my 
hypothetically taking this, putting this on the screen, and saying, ﬁThis is the Committee™s 

consensus forecast of what the economy is going to look likeﬂ? 
VICE CH
AIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it would also be good, though, to say, ﬁA few people 
thought that 2013 could be a little weaker becauseﬂ blah, blah, blah.  But I would do it in 

Governor Tarullo™s two-
bucket camp
 rather than three-
bucket camp. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agr
ee. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thanks.  Anyone else? 

MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 
               
  
    
             
       
               
     MR. PLOSSER.  I would say my forecast differs from this, obviously, and I think it is 
likely to show up 
in the assumption about current policy.  We are going to see more inflationary 
pressures and less positive outlooks on output and employment. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 
MR. LACKER.  I still don™t have a clear, coherent sense of what policy I am supposed to 
be conditioning on.  Am I foreca
sting the Committee?  I think I am.  So on that basis, I might 
provide a good test case here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MR. LACKER.  First of all, coming into this, on appropriate policy, I was weaker in 
2013 by a couple of tenths.  And I saw inflation a couple of tenths stronger, closer to 2 
percent 

over the next 
year 
or two, getting to 2 
percent 
next year. 
So I would have put policy to 
rais
e rates earlier. 
Modifying that in terms of making it a forecast of the Committee™s action, I would 
mark up inflation in 2014. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sounds right.  Anyone else? 

MR. FISHER.  Can I ask a question on that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Forgive me.  I™m slower than everybody else at the table.  In releasing 
this, we would be releasing the funds path? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Releasing what? 

MR. FISHER.  The funds path, 
the fed funds rate forecast as well
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes
. MR. BULLARD. If you are a year earlier, is that a significant reservation?  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I™m sor
ry. 
                       
  
                
   
         MR. BULLARD.  A year earlier on the funds rate, is that a significant reservation? 
MS. DUKE.  But is that a difference in the policy path?  Because the policy path assumes 
2015 liftoff. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
  You could have 
a different reaction functio
n. MR. 
BULLARD
.  But then you™ve got to do your presumably out
come
-based
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
Based on the original line of comments where we asked you to 
condition on the forecast, and you submitted something 
that
 had higher inflation, I would have 
said t
hat you were a 
ﬁthree
ﬂ because you showed that, conditioned on sticking with the August 
statement
-type policy, you had much higher inflation than this forecast, and that should be 
exaggerated more based on the policy.  So I would have said that you™re a 
three. 
MR. BULLARD.  But I don™t think I am outside of these confidence bands. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I don™t think that is relevant.  It goes back to the question of, 
do you think that your forecast, from a policy perspective, would be materially different? 
MR. BULLARD. 
Again, I just don™t think getting into dissenting on a forecast is a 
sensible thing to do.  Has the Chairman done a good job of characterizing the center of the 

Committee?  Yes. I think yes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Lockhart. 

MR. 
LOCKHART.  I want to make sure I understand.  The next step is to write up a 
mock quarterly monetary policy report or something like that? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  I™m sorry.  Just a description of this discussion. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Right.  But we see how 
it is going to be communicated, how it is 
going to be implemented, is that right? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  That™s 
the purpose. 
                        
      
            MR. WILCOX.  Just the diversity of views portion. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  Okay. 

MS. DUKE.  For the mock exercise, in addition to my own fiscal cliff reservation, can I 
sign up to Sandy and Jeremy™s reservation about the effectiveness? 
MR. 
REIFSCHNEIDER
.  Oh, sure. 
MS. DUKE.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else?  [No response]  All right.  Yes? 

MR. POWELL.  I™m on that line b
etween the one and the two for exactly the same 
reason
.  I went with the one, but of course I do have the same reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
A question to be thinking about here is
:  What would 
Governor Powell do if he thought that the policy action is 
weaker than we anticipate, but the 
underlying economy is stronger, so that the outlook looks okay for him? 
MR. POWELL.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Because we are not showing a comparison, right?  We are 
just showing the ex post. 
MR.
STEIN
.  Oh, you™re just showing the ex post. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that™s the question.  T
hat™s what we™re discussing 
here.  We haven™t asked the question whether or not you think the baseline is adequate. 
MR. FISHER.  You might 
have to prepare for your press conference. 
CHAI
RMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Do you have a question or a comment? 
MR. FISHER.  Well, the plan is, once we get this nailed down, that you would then refer 
to it in your press conference. Is that correct? 
                             
   
     
            CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And then, we are hoping at some point t
o have a monetary 
policy report. 
MR. FISHER.  Which you would still refer to the consensus forecast in. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nothing is nailed down.  One possibility, which Governor 
Tarullo alluded to, is that we can™t do this in a timely way because we don™t know what the 

policy action is going to be soon enough, in which case it might be something that only appears 

in publication with the minutes, for example, three weeks later. 
MR. FISHER.  I agree with Governor Tarullo, by the way.  H
e makes an excellent
 point.  
My next question would be:  Could you summarize what we just discussed as though we were at 

a press conference? It probably would be difficult at this juncture. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would say that this is the forecast 
of the Committee.
 A few 
people disagreed, thinking that these policies would lead to higher inflation.  Most people 
agreed with the broad contours, except they pointed out a few issues related to the fiscal cliff and 

the efficacy of policy.  
President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. I™m a lit
tle confused.  Someone used the phrase ﬁa diversity section.ﬂ 
But you, at the beginning, describedŠI think you did in this contextŠ
a minutes
-like document, 
and in the minutes, of course, when they discuss participants™ views, the different views are sort 

of woven into the main narrative.  I wasn™t quite clear on what you guysŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I just learned about this five minutes ago myself. 

MR. LACKER.  Okay. Great. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I think the plan is to have a document that describes the 
consensus forecast, gives its main feature, 
and shows 
it in 
a minutes
-type discussion: ﬁ
The 
Committee discussed it. Most agreed with it
 but raised the following points anonymously.  
            
          
 President Lacker thought that it was
 a bunch of garbage.ﬂ  [Laughter]  And that would be the 
content. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay
, we will just have to start. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I hope this was helpful to you 
all
.  [Laughter]  Just 
so you have something to look forward to, our current plan is to talk about this exercise in 
October, so be sure and make your plane reservations now.  [Laughter] 
The next meeting is 
TuesdayŒWednesday, October 23Œ24.  
The press conference 
is 
at 2:15.  There will be a 
TV in 
the Special Library
, and lunch is available if you would like to stay.  No presentations are 
planned.  Thank you very much. 
END OF MEETING 
             
                                                
  Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
 on September
 12Œ13, 2012 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, September 12, 

2012, at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Thursday, September 13, 2012, at 8:30 a.m.  Those present 

were the following: 
Ben Bernanke, Chairman 

William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 

Elizabeth Duke 

Jeffrey M. Lacker 

Dennis P. Lockhart 

Sandra Pianalto 

Jerome H. Powell 

Sarah B
loom Raskin 
Jeremy C. Stein 

Daniel K. Tarullo 

John C. Williams 

Janet L. Yellen 
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, and Eric 
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Ko
cherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively 

William B. English, Secretary and Economist 
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary 

Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 

David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 

Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, Wil
liam Nelson, David 
Reifschneider, Glenn D. Rudebusch, William Wascher, and John A. Weinberg, Associate 
Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Govern
ors 
                                                                                                              Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; 
Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, 

Board of Governors 
Andreas Lehnert,
1 Deputy Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, 
Board of Governors 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Di
rector, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
Brian
 J. Gross,
2 Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 

Eric M. Engen, Michael G. Palumbo, and Wayne Passmore, Associate Directors, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Fabio M. Natalucci, Deputy 
Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Edward Nelson, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
Kelly J. Dubber
t, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, respectively 
Cletus C. Coughlin, Troy Davig, 
Mark E. Schweitzer, and Kei
-Mu Yi, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Cleveland, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 
1 Attended Wednesday™s session only. 
2 Attended Thursday™s session only. 
                                                               Lorie K. Logan, Jonathan P. McCarthy, Giovanni Olivei, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,
3 Vice 
Presidents, Federal R
eserve Banks of New York, New York, Boston, and New York, 
respectively 
Michelle Ezer,
4 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
3 Attended after the discussion o
n potential effects of a large
-scale asset purchase program. 
4 Attended the discussion on potential effects of a large
-scale asset purchase program. 
                           
                   
            
                                                          Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
September 12
Œ13, 2012 September 12 Session 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  Our first item is 
a staff report 
on the potential effects of large-
scale asset purchases.  Seth Carpenter will lead, but Vice 
Chairman 
Dudley would like to introduce the other presenter. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would like to introduce Michelle Ezer from the 
Markets Group.  Michelle and I actually had the interesting experience of writing a paper on the 
case for TIPS
, right in the heart of 
the financial crisis, along with Jennifer Roush
. I am not really 
sure how I managed to do that during that period, but, obviously, Jennifer and Michelle did most 

of the work.  So she is a coauthor. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay
, thank you.  Seth. 
MR. 
CARPENTER.
1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the 
material that™s 
labeled ﬁPotential Effects of a Large
-Scale Asset Purchase Program
.ﬂ  The Committee received three memos from the staff discussing various aspects of 
potential new large
-scal
e asset purchase (LSAP) programs.  I will discuss some 
considerations about how LSAP programs might be structured, and Michelle will 

discuss the balance sheet and income implications, along with the associated exit 

issues. 
When considering the financial and economic effects of LSAPs, the staff analysis 
starts from 
a term 
structure 
model that embeds Treasury and MBS supply factors as 
determinants of 
the yield 
curve.  
These effects depend on market participants™ beliefs 
about the entire trajectory of the SOMA
 portfolio™s holdings of securities and the 
types of those securities.  The FRB/US model assumes that declines in the 
10-year 
Treasury yield pass through roughly one-
for
-one to 
other market rates. 
In addition, 
the lower Treasury rate reduces the discount 
factor in pricing equities, boosting stock 
prices.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar falls as well.  For LSAPs that 

include purchases of MBS, there is an additional assumed reduction in MBS and 

mortgage rates.  Finally, the changes in these market 
variables are 
used to simulate 
the macroeconomic effects of these 
purchases using the FRB/US model. 
Of course, the results depend critically on the models used and a wide set of 
assumptions, any of which could be challenged.  First, in the staff models, the one-
1 The materials used by Mr. Carpenter and Ms. Ezer are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 
                   
             
                    
  
                     
      for
-one pass
-through from the 10-
year Treasury yield to other market rates could 
misstate the connection 
among 
these rates
.  For example, frictions like 
capacity 
restrictions 
for originations may prevent mortgage rates from fully adjusting
, at least 
in the short run.  Another source of uncertainty concerns the embedded effects on 

equity prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar.  Some event studies of 

previous unconventional balance sheet actions point to smaller effects than 

incorporated in
to staff analysis.  Finally, the macroeconomic effects of the changes in 

asset prices are calculated using the FRB/US model, and other models would 
of 

course 
yield results that could be larger or smaller. In short, while the projections 
represent the staff™s best assessment, the effects are clearly subject to considerable 

uncertainty. 
Buying either longer
-term Treasury securities or MBS should, in principle, put 
downward pressure on longer-
term interest rates and
, so, stimulate the economy. 
Although staff models suggest that purchases of MBS have 
a somewhat smaller effect 
than Treasury purchases on most longer-
term interest rates, they have somewhat 
larger effects on mortgage rates, and when translated into estimated macroeconomic 

outcomes, the differences 
are fairly small, especially relative to the substantial 
uncertainty that surrounds such estimates.  As a result, the staff memos did not 

provide clear guidance regarding the allocation of LSAPs between purchases of 

longer-
term Treasury securities and purchases of MBS. 
Looking at your first exhibit, to illustrate the macroeconomic effects that are 
implied by the staff models, we compare a projection in which the MEP, the Maturity 

Extension Program, is continued as plannedŠ
the solid
, dark blue lineŠ
to a 
projection that assumes 
that 
the Committee instead ends the MEP and purchases $600 
billion in Treasury securities and $400 
billion in MBS by late next year
.  That™s 
labeled 
option 1 
as in the staff memo
 and it™s the dotted blue line.  In addition to 
lowering term premiums from LSAPs, this option is also assumed to put downward 

pressure on longer-
term rates by pushing off the first increase in the federal funds rate 
by about six months.  This LSAP program is projected to boost real GDP, 
lower the 

unemployment rate, and increase the inflation rate somewhat.  As a consequence, 

more rapid progress toward both of the Committee™s goals is made.  The staff 

memorandum provided prior to your last meeting concluded that the purchases under 

such a 
program would not likely lead to a deterioration in market functioning.  

Michelle will 
later 
discuss some of 
the anticipated effects of the program on the 
Federal Reserve™s balance sheet and income. 
As I noted 
before
, the estimated interest rate effect of 
an LSAP depends on the 
public™s understanding of the FOMC™s intended plans for purchases and exit.  This 

consideration is particularly important for a flow
-based
 or open-
ended program that 
continues until a certain economic outcome is achieved.  If the public understands the 

FOMC™s stopping rule and has the same forecast for the economy as the Committee, 

and the economy evolves according to those projections, then our models would 

suggest that the flow-
based LSAP is 
roughly equivalent to a stock-
based LSAP 
of the 
same ultimate size.  Of course, the economy would likely not proceed exactly in line 

with expectations, so under a flow-
based LSAP, the anticipated total amount of asset 
             
      
        
         
          
                                 purchases would 
likely 
be more state dependent and evolve as the economy evolves.  
Option 4 in the memo entitled ﬁOptions for an Additional LSAP ProgramﬂŠ 

presented here 
as the dashed red lineŠwas intended to correspond roughly to such a 
program when the economy faces an adverse shock, and, as a result, purchases end up 

at a level tha
t is higher than originally assumed. If the ultimate size of purchases in 

this case is $2 trillion, our models suggest that the net effect would be somewhat 

smaller than if, from the beginning, a $2 trillion LSAP had been implemented.  

However, a flow-
bas
ed approach, if communicated clearly to the public, also could 
boost business and consumer confidence by reducing the odds of adverse tail 

outcomes and limiting the expected variance of economic outcomes.  This confidence 

effect is not captured in the staf
f projections but could be important
.  Alternatively, if 
the 
stopping rule is not clear, and the public believed that the Committee might stop 

purchases somewhat earlier than the Committee actually intended, then the interest 

rate effect 
could be reduced relative to what our models suggest.  
However, a
s the 
public came to understand the Committee™s stopping rule, the expected size of the 

SOMA portfolio would revise up, and the interest rate effects would become larger.  

Michelle is now going to discuss the 
balance sheet projections and some of the issues 
related to the exit. 
MS. EZER. 
Thanks, Seth.  As Seth mentioned, I will be discussing the balance 
sheet and income projections described in the LSAP options memo and associated 

exit issues.
  I plan to focus on the same two LSAP options Seth discussed, though the 
memo presented several options.  Turning to the top-left panel of exhibit 2, you can 

see the path of the portfolio under a baseline scenario in which MEP is completed and 

options 1 and 4 from the memo.  Under the latter two options, the portfolio grows 

significantly as a result of the asset purchases. 
Consistent with the exit principles, we 
assume that 
6 months prior to the first increase in the target federal funds rate, 
securities are allowed to ma
ture without reinvestment, and 6 
months after that first 

increase, sales of agency securities begin. These actions normalize the size of the 

portfolio through time.  The addition of a new LSAP program extends the period of 

time between the start of asset sales and when the portfolio normalizes in size. 
For 
example, under option 1 it takes 41 months for the portfolio size to normalize after 

the initiation of MBS sales.
  This is 6 months longer compared 
with 
the MEP 
scenario. 
In terms of Federal Reserve income, cumulative remittances to the Treasury over 
the projection period are lower than in a scenario with no additional LSAP.  
The 

lower remittances reflect higher inte
rest expense and the larger capital losses from 
MBS sales. 
Looking at the top-right panel, until 2016, remittances are higher under 
the LSAP scenarios, because of the higher interest income from the larger portfolio 

and minim
al additional interest expense
.  Thereafter, income is lower as a result of 
higher interest expense and larger capital losses. 
Under option 
1, annual remittances 
are projected to bottom out near zero.  By contrast, under option 
4, remittances fall to 

zero for more than 5 years, and a 
deferred asset is created. 
Of course, income and balance sheet projections can be sensitive to interest rate 
projections, and those projections are subject to uncertainty.  
One gauge of the 
               
          
       
   
              
       
    
  
           
              interest rate risk in the portfolio is presented in the middle
-left panel. Here, we 
present the projections of Federal Reserve remittances under an assumption that 

1 year after federal funds liftoff, the federal funds rate and 10
-year Treasury yield are 
100 basis points above the baseline levels, and these higher levels 
persist for the 
remainder of the projection period.  Under all of the LSAP options shown, the higher 

interest rate paths result in a period of no remittances to the Treasury and the creation 

of a deferred asset, as shown in the middle-right panel.  Under option 4, 
remittances 

to the Treasury would cease for a considerable number of years, and a substantial 

deferred asset would be created. 
The portfolio projections highlight two implications that an LSAP may have on 
the exit strategy.
 First, as shown in the bottom panel, the level of reserves would be 
higher at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate.
 Second, in order to 
remain consistent with the existing exit principles, MBS sales would need to take 

place over a shorter period than 5 
yea
rsŠthe period currently assumed in the 
projections.  
Absent a shorter MBS sales period, or other changes to the exit strategy, 

the size of the portfolio would not normalize within 2 to 3 years of the initiation of 

asset sales as anticipated by the exit strategy principles. 
Starting with the first point, under option 
1, reserve balances will be about 
$2.3 trillion at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate
Šabout $1 
trillion 
larger than expected under the current policy
, and also $1 trillion
 larger than assumed 
in June 2011.  
While increasing the IOER rate will raise short
-term market rates by 
itself, reserve
-draining tools can help to ensure a closer connection between the rates, 

and greater use of these tools may be needed
, given the increased quantity of reserves.  
The memo entitled ﬁThe 
Effect of an 
Additional $1 Trillion LSAP on the E
xit 
Strategyﬂ discussed the status of each of the different draining tools.  However, it is 

too early to provide specific details of a drain
ing plan
, because such a plan will 
depend on how markets evolve and the lessons learned once these tools are used in 

large scale. 
Turning to the second point, the exit strategy principles themselves will not have 
to change as a result of a new LSAP. The e
xpectation
, however, 
that the size of the 
balance sheet would be normalized within 2 to 3 years of assets sales might not hold, 

depending on the size of the 
asset purchase
 program.  Under option 1, by reducing the 
period of asset sales to 
3½ years from the
 5 years assumed in making the projections, 
the portfolio size would normalize within the assumed 2 to 3 
years. 
The s
taff 
currently believes that the faster average pace of MBS sales would likely be 

manageable from a market
-functioning perspective.  
That said, reducing the sales 
period would concentrate capital losses and result in Federal Reserve remittances 

declining to zero for a few years and create a deferred asset. 
In contrast, assumptions 
associated with the exit strategy principles would need to b
e altered under a $2 trillion 
LSAP like that under option 4.  Agency sales alone would not be enough to normalize 

the size of the balance sheet within 
2 to 3 
years of the initiati
on of asset sales in this 
case. 
Moreover, sales of securities in the volume envisioned under option 4 over a 
three
-year perio
d may cause market disruptions. 
          
                       
                  
In any event, the Committee may wish to review its exit principles periodically, 
particularly if the Committee implemented a flow
-based LSAP program, where the 
ultimate size o
f purchases would be unknown.  Adjustments to the principles could 
include more heavily relying on asset sales as a tool to drain reserves, for example, by 

expanding it to include a moderate pace of Treasury security sales. Asset sales could 

also occur so
oner.  
On balance, although the current exit strategy principles remain 
valid, additional analysis will be useful to determine 
whether alternate strategies 
might prove more helpful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Seth and I will be happy to 

answer any question
s. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Of course, this is just a summary of 
a lot of work that the staff has 
been doing on all aspects of asset purchases. You have received a 
number of memos.  Also, let me just mention that a little bit later this morning we will talk about 
the consensus forecast, which gives, in more detail, the staff projections of the effect
s of 
programs of different sizes on the economy.  
Let me now open the floor in case there are any 
questions 
for staff.  President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  I appreciate all of the 
work that went into this.  It has been quite helpful to me in thinking about what is going on.  Seth 

has made 
a good summary of the uncertainties and the range and assumptions that are needed to 

get the po
int estimates. 
I want to focus on two things. 
One has to do with the assumptions about market segmentation and 
pass
-through.  In 
some sense, the FRB
/US assumes
Šas you mentioned, SethŠ
that the 
pass
-through from the 
reduction of Treasuries to corporate and mortgage-
backed securities is one
-for
-one, which 
suggests, as you alluded to, that there is more segmentation across duration than there is across 

asset classes
, in the case of the models.  So one question I have would be, suppose that actually 
there was more segmentation across asset classes than across the term structure?  In other w
ords, 
if 
5-year 
Treasuries
 were a better substitute for 10-
year 
Treasuries
 than mortgage-
backed 
securities or corporate bonds are for 10
-year securities
Šwhich is the way it is kind of structured 
in the modelŠhow would that change your analysis of these e
ffects?  That is one question. 
                           
   
       
      
          
             
  
 And the second question is, you talked about the assumptions that are made and 
the 
uncertainties, and yet what we really got
, at the end of the day, w
ere 
some point estimates. 
So if 
I had to push you and I wanted to think about standard errors on these point estimates, how big 
do you think they are truly likely to be
?  Can we tell the difference, given the uncertainties 
among these different strategies
?  W
hat 
is 
your assessment of 
that? 
So those are the two 
questions I have. 
MR. CARPENTER.  Okay. 
The first question, what if there were more segmentation 
across asset types than across 
maturit
ies
? I think pretty clearly what you would see in that case 
is that we might have an effect on Treasury yields if we are buying 
Treasurie
s, and that would 
tend to push down 
Treasury 
yields and widen the spread relative to other asset types.  And to the 
extent that it™s other interest rates that have a direct effect on economic activity, you would get a 

smaller effect.
  So I think, in principle, that™s the way it would go. 
The hard part there
, I think, 
is there has clearly got to be a little bit of that going on.  And 
the previous memo about market functioning that we sent around said we might get to the point 

where you are buying so much that you are dislocating the 
Treasury 
curve from the rest of 
market interest rates. I think we are very sensitive to that possibility, and I think the staff 

conclusion so far is that we haven™t gotten to that point.  And I think some of the other studies of 

LSAPs and how they work also point to pretty substantial spillovers to other asset classesŠ
some 

Fed studies and some academic studies.
  So I think that™s a reasonable hypothesis to maintainŠ
I think 
it™s something that we will want to worry a lot about, esp
ecially if the purchases were so 
large that they were to somehow disrupt market functioning.  But my reading so far is that we are 

not there yet
, for some of those reasons. 
             
               
      
      
             
    
   Another reason isŠespecially if you go back to some of the previous LSAPsŠ
as the 
Desk has made clear what segment of the market we are buying
, there ha
ve been some pretty 
clear adjustments in interest rates at different points along the curve
.  This
 suggests 
that the 
maintained hypothesis that we have
, that the maturity matters a lot
, is coming through in some of 
the event studies.  W
hen the Desk helped the market understand exactly what the maturity 
distribution of purchases 
was 
going to be, we saw some movements of yields at the long end 
relative to the belly of the curve that suggest t
hat people see this sort of segmentation across 
maturities.  In addition, I think some of the reaction 
to the MEP caused us to feel 
a little bit better 
about that assumption.  The movement in the short rate relative to the long rate, once you control 
for e
xpectations, seemed 
to conform reasonably well with some of the inte
rest rate models that 
we have. 
So I think the short answer is you would get a widening of spreads, and to the extent that 
Treasuries are
n™t 
the thing that matter
s for economic activity, you would get less of an effect.  
On the other hand, if you were to do mortgage-
backed securities purchases, and the same 
hypothesis came up, then presumably you™d get a bigger effect just on the MBS rate, and 

presumably mortgages a
s well.
  And so the scenario you bring up might be an argument for 
having both asset classes
Šan argument
 that we didn™t cover in the memo.  I
f there is 
this 
segmentation across asset types, then buying both 
Treasuries
 and MBS may be a good thing to 
do, because then you will be able to affect both of those 
rates
, instead of relying on the purchases 
of 
Treasuries
 to also push down mortgage and MBS yields along with it. 
MR. PLOSSER.  To interrupt just a second on that point, though, that begs the question 
about 
buying MBS
Šlet™s say, 
even if it might help the mortgage market
.  You don™t have any 
evidence on whether that pass
-through 
to corporate and other asset classes is either differential or 
            
      
      
                 
the same or less than it would be with 
Treasuries
? Are you assuming 
that other asset classes 
would follow the same amount then, in that kind of story? 
MR. CARPENTER.  Right.  So I was trying to go into the counterfactual world where we 
are assuming this asset segmentation
.  And so there, 
there are 
lots of other hypotheses.  O
ur 
models sort ofŠ
and they are empirical models, where we get the results based on actual data
Š suggest that the purchases of MBS do have the same general effect on longer-
term interest rates 
by pulling out the longer-term assets and pushing things down.  I
f we had a different model, we 
would have to confront all of those same questions that you asked, including
, if there is a 
segmentation, what sort of 
pass
-through would there be?  But the models that we have, and the 
estimation that we have done, sugge
st that we are getting more or less the same effect on longer
-term rates of MBS and Treasuries
.  I was just saying, in the alternate version of the world, 
where 
there is a segmentation, 
it might be an argument for buying two different types of assets that 
we 
didn™t discuss in the memo. 
Your second question about standard errors is a really good one, and it is hard.  There are 
lots of different models that we have coming together, and I think Dave can probably speak 

really knowledgeably about the standard errors, especially from the FRB/US model.  But there is 

layering
, model upon model, 
to try to get these effects. 
I think we feel pretty good that we know 
for sure the sign of the first derivative, which is in what direction these things would happen.  

We pr
esented a lot of results, though, for different-
sized LSAPs in the memos, as Michelle 
pointed outŠ$750 
billion
, $1 trillion, 
$2 trillion. 
I think we can™t say with any confidence that 
we know the difference between a $750 billion LSAP and a $1 trillion LS
AP.  We are pretty sure 
we know that the 
$1 trillion
 one does more, but those are so close to each other that I don™t have 
       
              
      
                      
     
     
   
         much confidence in being able to differentiate.  
It™s t
hat sort of uncertainty 
I see, b
ut I don™t 
know if you want to talk about the 
macro effects. 
MR. PLOSSER.  I™m sorry.  Just to push it just a little bit.  So rather than the difference 
between 
$750 billion 
and 
$1 trillion, let™s just take one of them, the 
$1 trillion
 one.  And you 
estimate, what was it, 62 basis points on the unempl
oyment rate after two years?  Was that it? I 
can™t remember the exact number.  Whatever that number was, can you give me a standard 
error 
on that point estimate? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I™m going to come to that directly.  
First
, just to reiterate what 
Seth s
aid, your logic is correct.  To the extent that you think 
that the 
pass
-through 
from buying 
Treasuries 
into corporate 
bond yields
, stock market prices
, the exchange rate, 
and 
things like 
that
, are 
less than in the model simulations
, you are going to get smaller results. 
Second, I agree with Seth that the 
pass
-through 
effects 
that 
we have in there
Šas we have 
been saying right from the start back in 2008, early 2009Š
are
 highly uncertain.  And as time has 
gone on, I think the one source of uncertainty that has gone down is the 
concern
 about whether 
purchases 
would have any effect
.  At least we 
now 
think they ha
ve an effect. 
But having said 
that, 
there is 
still 
much uncertainty around these estimates. 
In terms of actually coming up with a confidence interval, I can™t do that, but I c
an say 
the following qualitative things that 
I think 
are helpful. 
First, take the model that Min We
i and 
Canlin 
Li 
developed that we are mainly using for pricing the effects on Treasuries
 and MBS.  
Now, that model kicks out a standard error.  I don™t know what it is, but it does not 
have 
tight 
error bands.  There is considerable width 
to the confidence intervals.  That said, we think the 
number is reasonable.  But could the number 
be somewhat smaller or somewhat bigger?  Yes. 
One point on why 
it could be bigger is, if you go back to the first LSAP, the event studies 
                                        
          
           suggested 
the LSAP
 might have lowered 
Treasury 
yields by 100 basis points.  
In the analysis that 
Min and 
Canlin
 are doing, it™s 50.  So that™s an example, 
where they are not necessarily taking 
the highest-
side estimates. 
There are other studies that suggest that we could be getting lower effects on financial 
markets than in the FRB/US analysis.  On the other hand, 
FRB
/US ignores some things, 
such as 
the 
potential 
pass
-through to house prices
; it has no effect 
in the simulations
.  And, there 
are 
confidence effects
 that Seth alluded to.  Even if you knew what the financial effects would be, 
there would still be a subs
tantial confidence interval for the economic effects
.  I don™t have them 
off the top of my head, but we have generated confidence bands for FRB/
US 
impulse responses 
over the years.  They are a lot like 
those in other models.  They are fairly significant 
around what 
the unemployment rate 
effect 
would be.  
The effect
 could be considerably closer to zero, or it 
could be bigger.  L
et™s say that
, for 
a given LSAP, the point estimate is a half a percentage point 
on the unemployment rate after three years
Šthat™s t
rue 
for the way we are scoring 
alternative 
B. Could it be a quarter?  Yes.  A quarter 
is certainly inside the 
70 percent 
confidence interval
.  Could it be three-quarters of a percentage point? Yes.  That would be inside the 70 
percent
.  So 
that™s just sa
ying what
, I think
, everyone agrees upon: there are v
ery wide confiden
ce intervals 
on these effects. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  While I was listening to Seth™s disclaimers at the beginning, it sort of 
sounds like an Allegra ad on television [l
aughter]
: These are the risks, et cetera.  And the papers 
actually were quite good.  The paper you particularly referenced had a lot of disclaimers in it.  

And what I am interested in seeing vetted more thoroughly is the degree to which this 

compounds the complexi
ty of a
n exit when we decide to exit. 
          
          
                        
    
     It seems to me one of the virtues of, 
particularly
, ﬁThe 
Effect of an 
Additional $1 T
rillion 
LSAP 
on the E
xit 
Strategy
ﬂ was the discussion of substantial uncertainty.  There are lots of 
quotes in there that are qualified. 
It seems to me that the proponents of 
an extended LSAP would 
take a view from a signaling channel perspective that one of its benefits is that 
it is effective 
precisely because it makes it more difficult to either raise short
-term interest rates or sh
rink the 
balance sheet for some time.
  And in a way, what I am concerned aboutŠand I am interested in 
learning more
Šis the degree to which we tie the hands of our successors, or if not tieŠ
maybe 
that is too strong a wordŠwe tangle their hands, and how much 
more difficult the exit strategy 
becomes. 
It strikes me that the stronger the recovery
Šthat is, the more rapidly we achieve 
equilibrium interest rates
Šthe harder it is going to be for us to exit.  And I would like to see that 
vetted a little bit more. 
I thought the papers touched on that, particularly the paper you referred 
to, but I think it would be helpful, Mr. Chairman, if we got a better sense of what complexities 
this imposes upon exit at the right time. Just a comment. 
MR. CARPENTER.  No, that™s 
really helpful. 
MR. FISHER.  I don™t know what your take is on this. 

MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely.  We clearly have a lot of details to write down.  So if 
the Committee wanted to exit 
next week
, or something like that, we would have lots and lots and 
lots an
d lots of details to write down, none of which are we prepared to give you right now, 
because the world presumably, between now and exit, is going to change.  And so it is going to 

take some time. 
That said, I just want to leave you with one thought.  When 
we were writing these 
memos, one of the first points that we wanted to have clear in our heads before writing themŠ
all 

of the staff who were working on this, including staff at the Desk who are experts on both 
      
  
                            
      
    
           
  
financial markets as well as 
the execution of things and the staff 
at the Board
Šwas
, does 
anybody think that if we were to do another LSAP as envisioned in these memos, that when the 
Committee wants to tighten monetary policy
, the staff would not be able to follow through on 
that
?  Because I wanted to make sure that everybody was able to look in their heart of hearts and 
say, ﬁWe think that the Committee will be able to tighten policy appropriately to hit its
 dual 
mandate,ﬂ and everybody said, ﬁYes, we think we are in that situation.ﬂ How we do it is not 

perfectly clear yet
, for a variety of reasons
.  But we would have had to write a very, very 
different memo
, I think, if we really thought there was some risk to the conduct of monetary 
policy in terms of our ability to execute the exit strategy. 
MR. FISHER.  You point out in the memo that there is a learning process here, 
in terms 
of the different tools that might be used.  But I still think we should press this in our discussion 

before proceeding. 
MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely. 

MR. FISHE
R.  Yes, sir. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I 
want to follow up on one point b
ecause it also relates to what 
President Plosser was talking about.  I think, 
whether it is connected to fear that we won™t be able 

to exit or whether it is a signaling that the Committee is willing to be more accommodative 

persistently out in the future, those policy expectations 
can have a big effect 
on some of the 
results
.  Ofte
n, the way we score thingsŠand I think I threw out a half a percentage point a 
second agoŠ
doesn™t take 
into account this additional signaling effect
 about the future path of the 

funds rate t
hat 
you potentially can get.  T
here is some evidence from the even
t studies that you 
did get 
it with the first two LSAP programs
Šthat by announcing 
a program
, you are also 
sending the signal that you are going to be more willing to keep rates lower for longer. 
      
           
               
        
           
    MR. FISHER.  That™s what I was
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right. 
At least as far as the model scores it, if that™s fully 
credible, if the expected funds rate path the market has really flattens out, in principle, you get a 
nontrivial kick from that. 
MR. CARPENTER. 
The only thing to highlight, though, is the difference 
between a 
willingness to keep the interest rate lower
 for longer versus an ability 
to raise them
.  And we 
don™t currently worry about the second partŠwe don™t worry about the ability to raise interest 

rates.  But what the Committee decides to do, obviously, is about the willingness to keep interest 

rates lower
. MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Does the FRB/US model allow you to 
isolate the kind of intermediate estimates
Šthat might be credit aggregates or asset price index 
levels
Šthat fit between lower interest rates and GDP growth, so that you could actually get a 
sense of the transmission mechanism working through the model? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
You can snip cer
tain transmission mechanisms and see what it 
does to the total effect 
if you
 just zero it out.  We have done experiments like that, and what it 
shows is, roughly speaking, changing 
Treasury 
yields, if it doesn™t go out into any other asset 
prices, doesn™t do anything in the model, to a first approximation.  
What matters is that it goes 

into private long-term interest rates, like MBS and corporates; second, that it goes into 
the 
stock 

market; and, third, that it goes into exchange rates.  So you can think of 
it as 
three channels
: cost 
of capital, wealth effects, and exchange rate.
  The model says each of those is worth 
roughly a 
third of the overall effect.  So if you didn™t believe one of the channels was operating, or you 
      
                                  
  thought it was operating only half 
as effectively as it usually does, you could then scale the 
numbers down with that rough math.  And that would be approximately correct.  
But in terms of 
what it implies for bank lending, or something like that, no, the model doesn™tŠ 
MR. LOCKHART. 
It doesn™t explicitly estimate the
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It doesn™t have any explicit predictions about what happens to 
bank lending or anything like that. 
MR. LOCKHART.  So to simplify, for my purposes, the exercise assumes some kind of 
historic
al correlation between lower interest rates and economic activity. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Which may or may not prevail in this current situation. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Which may or may not prevail, with one very important 
caveat.  Because housing is at such an extraordinarily low percentage of GDP, in essence, 
that 

historical correlation has been marked down in these analyses.  Ordinarily housing is a big 

source of a kick.  In these scenarios, the direct channel on housing construction activity is worth 

hard
ly anything.  It™s a little bit, but it™s very small.  That could be right or wrong, but in the 
results that Seth was showing and 
that 
were in all the other analys
is we™ve sent you, 
there is,
 in 
that very important sense, 
an attenuation of the effectivenes
s of monetary policy, whether it™s 
conventional or unconventional right now. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to follow up on this issue 
about confidence intervals.  In 
figure
 1, there would be data uncertainty; there would be 
uncertainty about transmission channels; there would be uncertainty about models.  If you 

layered all of that together, you are going to get very wide confidence intervals.  But on 
              
          
    
   
          
              exhibit 
2, where we are
 looking at the SOMA holdings, there we can sort of mechanically map 
out, more or less, what is going to happen.  There is some uncertainty based on interest rates
, and 
so on, but 
I just want to be clear on this
: This is
 much more solid, I would say, than page 1, 
which is very uncertain and very speculative about 
what the effects might be. Is that a fair 
assessment? 
MS. EZER. 
Our portfolio projections depend importantly on the interest rate 
assumptions that were provided, so those confidence intervals will feed through into our 
projections when it comes to things like Federal Reserve income over time.
  When it comes to, 
say, the top-
left
 panel, the path of the portfolio over time, the confidence interval is probably a 
little bit smaller
, provided that the 
assumptions that we made about the timing of liftoff and the 
strategy used for exit remain constant.
  There the confidence band would be in your projections 
for prepayments on your MBS portfolio.  But since you are assuming that you are going to get 

rid o
f your holdings of agency securities over a set period of time, it is just going to change kind 
of the wiggles in how MBS declines over that period.  But we would still eliminate it over a 
five
-year period with confidence. 
MR. BULLARD.  Just one other comment, Mr. Chairman.  On exhibit 2, 
panel
 4, ﬁD
eferred 
Asset.
ﬂ  T
hat is kind of a nice term
, ﬁdeferred asset.
ﬂ As far as I know, the Committee 
has never used the deferred asset.  It strikes me as a possible political firefight to bring that into 

play.  
All 
of the scenarios here, other than 
option 1, if I™m reading this correctly, would bring the 
deferred asset into play
, with possible repercussions, I think, 
for the Federal Reserve. 
MR. CARPENTER. 
Just a small bit of clarification:  I
t has never been the case that we 
have had
, for the Federal Reserve 
System as a whole
, a deferred asset
.  It has 
been the case on 
several occasions that there has been a deferred asset for a given Reserve Bank. 
        
       
                     
     
        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think the defense in that case would be that 
the total, 
which was including the very high 
remittances
 early in the period, still would be higher than 
historical norms. 
MR. POTTER.  That™s correct. 
MR. BULLARD.  That might be a hard story to tell when the time comes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair
man
, you have a two-hander? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
  Yes.  I think the confidence intervals on interest rates are 
going to be almost proportionate to the confidence intervals on the real economy variables, 

because you are not going to know what the trajectory o
f short
-term rates is going to be or the 
shape of the yield curve. And, in fact, you are probably even more uncertain about the shape of 

the yield curve because you have never gone from purchasing all of these assets to selling all of 

these assets.  So we
 don™t really know how the market is going to react to that. 
The second thing I just want to note very briefly is a lot of this also depends on what 
monetary framework you are actually going back to.  And the presumption of the staff memo is 

that we are going back to a 
corridor system.  But you might decide, as you go through this, that 

maybe IOER works pretty well. 
And 
you might actually want to go back to a floor system that 
would allow you quite a bit more discretion in terms of how your exit actually works.  And that 

would feed into a lot of these projections.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Again, I want to thank the staff for all of the work 
you 
did to help prepare us for this meeting, including the work on LSAPs, but also work on other 
tools like IOER.  So we appreciate it very much.  
Let me turn to item 
2 and cal
l on Simon Potter 
to discuss financial developments. 
                 
                             
    
                                                                             MR. POTTER.
2 Thank you
, Mr. Chairman.  Over the course of the 
intermeeting 
period, global financial markets were dominated by three areas of focus: 
the ECB™s 
new Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) pr
ogram, fluctuating expectations for 
further policy accommodation from the FOMC, and continuing concerns over global 

growth prospects.  By the end of the 
intermeeting
 period, market perceptions of the 
effectiveness of policy measures to at least attenuate t
ail risks facing the global 
economy contributed to improved risk sentiment in financial markets, as seen in 

higher advanced economy sovereign yields and stock markets. 
I will begin with developments in U.S. interest rates, which in the Treasury 
market were moderately higher over the 
intermeeting
 period.  The upper-
left panel 
shows the decomposition of changes in nominal yields for 5- and 10-
year securities 
during key portions of the intermeeting period.  
Nominal 
Treasury yields increased 
significantly early in the period, with the 10-year yield up by more than 35 basis 

points at one point.  Most of the 
initial increase in yields was driven by improved risk 
sentiment on expectations of a forceful ECB policy respons
e, as well as by stronger
-than
-expected U.S. economic data
.  The rise in yields partially reversed following the 
release of the August FOMC minutes and continued somewhat after the Jackson Hole 

symposium.  The move lower in the 5-
year real component was co
nsistent with 
growing expectations for policy easing.  
To date, there is little evidence of worries 
of the fiscal cliff affecting pricing in the Treasury or other markets. 
At the same time, inflation compensation
, as derived from inflation
-indexed 
securities
, rose at the 5
- and 10-
year tenors
.  Higher energy prices contributed to the 
increase in inflation breakevens, particularly at shorter maturities
.  However, spot and 
forward 5
-year breakeven inflation rates remain well within recent historical ranges, 
as seen in the upper-right panel. 
As shown in the middle-left panel, dealers continue to assign the highest 
probability of a first increase in the 
target
 rate to the second half of 2015.  However, 
the distribution has continued to shift from earlier liftoff
 dates and into 2015 and 
beyond.  The survey results are broadly consistent with market-
implied measures of 
liftoff, as market prices indicate significant odds that the target rate will not be 

incre
ased until the middle of 2015. 
Immediately following the F
OMC statement on August 1, interest rates increased
, as markets had been pricing in close to even odds of an extension of the forward 

guidance
.  The middle-right panel shows an event study based on the small sample of 

forward
-guidance surprises.  Reading from left to right, the blue dots represent the 
three events in our study: 
first, the decision to maintain the late
-2014 forward 
guidance at the 
most recent 
meeting; second, the extension of the forward guidance to 

late
 2014 at the January meeting; and third, the introduction of the original mid-2013 
language in August 2011.  
The 
x-
axis measures the surprise component of these 
decisions, which we measure in months and derive from the difference between the 

announced 
forward
-guidance date and the ex
pected month of liftoff calculated from 
2 The mate
rials used by Mr. Potter are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 
      
               
  
    
       
      
                 
          
   our d
ealer surveys
.  The 
y-axis measures the change in the 10
-year Treasury yield 
after the FOMC announcement
.  Alternative methods of measuring the surprise in 
months yield broadly similar results
.  Averaging across 
these measures suggests a 
rule of thumb of roughly a 1 basis point change in the 10-
year Treasury yield for each 
month of 
forward
-guidance 
surprise
.  Of course, measuring announcement effects is 
complicated by the interaction between forward guidance and 
expectations for the 
balance sheet
, including exit, which this analysis does not consider.  In the three 
events examined
, there were no explicit changes to the balance sheet or exit 
principles. 
Turning to other domestic assets, MBS spreads to Treasuries ar
e narrower over 
the 
intermeeting
 period, as seen in your lower-
left panel
.  Investors attributed much of 
the fluctuation in MBS spreads over the period to shifting expectations for Federal 

Reserve purchases, especially in the last few days.  By contrast, t
wo other 
intermeeting developments may serve to tighten mortgage market conditions on the 

margin
.  First, the FHFA announced that it will raise guarantee fees on GSE loans by 
10 basis points starting in the fourth quarter of this year, a fee that lenders w
ill likely 
pass on to borrowers.  Second, the Treasury announced that the wind-down of the two 

GSEs™ portfolios will accelerate to a 15 percent yearly rate, from 10 percent at 

present
.  Much of the wind-down is expected to occur through paydowns, 
necessita
ting only a small portion of sales from the portfolio over the next year.  

Given this, investors do not expect the accelerated wind-downs to be disruptive to the 

MBS market, and spreads to Treasuries were little changed following the 

announcement. 
The final panel looks at how recent developments have affected 
U.S. 
risk assets
.  Overall, the stabilization in European financial markets and heightened expectations 

for domestic policy easing have supported both equity and debt markets.  
The 

S&P
 500 index rose over the intermeeting period by more than 4 percent and is 
currently at its highest level since the beginning of 2008.  
Near
-term uncertainty, as 
measured by the VIX, is near multiyear lows
.  High
-yield bond spreads have 
tightened to levels last observed in
 2011:Q3, and corporate bond issuance in July and 
August has been higher than 
over the same period last year. 
Your second exhibit turns to developments in Europe and global asset prices more 
broadly.  
The most important 
development 
in global financial markets was the 
steadily growing expectation that the ECB would announce an effective new program 

to purchase shorter-
dated peripheral sovereign debt
.  As seen in the top-
left panel, 
these expectations led to a significant narrowing of
 peripheral sovereign debt spreads 
to German yields, particularly at shorter maturities wi
thin the scope of the program. 
Many of the uncertainties regarding the new program were resolved by the ECB 
announcements last week, leading to a further narrowing of peripheral spreads, 

additional gains in European equities, and appreciation of the euro against the 
U.S. 
dollar and the Swiss franc.  
Indeed, euro
-area financial markets have exhibited a 
greater degree of stability over the 
intermeeting
 period, and investors do not appear to 
be seeking significant protection 
against 
large swings in asset prices
, as seen in the 
                                       
    
  
  
               upper-
right panel
, ﬁImplied Volatility on 
Euro
pean Equities and on the Euro-
Dollar 
Currency 
Pair
.ﬂ 
As Steve Kamin will note in his briefing, the OMT
 program has the potential to 
ease financial stresses but must be accompanied by fundamental reform measures at 

the national level
.  Changes in forward peripheral spreads to Germany appear 
consistent with this view
.  Your middle-left panel shows Spanish an
d Italian 
five
-year 
debt spreads 
relative to Germany on a 
five
-year
-forward basis
.  These forward 
five
-year spreads have come down much less than spot spreads on instruments that are 

within the maturity range
 of the ECB™s purchase program. 
In the near 
term, financial markets will face a number of uncertainties, including 
the ongoing EU and IMF review of Greek compliance with the terms of its aid 

program.  In addition, for those countries 
not already in a program, the ECB will not 
activate the OMT unless
 there is agreement on conditions for accessing fiscal support 
facilities
.  It is unclear whether Spain will take this step w
ithout renewed market 
pressure. 
Looking forward, both Spain and Italy need to ramp up debt issuance over the 
remainder of the year
, after issuing at a somewhat tepid pace in recent months
.  This 
can be seen in the middle-
right panel
.  Spanish and Italian banks have historically 
been a significant source of demand for their own sovereign™s debt.  
However, that 

source of demand has drop
ped
 off in recent months.  As shown in the bottom-
left 
panel, since the ECB™s last three
-year LTRO, Italian banks have added to their 

sovereign debt holdings at a greatly reduced pace
.  Spanish banks have actually 
brought down their holdings of sovereign debt since the first quarter, given their own 

funding difficulties.  On a more positive note, anecdotal reports suggest that asset 

managers are reducing their underweight positions on Spanish and Italian debt, and 

access to primary debt markets has improved 
for Spanish and Italian banks. 
The last panel of this exhibit focuses on global risk assets 
more 
broadly.  
The 
accommodative policy stance of many central banks has been supportive of equity 

markets in recent months, particularly in the 
United States
 and Europe.  
In contrast, 
emerging market equities have generally underperformed, reflecting investors™ views 

that th
ese regions may be experiencing a slowdown in economic activity.  China™s 
Shanghai Composite I
ndex remains at levels last seen in early 2009. 
Your final exhibit focuses on recent Desk operations and market expectations for 
additional policy actions as reported in the d
ealer 
survey.  
Over the intermeeting 
period, the Desk purchased $60 billion in longer-term Treasury securities and sold or 

allowed
 to mature without reinvestment $58.5 billion of shorter-
dated securities under 
the maturity extension program (MEP).  These operations continue to proceed 

smoothly.  In particular, the Treasury security purchase operations have recently met 

with better de
mand.  As shown in the upper-left panel, the previous trend toward 
lower coverage ratios and less favorable prices for the purchase
 operations reversed 

somewhat. 
       
              
             
  
                          
           As shown in the upper-right panel, the MEP transactions have been lengthening 
the average dura
tion of the SOMA™s Treasury holdings in line with the policy intent.  

This measure is expected to reach about 
eight 
years if the program continues through 
the end of the year, far longer than the historical range of two to three 
years.  This has 
pulled the average duration of the overall portfolio higher as well, given that the 

duration of the MBS portfolio has recently remained steady at around 
two 
years. 
The next two panels focus on the reinvestment of principal payments on the 
SOMA™s holdings of agency debt and MBS.  Over the intermeeting period, the Desk 

purchased $33 billion of MBS.  These reinvestment purchases have generally 

proceeded smoothly, with market trading volumes remaining steady and only some 

instances of specialness in the coupons being pur
chased. 
The middle-left panel shows the monthly pace of paydowns, which has 
averaged 
about $26 billion since October of last year.  Given continued low interest rates, we 

expect the paydowns to run at roughly $31 billion per month through the end of the 

year.  Such a pace would suggest that 
the 
MBS purchases resulting from the 
reinvestments of the agency paydowns would constitute about one-third of the gross 

issuance of TBA
-eligible securities. 
The middle-right panel shows the distribution for the 30-
year sector of principal 
paydowns to the MBS portfolio, as well as the coupons in which the Desk has 

reinvested.  The portfolio continues to shift into lower-coupon securities, reflecting 

the overall decline in 
rates and the decision to concentrate purchases in newly
 issued 
TBA securities that are more liquid and more directly linked to the primary rate
.  Since June, low interest rates have led to paydowns of holdings of lower-coupons 

MBS, including the 3.5 and 4 percent coupons.  
Newly issued securities also have 

longer duration than those paying down, so these purchases have extended the 

duration of the MBS portfolio. 
Your final two panels of this exhibit show results from the most recent 
dealer 
survey.  
We use
d a phone poll this Monday to update some of the answers, following 

the significant developments in Europe and the e
mployment 
report.  As seen in the 
lower
-left panel, dealers assign a 90 percent probability to any easing action being 
announced at this mee
ting
.  More specifically, dealers place very high odds of 
80 percent on a change to the rate guidance.  The median respondent also saw a 

65 percent chance of an announced increase in the size of the SOMA portfolio.  

Expectations for these policy actions fi
rmed somewhat following last Friday™s 
employment report.  The derived joint probability for an extension of the forward 

guidance and the announcement of additional asset purchases increased to 57 percent 

in this Monday™s phone survey, up from 46 percent in 
the 
dealer survey. 
The panel to the right shows the dealers™ projections for the size and distribution 
of additional asset purchases anticipated through the end of 2013, as derived from 

respondents™ expected path of the SOMA balance sheet.  Respondents ex
pect the size 
of the balance sheet to grow by around $600 billion by the end of 2013.  Median 

expectations are for an increase of $300 billion in Treasury and about $300 billion in 
             
                  
                 MBS holdings by the end of 2013.  While not asked specifically about the st
ructure of 
a potential asset purchase program, some respondents indicated in their written 

comments that they expect an open
-ended program conditioned on economic 
variables.  Mr. Chairman, this completes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions for Simon?  President 
Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Two questions for Mr. Potter.  The first has 
to do with 
the 
duration of our holdings of agency MBS.  The graph indicates the average 
duration of our current holdings is around two.  Now, would our average duration of purchases 

under what we™re going to talk about later today or tomorrow, would that be substantially larger? 

Do you have a sense of what that would be? 
MR. POTTER.  Yes.  Somewhere between four and six.  Is that right, N
ate
? MR. WUERFFEL. 
That™s correct
. MR. LACKER.  Four and six? 

MR. POTTER. 
Yes
. MR. LACKER.  Okay.  So the other question I haveŠ
I was at a conference a couple of 
weeks ago.  I believe I saw you there, Mr. Potter, andŠ 
MR. POTTER. 
Symposium
, yes
. MR. LACKER.  An economist there was arguing that the effect of our forward guidance 
occurred more via revisions in investors™ expectations about future economic conditions rather 

than a change in their views about our future reaction function, and 
becaus
e you folks have such 
rich interactions with the dealer community and you talk to them about 
this forward guidance, I 
wondered if you guys had a view as to the economist™s assertion. 
MR. POTTER. 
Those dealer economists also 
read about
 Jackson Hole.  Some of 
them 
were there
, so I think they viewed that with quite a lot of interest.  I
n the dealer survey
, some 
               
     
            
        
        
      
   people thought that the change in rate guidance might be not just a calendar type, but trying to 
distinguish it from just a pure expectation of where you expected the economy to be.  I don™t 

think it™s possible to get a very clear answer from these respondents, because I don™t think the 

FOMC
™s been completely clear on this either. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Simon, I think I heard you correctly.  So we™ve been purchasing about a 
third of the eligible TBAs, and you also mentioned that there™s a planned 
increase
 in the 
rate 
of 
GSE wind
-downs to 15 percent from the 10 percent level earlier.  I
s that likely to change? If we 
were to proc
eed with just 
$30 or $40 billion, as outlined in a
lternative 
B, would that change our 
percentage of the eligible TBA purchases, given the contraction that™s occurring among the 

agencies
? If my memory is correct, they had about $1.4 trillion.  It goes back 
to last March. 
I can™t remember the last time I looked at the numbers.  So that™s about $15 billion; 15 
percent 

translates to about $15 billion, I think, in the contraction.  I™m just curious if it 
affe
cts the 
percentage of eligible TBA that we™d be hold
ing if we were to proceed. 
MR. POTTER.  No, I don™t think so. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

MS. LOGAN. 
We™re currently purchasing about a third of gross issuance.  That number 
is going to go up to 60 to 75 percent, depending on which option the Committee chooses. 
MR. FISHER.  Right, s
o that is not affected by
Š MS. LOGAN
.  The reduction that the GSEs are doing is happening 
in more than just 
TBAs
; they™re reducing in other types of securities 
as well
.  So I would think that number is 
probably fairly small.  In terms of the total amount outstanding, we™re currently going to have 

about 18 percent of the MBS, and that would move to about 25 percent. 
       
    
   
      
             
         
        
    
   
 MR. FISHER.  Okay
, thank you.
  And just an observation, if you look at your 
panel
 5 and
, particularly
, the high-
yield 
spread 
on panel
 6, things obviously are going our way.  T
his is 
what we would like to see, as well as the equity price response.  What doesn™t seem to be going 
our wayŠand I only point it out as an offset, even though it™s a short time horizonŠ
is 
it seems 

that the 
breakeven 
inflation rates
Šwhether it™s the 
5-year
, 5-year forward
; the 
5-year
; the 
10-year, which is not on this chartŠbottomed in the spring of this year, and the slope is upward.  

We can talk
, perhaps
, later.  I don™t know if we™ve done an LSAP-
type program in a context 
of 
rising inflation expectations or 
not. I think there was at least a 
chart in the 
Teal
book that would 
indicate we haven™t done one yet under those circumstances. 
But I just point out, Mr. Chairman, that if you draw 
a line from the bottom of the 5-
year 
rate, it really bottomed out in the summer of 2011 and has been on the rise. I™m not saying it™s 

dangerous, and it may be something that we would like to encourage, 
or some at this table would 

like to encourage, but we do have rising inflation expectations.  And to say inflation expectations 

are contained
Šwe might think about how we want to phrase that as we get down to the policy 
statement of tomorrow. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I™m not sure I take the same inference.  The 5-
by-5 
is pretty 
flat and is lower than it was last year. 
MR. FISHER.  
And 
the 
5-
year? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  At
 the margin, and the 5-year is obviously being affected by 
the oil price movements. 
MR. FISHER.  And the 
10-year also is not on this chart, and then gold prices, of course, 
have increased significantly
, for those 
who 
care about that ancient relic. 
       
      
           
           
                
   
            
  
                                                     MR. POTTER. It is true that the deflation risk we can calculate is lower than it was in 
2010. MR. FISHER.  Right.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questi
ons for Simon? [No response] 
Okay.  Seeing 
none, we need to vote to ratify domestic open market operations since August.  
Without 

objection?  Okay.  Our next item is the economic and financial situation, and David Wilcox and 

his colleagues will make that
 presentation. 
MR. WILCOX.
3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think there should be a single 
summary exhibit. 
You all may be relieved to know that my prepared text includes 
1,192 words, and I do not plan to ad lib an additional 2,000 words into my delivery.  
[Laughter] 
As you can see from the upper-
left panel of the forecast summary exhibit, the 
near
-term outlook for real GDP growth in last week™s edition of the Tealbook is 
broadly similar to the one that we sent you in July.  To be sure, the July gain in real 

PCE was better than we had expected.  However, consumer sentiment
Šshown in the 
lower
-left panel
Šhas remained downbeat, job gains have been modest, and the price 
of gasoline has moved back up, all of which caused us to largely discount the 

favorable spending news.  Similarly, July shipments of capital goods were stronger 

than we had expected, but forward-looking indicators, including the continued decline 

in the capital goods orders data, as well as the subdued responses to various surveys 

on capital spending plans and business conditions, are consistent with only subdued 

near
-term increases in business outlays.  If you squint hard at the upper-
left panel, 
you will detect that we shifted a little GDP growth from the second half of this year 

into the first half of next, reflecting our assessment that the drought will depress farm 

output in the second half of this year by more than we had predicted in July. 
The one component of aggregate demand that has seemed to have been on a 
somewhat stronger trajectory relative to our expectation in the July Tealbook was net 

exports.  Even so, last week™s forecast called for GDP growth to average just 

1.8 percent through the middle of next year, about in line with our prediction for the 

growth of potential over this period. 
Since the Tealbook closed, the main piece of economic news was last Friday™s 
employment report.  In a seeming exception to Dave Stockton™s famous description 

of the usual shelf-
life of t
he staff economic forecast, our jar of mayonnaise survived 
its first 48 hours in the Mojave Desert with only relatively minor signs of spoilage.  

[Laughter]
  The red line in the bottom-right panel summarizes our effort to combine 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
          
       
                                   
      
   
 the signals from the estab
lishment and household surveys (the latter of which is not 
shown on the chart because it is so noisy compared 
with the establishment results), 

and to control for weather effects and recession-
related seasonal adjustment 
distortions.  As you can see from the downward tilt toward the end of that line, the 

estimated underlying pace of private payroll employment growth has trended lower 

over the course of this year and now 
is 
at the low end of the range that it has occupied 
during the past 2½ years.  The unempl
oyment rate unexpectedly declined 
0.2 percentage point, but like many other analysts, we have been inclined to see more 

weakness than strength in the totality of the results from the household survey, given 

that the employment measure from that survey and 
the participation rate both 
declined.  Based on our projected path for real GDP over the next several quarters, we 

continue to expect the unemployment rate to average around 8¼ percent through the 

first half of next year.  I should also note that the workweek was lower than we had 

expected, and average hourly earnings were flat
, rather than increasing slightly as we 
had expected.  In combination, these results suggest a modestly weaker trajectory for 

compensation and
, therefore,
 household spending than we had factored into the 
Tealbook. 
Two other key pieces of information released since the Tealbook were also 
weaker than expected.  In particular, vehicle assembly plans now point to a slower 

pace of motor vehicle production in the third and fourth quarters th
an we had 

projected in the Tealbook, whileŠ
as Steve will discuss shortly
Šthe latest foreign 
trade data were slightly to the soft side of our expectations in terms of the
ir implications for GDP growth. 
In all, these bits of information would cause us to shave about ¼ percentage point 
off our forecast for the pace of real GDP growth during the second half of this year, 

leaving our forecasted average growth rate for this quarter and next at an anemic 

1¼ percent. 
Turning to the medium term, we upgraded our outlook slightly relative to our July 
projection.  As Steve will discuss, the improvement, such as it is, partly reflects a 

somewhat less worrisome situation in Europe than we had previously believed.  As 

we described in the Tealbook, even after factoring in the disappointment that we think 

would ensue from an announcement of no change in the stance of monetary policy at 

the conclusion of this meeting, we judge that stock prices would remain on a slightly 

higher trajectory and the dollar would be slightly weaker than we assumed in the 

previous projection.  These small positive influences are only partly offset by the 

increase in oil prices, part of which may itself reflect the improvement in sentiment 

related to the crisis in Europe. 
The small upward revision 
to real GDP over the medium term led us to shave a 
little off of our projected path for the unemployment rate, which is shown in the top-

right panel of the exhibit.  Even by the end of next year, however, we expect no 

significant reduction in the unemploy
ment rate. As real GDP accelerates more into 
2014, the unemployment rate declines about ½ percentage point, ending that year at 

about 7½ 
percent. 
         
    
    
     
         
   
   
     
         
     
       
    
  
  Aside from the crisis in Europe, the other main concern that continues to loom 
over the domestic outlook is the fiscal cliff.  On this front, there have been no major 

developments recently, and we continue to expect none, 
at least through the 

November elections.  At this stage, I can only assure you that our decision to stand 

pat on our fiscal policy assumptions reflects no lack of concern or uncertainty on our 

part:  The fiscal cliff continues to figure prominently in our thinking as a serious 

threa
t to the still
-anemic recovery. 
Turning to the inflation outlook, the incoming data on core PCE price inflationŠ 
the 
middle
-right panel
Šhave been close to our expectations.  We continue to project 
that core inflation will hold steady at about 1½ percent through the end of 2014, 

reflecting anchored inflation expectations, a persistent margin of labor and product 

market sl
ack, and modest gains in imported goods prices. 
In response to the upward move in spot prices for crude oil since the July 
Tealbook, we have marked up our near-
term projection for headline PCE inflation
Š the middle
-left panel.  We have, however, made only small revisions to our near-
term 
food price forecast.  Although we now expect the quantity effects of the drought to be 

worse than we had forecast in July, the futures prices that we used in preparing our 

July food price projection had apparently already in
corporated almost all of the price 

effects.  Despite the upward pressure from food prices that we think will begin to 

show through around the end of this year, we expect headline inflation to step down 

slightly in the first part of next year, as the antici
pated reduction in crude oil prices 

implied by futures markets pushes down retail energy prices.  Steve will now 

continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.  In 1972, when Chinese Prime Minister Zhou Enl
ai was asked what 
he thought was the historic impact of the 
French 
Revolution, he famously answered: 
ﬁIt™s too soon to tell.ﬂ 
[Laughter] 
By those standards, assessing the implications of 
the European Central Bank™s plans to intervene in peripheral debt markets would 

seem hopelessly premature.  And yet, as Simon has described, anticipations of 

aggressive ECB action have substantially calmed European financial markets, slightly 

brightening an admittedly still
-cloudy outlook. 
As described in its announcement last week, the ECB plans to purchase sovereign 
debt on the secondary market, provided that the beneficiary governments enter into an 

arrangement with the region™s financial backstop facilities and agree to policy 

conditionality.  Although the ECB will be announcing neither a target ceiling for 

yields on peripheral debt nor the amounts it intends to purchase, it has signaled a 

more aggressive and sustained program than its earlier forays into bond markets. 
Beyond simply comforting investors that the ECB is riding to the rescue, these 
plans could ease financial stre
sses in a number of ways.  First, by lowering yields, the 

bond purchases would reduce public debt service burdens and improve fiscal 

sustainability.  Second, and as a related matter, by taking sovereign bonds out of the 

hands of private investors, ECB purchases may create room in those investors™ 

portfolios for new issues, thereby improving the governments™ access to financing.  
          
  
           
                 
   
   
         
                     
  
    Finally, the package of ECB purchases
, plus access to the regional financial backstop 
facilities
, is widely anticipated to involve less stringent conditionality, and thus less 
stigma, than the full
-blown IMF and EU rescue packages received by Greece, Ireland, 
and Portugal.  In consequence, it is more likely, though far from certain, that Spain 

and/or Italy may request financial assistance before market conditions have become 

so adverse that further financial turmoil is inevitable. 
With markets figuring in brighter prospects for official support, financial stresses 
over the next several months are likely to be less pronounced than we assumed in the 

July Tealbook, and we are anticipating that, barring further adverse shocks, European 

markets could soon begin the long, slow process of normalization.  However, we are 

still very far from being out of the woods.  In the near term, European l
eaders still 
need to work out the conditionality to be required of governments benefi
ting from the 
financial rescue facilities and ECB intervention, and that could be contentious.  

Additionally, IMF and EU officials are currently assessing the status of Gr
eece™s 
struggling adjustment programŠalthough Greece™s official creditors are expected to 

approve a much
-needed disbursement by October and postpone more difficult 
decisions until later, this is not assured, and a messy Greek exit from the euro area at 

this time could be quite dangerous. 
Taking a longer view, the ECB™s new program is not, to 
coin a phrase, a panacea. 
It can only give Europe breathing space to implement the fundamental reforms that 

will ultimately restore confidence.  If the Europeans do not make progress on the 

measures needed to achieve fiscal and financial stability
Šbudget consolidation, 
growth
-promoting structural reforms, and region-
wide banking initiatives
Šthe 
ECB™s ability to contain financial tensions will be sorely tested.  Accordin
gly, market 
confidence likely will not be fully restored until the peripheral economies prove they 

can cut their budgets, improve growth prospects, and strengthen their banksŠ
and all 

that could take a number of years. 
In consequence, economic activity in Europe is also likely to remain subdued for 
some time to come.  To be sure, the easing of financial stresses, combined with some 

data that have been less bleak than expected, have led us to project a somewhat 

shallower recession than we wrote down in the July Tealbook.  Even so, in our 

current projection, euro-area GDP continues to contract through the middle of next 

year and recovers only very weakly thereafter. 
The outlook for our other trading partners, while hardly as bleak as that for 
Europe, is nonetheless subdued.  Excluding the euro area, aggregate foreign growth 

dropped from roughly 4 percent in the first quarter to 
less than
 3 percent in the 
second, below its trend pace.  Moreover, since your last meeting, indicators such as 

PMIs and exports have ge
ner
ally come in on the soft side. 
These developments are worrisome, but considering the factors responsible for 
the slowdown, our best guess is that 
economic 
growth will bottom out in the coming 
quarters rather than deteriorate further.  The pace of 
deterioration in Europe, which 
accounts for much of the United Kingdom
™s stagnation this year, as well as the 
             
                               
              
                    slowdown in Asia™s exports, is projected to become only a little more pronounced in 

the second half of this year.  The recent weakness in U.S. growth has also weighed on 

our trading partners, but the U.S. economy should start picking up a few quarters 

down the road.  And much of Asia™s slowdown reflects the fading of the bounceback 

from Thailand™s floods and Japan™s tsunami last year.  All told, we 
anticipate that 
foreign growth outside the euro area will stay subdued at 3 percent over the remainder 

of this year.  It then picks up to 3¾ percent by 2014, as the euro area starts to recover, 

the U.S. economy picks up steam, and monetary policies around 
the world remain 

quite accommodative. 
Another factor weighing on foreign growth, especially in Asia, has been China™s 
slowdown from near double-digit rates in the past two years.  Chinese growth 

registered 7½ percent in the second quarter of this year.  With recent weak exports 

and PMIs leading us to revise down our forecast, we see growth remaining at that 

relatively subdued pace during the remainder of this year, before picking up to about 

8 percent thereafter. Under these circumstances, we continue to s
crutinize the data 
for indications of a hard landing, but we do not see any compelling signs that one is in 

the offing: 
 Retail sales growth has remained reasonably solid, housing prices have 

flattened out, and the government retains the monetary and fiscal scope to counter a 

decline in demand. 
The effect on oil prices of resurgent political tensions over Iran poses another 
threat to the global economy.  Crude oil prices have now retraced more than half of 

their decline from earlier this year, and our curre
nt projected trajectory of oil prices 
averages roughly 10 percent higher than in the July Tealbook.  A rise in oil prices of 

this magnitude should not substantially affect the foreign outlook.  By our rough 

estimates, it could reduce 
economic 
growth in the advanced economies by 
0.1 percentage point over the next year or so, while the effect on aggregate emerging 

markets growth is roughly a wash
, as gains by oil exporters offset losses by importers.  

By the same token, our inflation outlook is a bit higher i
n the near term but little 
changed further out.  However, no resolution of the problem of Iran™s nuclear 

program is in sight, and we are attuned to the risk of much steeper rises in oil prices. 
All told, considering the momentous developments taking place 
in the global 
economyŠMario Draghi™s plan to save the euro, China™s struggle to achieve a soft 

landing, and 
fluctu
ations in commodity marketsŠthe outlook for U.S. trade is, well, 
not so momentous.  In the first half of this year, notwithstanding the global slowdown 

and the rising dollar, net exports managed to eke out a 
small 
positive contribution to 
U.S. GDP growth.  We received trade data for July yesterday; both exports and 

imports fell, but the trade balance was little changed.  Accordingly, we retain o
ur 
view that for the next couple of quarters, the combination of slowing foreign growth, 

a still
-elevated dollar, and the effects of the drought on agricultural production leads 

to some moderation in export growth, and the external sector imposes a modest 
drag 
on the economy.  After that, net exports gradually shift back toward neutral, as the 

global economy picks up and European stresses subside, so that a reversal of flight-

to-safety flows allows the dollar to start depreciating.  Thanks to Mr. Draghi, th
is 
projection is based on a somewhat lower path of the dollar than in the July Tealbook, 
         
  
      
                     
   
                   
                                                         and thus a bit faster export growth and less drag from net exports.  Andreas will 

continue our presentation. 
MR. LEHNERT.
4 I™ll be discussing material from our recent 
QS report 
on financial stability 
and from an earlier memo on the effect of low interest rates.  In our 
report, the most prominent shocks we identified were an intensification of the 

European sovereign crisis and a U.S. recession, perhaps brought on by a s
uboptimal 
resolution of the ﬁfiscal cliff.ﬂ  The major vulnerabilities we highlighted were, first, 

the market™s perception that some large banks remain weak, despite substantial 

increases in capital and liquidity, which raises the likelihood of funding runs and 

increases the cost of raising capital; second, the unstable funding model of brokerŒ 

dealers
; and, third, the persistent risk of runs on money market funds. 
We have also placed increasing emphasis on vulnerabilities stemming from the 
low interest rate 
environment, and that™s what I™ll focus on today.  After all, long-
term Treasury yields haven™t been below 2.5 percent for a sustained period since 

1954, a time when the financial system was quite different. 
A low short-
term interest rate policy, given st
rained household and business 
fundamentals, is designed to improve macro performance.  The benefits arise, in part, 

from increases in asset prices and
, thus, the value of collateral held by businesses and 
households.  These increases should, in turn, enhan
ce financial stability. 
But a low 
rate environment could lead investors trying to boost yields to borrow too much, take 

on too much risk, or bid up asset prices enough to stretch valuations.  Relatedly, 

important parts of the financial system might become
 vulne
rable to a rapid rise in 
rates. 
To assess these risks, we surveyed a wide range of asset markets and financial 
institutions looking for signs of excessive valuations, greater leverage, 
or increased 

risk
-taking.  To summarize, we found little evidence that the low rate environment 
has fostered additional vulnerabilities to date: 
 Valuations for broad asset classes are 
not stretched
, and we identified only a few isolated pockets of increased 
risk
-taking. 
As shown by the top panel on your first exhibit, 
estimated term premiums 
for 
10-year Treasury yields are quite low, due in part to safe-haven demand for 

Treasuries resulting from strains in Europe.  Term 
premiums
Šand thus Treasury 
yields
Šcould increase quickly if, for example, concerns about the U.S. fis
cal situation were to intensify. 
Your next three panels cover valuations in three major U.S. asset classes: 
equities, residential real estate
, and corporate bonds.  Overall, valuations across these 
asset classes show little sign of pressure.  As shown in the middle left, stocks are not 

trading at unusually high multiples; indeed, forward price-
earnings ratios are 
generally well within their ranges over the past 20 years.  Our measure of residential 

real estate valuation, shown to the right, is near an all-
time low.  Risk premiums
 in 
4 The materials used by Mr. Lehnert are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 
       
           
                   
              
  
        
       the high-
yield corporate bond market
Šas measured by the implied forward spread far 
out in the future (the black line in the bottom-
left panel)
Šare near their average of 
the past 20 years, notwithstanding the extraordinary highs 
experience
d during the 
financial crisis. 
However, valuations of assets in narrower and less-liquid markets have shown 
signs of pressure. Issuance of so
-called leveraged loans has been robust this year.  
Moreover, there is a trend toward lighter use of loa
n covenants and increased 
leverage.  As shown to the right, average ratios of debt to earningsŠknown as a debt 

multiple
Šamong this class increased further this year, although it remains below its 
pre
-crisis levels. 
Your next exhibit considers evidence on l
everage and 
risk
-taking
.  In the 
nonfinancial sector, as shown by the pink and blue regions in the top panel, household 

and business leverage has continued the decline begun in the recession.  Government 

borrowing, by contrast, has picked up, leaving the ratio of debt held by the public to 

GDP at its highest level since W
orld W
ar II. 
As shown in the middle two panels, there are signs that, potentially, commercial 
banks are taking increased interest rate risk.  Banks have increased their holdings of 

long-
mat
urity securities. As a result, their portfolios may be more sensitive to a 
sudden rise in interest rates than they were a year ago, depending on their interest rate 

hedges.  The low interest rate environment, combined with an unlimited FDIC 

guarantee on transactions accounts, has attracted a surge of deposits to banks.  The 

ability to issue deposits at below
-market rates should benefit banks were rates to rise; 
however, we don™t have historical experience to judge the sensitivity of these new 

deposits to a rise in rates.  That said, as discussed in the Tealbook, results from a 

recent informal survey of banks suggested they did not think it was likely that 

deposits would decline rapidly when the added insurance expires.  We™re currently 

working with economists and supervisors from throughout the Federal Reserve 

System on an analysis of interest rate risk at banks and plan to include the results in 

our December report. 
Life insurance companies are vulnerable to extended periods of low interest rates, 
in part b
ecause they have a significant body of liabilities with guaranteed returns that 

exceed current yields on safe assets.  As a consequence, insurers may be feeling 

particular pressure to reach for yield by extending their exposure to duration and 

credit risk. 
Indeed, as shown in the bottom left, the average maturity of insurers™ 
bond portfolios has risen in recent years, as firms accept greater duration risk.  

However, the shift isn™t particularly dramatic, and we are working with colleagues 

here and at the F
ederal Reserve Bank of Chicago to understand the risks faced by, and 
posed by, these institutions. 
The panel to the right shows the rapid rise in assets of real estate investment 
trusts
ŠREITs
Šthat specialize in holding agency-
guaranteed mortgage
-backed 
sec
urities.  While these institutions are something of a niche player, their business 

model of funding agency MBS holdings with repo, while vulnerable to sharp rate 
            
    
                 
      
            
     
        
  
     
   
  
   
                                                   rises, has proved quite profitable in recent years, producing double-
digit returns for 
shareho
lders.  This growth is one of the clearest indications we have of the 
willingness of some investors to take on additional interest rate risk in order to earn 

higher current returns.  This willingness may be enhanced by the apparent safety of 

investing in G
SE-guaranteed securities. In terms of their systemic threat, at their 
current scale, the sudden distress of mortgage REITs would likely be painful but 

manageable for the broader financial system. 
I™ll conclude with a less quantifiable form of risk produced by the low 
interest 
rate 
environment, related to a sense that a great deal of money is sitting on the sidelines.  

Consider two examples:  First, respondents to the SCOOS report that their clients 

have significant unused borrowing capacity; and second, pr
ivate equity firms focused 
on leveraged buyouts have elevated levels of committed but uninvested capital.  
All 

of this and more amounts to ﬁdry powderﬂ that could be deployed quickly.  Thus, 

while our ongoing monitoring efforts have so far found little evi
dence that the low 
interest rate environment has led to excessive increases in leverage, asset valuation
, or 
risk
-taking, investors do have the means to rapidly shift their portfolios.  Ed Nelson 
will continue our presentation. 
MR. NELSON.
5 I will be referring to the packet 
labeled ﬁMaterial for Briefing 
on the Summary of Economic Projections.ﬂ 
As shown in the top panel of exhibit 1, under your individual assessments of 
appropriate monetary policy, you see real GDP expanding only moderately t
his year
, but you expect the pace of the recovery to pick up next year and that economic 

growth in 2014 and 2015 will be somewhat above its longer-run value.  

Correspondingly, you expect the unemployment rate, shown in the second panel, to 

stay near recent readings for the rest of the year
, before gradually declining over the 
subsequent three years.  All of you expect that the unemployment rate at the end of 

2015 will be appreciably below its present rate; nevertheless, almost all of you expect 

it to be above what you judge to be its longer-run normal level.  Turning to the 

bottom two panels, you generally expect total PCE inflation of around 1¾ percent 

over the four quarters of 2012.  For 2013 through 2015, you generally see core and 

overall inflation stayi
ng close to or slightly below your 2 percent inflation objective. 
Exhibit 2 tabulates the ranges and the central tendencies of your projections, 
along with comparisons to the June SEP and the current staff forecast.  Compared 

with your June projections, you now anticipate a slightly stronger recovery and a 

somewhat larger decline in the unemployment rate over the projection period.  Your 

inflation outlook is little changed.  The Tealbook forecastŠwhich embeds the 

assumption of no additional accommodationŠputs economic growth in 2013 and 

2014 at the lower end of your central tendency, and the unemployment rate above it; 

the 2015 forecasts, however, are within the central tendency.  The Tealbook forecast 

for inflation runs consistently below your central tendencies for 2013 to 2015. 
5 The materials used b
y Mr. Nelson are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
                   
             
     
     
       
   
      
     
               
        
          
  Exhibit 3 provides an overview of your assessments of the appropriate path for 
the federal funds rate.  As shown in the top panel, most of you think that it will not be 

appropriate to begin raising the funds rate until 2014 or later.  About two-
thirds of 
you now see firming only beginning in 2015 or 2016, compared with about one-third 

of you in June.  Four of youŠtwo fewer than in JuneŠ
now believe that economic 

conditions will warrant increasing the federal funds rate before 2014.  Two of you 

favoring a funds rate increase before 2014 cited the need to tighten policy relatively 

soon in order to prevent inflation from exceeding the Committee™s 2 
percent 

objective, and two pointed to the need to forestall financial imbalances.  Many of 

those who would not raise the funds rate until 2014 or later cited sizable output or 

unemployment gaps alongside an inflation profile unlikely to exceed 2 percent over 

the medium run. 
The bottom two panels of the exhibit provide your assessments of the app
ropriate 
target for the federal funds rate at the end of each year of the forecast period and over 

the longer run.  For the 6 participants who 
see the funds rate leaving the effective 

lower bound in 2014 
or earlier
, the median value for 
the funds rate at 
the end of 2014 
is 
1.75 percent.  The 12 participants who expect that the funds rate will not leave the 

lower bound until 2015 judge that the appropriate funds rate at the end of that year 

will be 1.6 percent or less, while the 1 
participant who sees the st
art of firming in 
2016 sees the funds rate at 75 basis points at the end of that year (not shown). 
Fourteen of you now judge that ﬁappropriate monetary policyﬂ calls for a more 
accommodative path for the federal funds rate than in your June SEP, involving 
either 
a lower target for the funds rate at the end of the initial year of firming or a shift out 

in the first year of firming.  Moreover, 11 of you indicated that appropriate policy 

calls for additional asset purchases
, at this meeting or before long. 
Exhibit 4 depicts the economic conditions that you anticipate for the year in 
which you expect the first funds rate increase. Your projected unemployment rates 

range from about 5¾ to 8 percent, with a median of 6½ percent, while your inflation 

projections 
are in a narrow range of roughly 1¾ to 2¼ percent, with a median rate of 
2 percent.  Generally, participants who expect the first funds rate increase in
 2012 or 2013 (shown by the 
blue triangle and 
white diamonds) see a higher level of 
unemployment at the time of 
the first funds rate increase
 than do those reporting later 
firming
 dates (shown by the gray circles, dark blue squares, and 
the 
gray triangle
). The final exhibit reviews your assessments of the uncertainty and risks 
surrounding your economic projections.  As shown in the top two panels in the 

column on the left, almost all of you continue to indicate that you judge the current 

level of uncertainty about GDP growth and unemployment to be higher than the 

average level over the past 20 years.  The co
rresponding panels to the right indicate 
that you continue to view the risks to GDP growth as weighted toward the downside 

and, accordingly, the risks to unemployment as weighted to the upside.  Many of you 

attributed your continued emphasis on downside growth risks to concerns about 

Europe and U.S. fiscal policy; other factors cited included uncertainty about the level 

and growth rate of potential output and the possibility of a hard landing in China.  
      
  
  
    
     
    
                                Turning to the bottom two panels, 8 of you assess the uncertainty attending your 

projections for total PCE inflation as higher, and another 10 of you see the 

uncertainty as broadly similar to the average level of uncertainty over the past 

two
 decades.  Most of you continue to see the risks to inflation, shown 
to the right, as 
broadly balanced.  Thank you.  That concludes the staff presentations. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much for your presentation.  The floor is 
open for questions.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Wilcox, the lower right-
hand panel 
displays a model estimate, and I 
was wondering what it™s an estimate of. 
MR. WILCOX. It™s a statistical exercise that tries to combine several different sources of 
information.  First and most broadly, it combines the payroll survey estimate of job gain with an 
adjusted measure from the household survey, 
where the adjustments
Š MR. LACKER.  Have been comparable. 

MR. WILCOX.  Štry to take the household measure and do about a dozen or 
15 adjustments that put it on
, as conceptually 
as possible, 
an apples
-to-apples basis with the 
establishment survey. 
The second category of information that it builds in is that we had one of our seasonal 
adjustment experts, Charlie Gilbert, take a close look at this series, specifically with a question in 

mind of trying to disc
ern effects on seasonal factors that stem from the timing of the sharp 
downdraft in employment in 2008 
and
 2009, and to advise us on the extent to which those timing 
effects may have bled into seasonal factors
, causing published estimates of seasonally adjusted 
job growth around the turn of the year to be systematically higher than they should actually be. 
The third type of information that™s built in is a regression
-based analysis of weather 
effects.  It seems like a dim memory at this point, but we had, a
s you will recall, an 
extraordinarily warm winter this year, and there was some speculation that that may have shifted 

the timing of employment.  Those weather
-related effects are pretty small, but they™re included 
           
    
                    
       
       
     here
, as well
, for the sake of completeness.  And then around all of that, what we do is just apply 
a simple 
Kalman 
filter to the resulting series in an effort to extract for you where we think all this 
statistical evidence would point in terms of what™s the best available estimate of job gain
, taking 
account of all that information that™s available to us. So it™s
, at some level
, nothing more than a 
statistical exercise to try to extract signal from noise.  On the other hand, it packs in a 
tremendous amount of information. 
MR. LACKER.  Those all sound like very useful and constructive statistical initiatives.  I 
just wondered what the target you were aiming at trying to estimate is. I mean, is it the trend or 

the current value? 
MR. WILCOX. It™s essentially a smooth
ed trend that takes account of both the 
information in the establishment survey and the household survey.  I mean, I could reiterate: 
It takes account of that
; it tries to adjust for weather and 
seasonal
Š MR. LACKER.  You™re aiming at a true measure of the cu
rrent gain
, or a true measure of 
the trend? 
MR. WILCOX.  True measure of the current gain, smoothing through 
a variety of 
sources of noise. 
MR. LACKER.  A smooth measure of the current gain.  I™m less confused now. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You™re confused at a 
higher level. President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I actually drove back from our western 
symposium this year with two geriatric dogs and other things, but I want to comment on the fact 

that driving across the s
tate of Nebraska, what
 struck me was the drought and the corn crops and 
just how dead the entire s
tate of Nebraska looked
, at least from Interstate 80. 
       
                                 You made some reference to the drought and the corn crop, and I remember reading 
somewhere
ŠI couldn™t find it in my searchingŠabout your estimated effects of the drought on 
GDP this quarter and next.  And I™d like to hear you talk a little more about what you think those 

effects were
; the ramifications of those effects, of how they bleed, in some sense, through in your 

forecast t
o your employment forecast, for example, through an Okun™s l
aw measure because 
GDP is lower
; how much impact you thought it had on the gap in the near term; and how that 
dissipates through your forecast.  Can you just walk me through those linkagesŠt
his is clearly a 
classic supply shock of 
a dr
oughtŠand how much then it feeds into other things that matter that 
we look at a lot for monetary policy? 
MR. WILCOX.  So I™ll take a first crack at it and invite my other colleagues to jump in 
with additional i
nformation.  We thought in July we had built in some quantity-
related effects
Š about $10 billion is my recollectionŠon farm output.  This time, based on USDA assessments of 

field conditionsŠ
people may be doing something a little more systematic, out walking
 in the 
fields with their clipboard and so forth to look at corn yields
; corn is one of the crops that is most 
affected
Šwe think that it™s about a $30 billion hit to real farm output this time, so substantially 
bigger than what we had built into the July projection. 
We think that that™s likely to show up mostly in a decumulation of inventories in the third 
and fourth quarters.  The way that inventory arithmetic works, the hit to GDP growth is going to 

be concentrated in the third quarter.  We™ve got the same rate of inventory decumulation built 

into the fourth quarter, but because it™s the same rate of decumulation in both quarters, the 
effect 
on GDP growth 
we™ve penciled in 
is zero in the fourth quarter.  
We also think there will be a 
small additional negative effect on agricultural exports as well, so that™s where in terms of the 

GDP accounting
Š        
       
   
                       
   
  
                    
MR. PLOSSER.  And that led to how much of a decrease in your estimate of 
GDP growth for the third quarter? 
MR. WILCOX.  About 0.8 
percent
age point o
n GDP growth
. MR. PLOSSER. 
Yes, 0.8 
percent
age point.  That™s what I thought 
I remembered. 
MR. WILCOX.  We thinkŠwe hopeŠthat™s going to be a transitory supply shock and 
that next year
, our planning assumption has been, crop yields are going to come back to normal.  
Now, there™s sort of a philosophical question about when that actually occurs.  If we were 
operating 
in annual data, it would be perfectly clear that it would happen in 2013.  
However
, the 
way that the BEA does it, and we™ve been in very close contact with them, is 
to smooth that 
through the four quarters of the calendar year, so that snap back to normal crop yields, 
basically 

at this point, of course, by assumption, occurs in the firs
t quarter. 
So we™re mimicking 
the 
BEA™s algorithm in packing in the return to a normal level of GDP in the first quarter of 2013.  

That™s not based on any pretense that anybody actually knows that that™s the way the corn plants 

are going to grow in 2013.  
That™s just the 
BEA 
methodology.  I wouldn™t have anything better to 
suggest to them if I were in their shoes. 
Now, farm proprietors™ income actually sees a much smaller effect because prices are up 
and there™s crop insurance, and so the implications for 
nominal farm income are much less 
severe than they are for real output. 
We think that there™s likely to be very little effect on 
employment because we™ve made the assumption that employers are going to smooth through 

this transitory effect.  I wouldn™t be surprised, of course, if there was some effect on things like 

farm equipment manufacturers and that sort of thing, but I think that™s going to be lost in the 

noise in terms of our ability to actually 
estimate it. 
       
                               
   
   MR. PLOSSER.  So this wouldn™t show up in 
any sense on your estimates of the 
magnitude of your output gap over the next two quarters? 
Would you raise that? 
MR. WILCOX.  M
echanically, I suspect our output gap will be a little wider over the 
second half of this year, and then it will just come back in the first quarter of 2013.  Is that right, 
Bill? 
MR. 
WASCHER
.  Yes, that™s right.  Because we tend to set potential growth on an 
annual basis, we didn™t make an explicit adjustment to the gap measures you see in the Tealbook 

for the effects of the 
drou
ght
.  I would say that in terms of when we look at Okun™s l
aw relationships and thinking about the path of the unemployment rate, 
we did take out the effect of 

the drought from potential in that equation.  So we didn™t want the drought to affect the 

unempl
oyment rate forecast. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Ye
s, that™s kind of what I was trying to get at.  Okay.  Thank you very 
much. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  One minor place it might show up, because we didn™t do the 
adjustment, would be in the Tealbook 
B rules thing. It™s pretty small, but the 
rules
 would 
respond to that. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Did I just understand correctly that you removed the effect of the 
drought on the gap, the unemployment rate gap? 
MR. WILCOX.  In our Okun™s l
aw analysis, in setting the unemployment rate. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It will bounce right back. 

MR. WILCOX.  I™m sorry? 
                           
               
    VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The effects are just going to go away in two quarters. 
MR. WILCOX. It is a transitory effect.  The fu
nds rate is constrained at zero.  So it 
doesn™t have any implication for the funds rate.  And in terms of calibrating the response of the 

unemployment rate to the GDP gap, we sterilized the GDP gap from transitory dro
ught
-related 
effects on GDP. 
MR. LACKER
.  Okay.  So let me just ask the question for which 
this is most germane
Š do inflation dynamics depend on this adjustment? 
MR. WILCOX. 
I think we™re talking about splitting a micron here, butŠ 
MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, but I™m just very curious about the principle here. 
MR. WILCOX.  The methodology is intended precisely to seal off the implications for 
core inflation.  I should say, of course, 
the first
-order implication for inflation is through food 
prices. 
MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, right, righ
t. MR. WILCOX.  That has been allowed to feed through. 

MR. LACKER.  Right.  But in terms of the gap™s effect on inflation, you want to sterilize 
it from the effect that the dr
ought is going to have on real output and employment in a 
year 
or 
two. 
MR. WILCOX
.  Correct, y
es. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question for Andreas.  
On exhibit 2, you have 
this chart that looks at nonfinancial sector credit to GDP.  
I keep staring at it, and I am still trying 
to figure out what implications I™m supposed to draw from it.  The secular uptrend from 1956, at 
          
      
              
       
                   
best
, flattens out for a while
.  So the first question is what implication do you think we were 
supposed to draw from this
?  And, second, if you looked at a char
t of 
nonfin
ancial sector assets 
to GDP, would that also show 
mostly a secular 
uptrend?  And then, how do you put those two 
together? 
MR. LEHNERT.  I think the
re are
 key macro questions that are impli
cated 
by your 
question, which I™m not going to touch, but 
just from a financial stability perspective, at the very 
highest level
, in some sense, financial stability concerns in a low-
rate environment arise when 
you see people and businesses borrowing more.  This picture was just supposed to 
be an easy 
way 
to portray the fact that we™re not seeing households and businesses borrowing more. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Right.  We could 
also interpret it as, gee, credit to GDP 
is still really, really high
, and
, therefore, that means bad things.  That is what I was sort of 
getting 
at. 
So you don™t take a negative signal away at all from the total level of credit to GDP is still 
high? 
MR. LEHNERT.  Ye
s, okay.  I treated that as a separate question.  So then there™s a 
question, are we approaching some kind of 
fiscal moment
, some sort of S
argent
Wallace 
moment, where the global carrying capacity for U.S. sovereign obligations is being reached? 

That™s something that we highlighted in our report as a potential risk.  
If there™s 
a material 
worsening in the fiscal outlook, 
or if 
there™s some really ugly resolution to the debt ceiling 

negotiations in January and so forth, all those things could have negative implications for future 

stability. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But the total level here, if you add household, business, 
and government together, that™s not a good sign. 
MR. LEHNERT.  If you look across countr
ies
, you would see a lot of different 
levels. 
           
          
   
  
      
    
   
           
    
     
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
They™re 
all over the place. 
MR. LEHNERT
.  Exactly.  So I don™t know why Denmark is one and Japan i
s a different 
one, but we can just judge the 
United States
 by its own history. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  First, I wanted to thank Andreas for a very good summary
, very helpful 
graphics
, and so on.  We™re in the middle of doing our 
SABR
 analysis for banks, and one of the 
positive attributes we have noticed is that we seem to be seeing a brighter picture for the average 

bank.  For example, the ones that we rate one or two probably are performing 
the best that we™ve 
seen in terms of the percentage of potential 
downgrades since December of 2006.  So I think 
that™s one positive aspect that wasn™t included.  I™m not being critical, but when you look at your 

second panel of long-
term securities held by comm
ercial banks and so on, there seems to be a 
healthier tenor, and we™re not done with the analysis yet, but I just wanted to point that out. 
With regard to seasonality, I wanted to ask Dave Wilcox about the August employment 
numbers; I think I™m correct in 
saying that that is a number that gets revised more frequently 

than others.  I think 17 of the last 22 years, i
t™s been revised, and if I remember correctly, last 
year it went from zero to 44,000 to 104,000, and I assume we™re taking account of the fact th
at 
that is often a highly unreliable number.  Am I correct? 
MR. WILCOX.  We™re taking account of the fact that it is the best possible information, 
and we don™t confuse it with truth, absolutely.  [Laughter] 
MR. FISHER.  So we assume it gets revised more o
ften than not? 
MR. WILCOX. 
Yes. 
           
          
   
              
             
  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
The BLS has a 
confidence intervalŠ
the 90 percent 
confidence 
interval is 
plus or minus 100,000.  So that gives you an idea. 
MR. WILCOX.  It™s a sample-
based estimate. It is based on a very large 
sample of 
employers. It™s a universal sample of large employers and a statistically drawn probability 
sample of medium an
d smaller employers, but there are a host of issues associated with 
constructing that number, including the fact that not everybody th
at ultimately will report
, 
reports in the first wave of responses and that seasonal adjustment, as my remarks described 

earlier, involves 
a great deal of science but some art as well.
  So I don™t have any specific reason 
for doubting or casting aspersions on the August number, but you™re absolutely correct that 

month in and month out, that™s a number that is subject to two-sided revision. 
MR. FISHER.  And then lastly, just listening to Steve Kamin, this is perplexing about oil 
and gas 
prices
, and particular
ly prices at the pump.  There may be some seasonality in terms of 
the 
switchover 
that
 occurs, but given the weaker economy, which I think almost all of our 
forecasts have envisioned, and given the production that™s taking place stateside, even 

accounting f
or the storm that took place in the Gulf, it just seems odd that we might expect oil 
prices to increase rather than hold level or decrease.
  And f
or what it™s worth, the ﬁoiliesﬂ that I 
speak to
Šfrom the independents to Tillerson at Exxon and so onŠ
their expectation is that this 
has been a bit of a bulge, and that it™s more likely to settle down and actually decrease somewhat.  

For what it™s 
worth
Šand I always emphasize that because Mr. Tarullo insists that I do so when I 
talk about my anecdotal evidence
ŠI just wanted to pass that on. 
MR. KAMIN
.  Thank you. 
Just to be clear, our baseline forecast for crude oil prices in 
the markets is, indeed, to decline over time from the current level. 
MR. FISHER.  It wasn™t clear the way you presented it.  So I wanted 
to add that. 
      
          
                     
    
  
   
    
   MR. KAMIN
.  Yes.  So just to clarify, what I was alluding to was future upside risks that 
could take place if geopolitical problems in the Middle East became more pronounced than they 
are now. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to come back to the financial 
stability handout, exhibit 2, 
chart
 1, which is ﬁN
onfin
ancial 
Sector 
Credit
-to-GDP Ratio.
ﬂ In 
answer to the earlier question, you said 
that the cross
-country evidence on this was all over the 
map, and that does not gibe with what I understood the cross-country evidence to be, which was 

that this line is basically trending up across the developed economies.  S
o it looks very similar 
actua
lly. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Sorry. I meant the cross-country evidence on the level.  I thought that 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley was asking, is 2.5 a magic number? I mean, this number is much bigger 
in some countries and much smaller in other countries. 
MR. BULLARD.  Oka
y, but the picture would look the same. 
MR. LEHNERT. 
Yes. 
MR. BULLARD. 
It has always been trending up, I guess.  The developed world has 
always been trending up, 
is that right? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
The tricky part about this is if you have a secular trend 
of more intermediation, then this is going to be an upward-trending number, and so the degree of 

intermediation in a financial system really is important in terms of what 
number you 
get. 
               
         
              
    
              MR. BULLARD.  When people showed this picture to me over the year
s, I always said, 
well, this was 
financial market deepening
, and 
good things are happening in the 
intermediation 
sector
.  It didn™t pan out so well later. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Well, and presumably by analogy, 
then
, the fact that it™s 
now falling 
for the household and business sectors 
isŠ MR. BULLARD.  Y
es.  Okay, thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I just 
wanted to make a comment on the 
financial stability report. I continue to find a lot of value in this, and I think particularly as we 

look at these trends 
in a low interest rate environment, I would take no exception to the 
conclusion that right now imbalances are not obvious.  But just thinking back to how we thought 

about land values in the 1980s, in the late 1990s and early 2000s, as we watched banks begin to 

concentrate in commercial real estate and even some of the subprime exposures, the point at 

whi
ch to know when to take signal from some of those things is very difficult, notwithstanding 
supervisors and others 
looking at them.
  So I think as you continue to monitor this, as we get into 
December and beyond
, looking at where these trends are going 
wil
l be 
very important. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any other questions for our colleagues? 
[No 
response]  Okay.  Seeing none, on the agenda, we have an opportunity for participants who want 

to raise questions or issues related to financial stability
.  And Vice Chairman
, if you™d like to 
start off
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen and I were in B
asel 
over 
the weekend, and I have to say that there was a 
pretty strong sense of unanimity that what the 

ECB did was essentially the best that t
hey could accomplish, given the various constraints under 
                              
   
                 
  
 which 
they were 
operating.  The fact that the purchases could be unlimited means that the 
program has the potential for actually being an effective backstop, and the fact that the ECB will 
be pari p
assu 
with other bondholders is important because it really will reduce the pressures on 
private holders.  
So in effect, 
there may be private holders, if they view this as credible, who will 
actually want to invest in these sovereign instruments for a carry trade because the yield 
curves 

in these countries, 
of course
, are very, very steep. 
There™s also a bit of carrot now to incent proper actions by the government.  So if you do 
the right thing, we will intervene and we will hold down your debt service cost.  And I don™t 

think th
ere was that carrot before
, so I think that™s pretty significant.  I think that the ECB has 

essent
ially put on the table something that could take the risk of an interest rate-debt service-
fiscal deficit spiral a bit off the table as long as the countries do the right thing.
  And in addition, 
if these purchases do, in fact, materialize, I think this does push you in the direction toward 

further fiscal union.  After all, the ECB is backstopped by 
the entire 
euro zone, so such purchases 
will increase the joint and several nature of the union.
  And finally, I thought the other thing that 
was noteworthy abo
ut the ECB action was that it was a 22 to 
1 vote, with only 
Weidmann
 of the 
Bundesbank dissenting.  Given the fact that the German political leadership, 
at least for now
, seems to be supporting the ECB actions, this means that the Bundesbank™s opposition i
s somewhat marginalized at this point. 
So that™s the good news. 
Despite this, I don™t think we should kid ourselves.  I think the situation remains very 
tenuous despite the ECB™s supports.  I™d be, probably, slightly darker than Steve™s comments on 

this.
  Several issues worth highlighting: 
First, the ECB program would only activate if the 
countries actually negotiate an MOU with the 
euro group, and already we™re hearing signs 
that 
Spain seems to be reluctant or slow in terms of pursuing it.  In fact, the Spanish may decide that 
                       
         
       
            the backstop might be e
ffect
ive even if they don™t seek an MOU.  That seems like a highly risky 
strategy, but it is something that they might decide to do.
  Second, the program obviously will 
only continue if they stay on the progra
m. And, third, it™s going to take a while for this all to be 
implemented because the MOU has to be negotiated with the e
uro group
, and all of the finance 
ministers have to agree, and several parliaments actually have to approve the MOU.  So this idea 
that this is going to be happening very, very quicklyŠ
I think the market is probably a little bit 
ahead of itself in terms of how quick
ly this will come into play. 
Other issues
Šthe 
ECB program will not necessarily crowd in investors, because it™s not 
clear how long this is going to last.  So you might buy things, but you still have quite a bit of 

risk.  
You still have a very bad feedback 
loop from the austerity programs to the economy, to 
fiscal performance
, and
 the state of the banking system.  This doesn™t take any of that off the 
table, and there™s still no road map as to where we™re actually going in terms of the ultimate 

destination
:  What does greater fiscal union in Europe look like? 
So this is a very important 
thing that the ECB has done.  I think they did the best that they could possibly do, and the good 

thing is they put the problem back in the lap of the governments, 
where it b
elongs.  They have 
done what they can do now, and now it™s up to the governments to decide, both in the core and in 

the periphery, if 
they™re going to go along. 
The basic model
, though, of this whole situation hasn™t changed.  Countries have to show 
they™r
e on a sustainable path to regain market access.  The core countries are unwilling to be 
explicit about the level of support because of 
fears that this will undermine the effort.  The 
constitutional court decision in Germany today, which was actually mostly positive, affirmed 

that the German commitment is limited to 
•190 billionŠthat™s it, and so that™s sort of 
significant. 
            
     
          
              
  
   
     
 I think the unwillingness of the German Constitutional C
ourt to be explicit does create 
uncertainty that makes progress more difficult.
  So we do still have a long way to go, and we 
don™t have big, solid backstops to absorb shocks or support confiden
ce.  The ESM
ŒEFSF resources are
 still very much too small to credibly backstop Spain and Italy, and the ECB support 
may be too uncertain as t
o its sustainability.  So it™s progress, but there a
re still a lot of questions 
on the table. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you for the financial stability report.  Like President George, 
I do appreciate the monitoring that you™re doing in this area.  I just had two quick questions.  

They both relate to money market funds.  We™ve had an SEC proposal that wasn™t proposed, and 

I was wondering about your perspective looking at Europe, 
where there™s more than
 $1 trillion of 
money market funds 
and 
they have a mix of floating and fixed NAVs.  I don™t know how much 
time you spent looking at the European money market funds, but I™d be interested in your 

perspective on the industry™s concern with the floating NAV, which se
ems to have been 
successful in stopping forward movement.  And then the second question is, given that they have 

both floating and fixed NAVs in Europe, and the deposit rate went down to zero, is there 

anything to infer about interest on excess reserves fr
om the European money market fund 
experience with the deposit rate going to zero
? MR. LEHNERT. 
Are
 those questions you™d like me to answer? 
[Laughter] 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If not here, at another time. 

MR. LEHNERT.  Very, very briefly, and I certainly don™t approach your expertise in this 
area, we™ve long maintained that the redemption of par, what you call the fixed NAV, is useful in 

certain circumstances.  There are certain elements of the U.S. tax cod
e and other things that 
             
    
     
        
  
   
          
     
     
                                                                 make it useful
.  But basically
, at the end of the day, it™s just a safe place to put your money
, and 
if 
it floats up and down a bit, it™s not the end of the world.  And, of course, the European 
experience highlights that, although p
resumably their tax treatment might be slightly different. 

Then what™s happened to European money markets since the deposit rate went to zero? It
™s maybe still a little early to tell what the long
-run effects are, but the initial wave of reports is that 
there hasn™t been an implosion of the money markets. 
MR. POTTER.  One fund closed.  The Bank of AmericaŒMerrill Lynch fund closed. 

MS. LIANG
.  I guess I would just add that even at current rates, the proportion of U.S. 
funds that are waiving fees is really
 quite high, so the implications of further reductions in 
money fund rates could have effects.  S
ome ballpark estimates
Šthey are not precise
Šis 
that 
about 70 percent of U.S. funds are waiving their fees at this pointŠthat™s a pretty big number. 
CHAIRMAN BE
RNANKE.  Okay.  Why don™t we take a break for lunch?  When we 
come back, I™ll talk briefly about the experimental consensus forecast, and then we™ll go to the 

economic go
-round.  Why don™t we reconvene at 1 o™clock?
 [Lunch recess] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
6 Why
 don™t we 
re-commence?  Please feel free to finish 
your fruit or your cookie. I™ll provide the entertainment here.  [Laughter] 
I™d like to talk for just 
a few minutes about 
the 
latest iteration of the experimental consensus forecast.  You have a 
handout 
with that title. It proceeded in the same way as in previous iterations
:  The staff sent out 
a preliminary Tealbook forecast about a week in advance and 
received your comments. We also 

had the benefit 
this 
time of having the SEP.  So using all that, 
we came up with the forecast 
that™s shown in table 1 on page 1, and which is diagrammed in exhibit 1 on page 4. 
6 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
                  
           
      
    
  
      Like the Tealbook, this forecast or projection is conditioned on no change in policy.  That 
is, it™s 
conditioned on the August policies of continuing the MEP and late 2014 guidance.  
Generally speak
ing, the data are quite similar to 
the 
JulyŒAugust consensus, which is shown 
immediately below.  One exception is the 2013 real GDP forecast on the very first line, 
2.2 percent, which is a little bit weaker.  That was not inconsistent with the comments that came 

on the first draft
; most people either saw the near term as being a bit weaker or about the same
.  But I want to come back to that number in a moment.  The unemployment and inflation numbers 

are pretty similar, and if you care to look at the figure, you™ll see that the trajectories are very 

similar obviously, particularly relative to the standard errors. 
Like last time
, we also looked at the consensus forecast under alternative policy 
assumptions, and that™s given in table 3 on page 3.  Under each variable, the first line, the status 

quo is, again, the same as the consensus forecast in t
able 1.  That™s the forecast assuming the 
August policies continue.  The subsequent lines include, first, a chan
ge in the guidance to 
mid-2015, so simply 
a mechanical moving out of the interest rate path to mid-2015, and then 
subsequent 
additions of 
a $750 billion or $1 trillion LSAP program.  So that gives the 
alternative
s.  The differences are consistent with the 
FRB
/US analysis
; I™ll come back to that 
point as well.
  And 
exhibit
 2 shows the paths for the federal funds rate, the unemployment 
rate, 
and inflation under optimal control, under the no-
policy
-change consensus forecast in red, and 
then the alternative policies provided in t
able 3. 
Now, this time an issue came up
, which was less of a concern last time, but 
it raises an 
important question that I think the subcommittee is going to have to look at, which is that, of 

course, the SEP is conditional on each person™s view of optimal monetary policy.  And in this 

case, if you turn to table 2, which shows median forecasts in the September SEP, you™ll see the 
        
           
     
    
  
     
    
      SEP is broken into two categories
: all participants and participants who assume further easing. 
A major
ity of people submitted a forecast in which they assumed that the guidance would be 
advanced to 2015 and that we would undertake additional asset purchases. 
So the SEP submissions actually assume that change in policy.  So then the question is, 
how do you get from those SEP projections back to the no-policy-
change baseline?
  And what 
the staff proposed, and what they did, 
was basically they took these policy differentials that are 
in t
able 3
, and they subtracted from the SEP results to get the baseline.  An
d to the extent that 
those differentials are not accurate or are different from what people expect, then that will, of 

course, create some noise in the baseline forecast. 
So I raise this for a couple of reasons.  The first is that we need to think aboutŠ
and we 
talked about this last time
Šwhether the consensus forecast we would want to release would be 
the pre-
meeting status quo policy forecast
ŠI think President Lockhart suggested that last time
Š or the postmeeting inclusive
-of-the-action forecast, or both.  We could consider both
; I think we 
need to discuss that.  If we do both, then we will have to figure out how to make sure people are 

comfortable with both the before and the after, if you see what I™m saying. 
For this meeting, I think it will not 
be 
very m
uch of a problem.  What I had proposed to 
do is, as was given to you earlier on, in 
item
 5 after the policy decision tomorrow, I will ask you 

whether you are comfortable with the consensus forecast inclusive of the policy action.  And if 

we do take policy 
action, then this whole issue will be irrelevant because we™ll be looking at the 
policies assuming 
the further easing
Šat least for those participants who submitted that. 
But I 
just want to flag this point and note that we are planning a discussion in October of this whole 

project, and certainly one of the issues we™ll want to discuss is whether or not we want to look at 

ex ante, ex post
, or both forecasts, and how we would best extract that information.  So, again, 
                   
               
         
    tomorrow after the policy decision, I™ll ask you if you are comfortable with the consensus 
forecast, including whatever policy decisions we m
ake; are 
comfortable, with reservations; or 
have a 
very 
different view.  And 
I™ll 
ask you
, if you have a different view, 
to briefly state 
what 
that 
difference is.
  Any questions or comments? Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
You have this issue that the SEP has some people 
who 
have no change in policy; others have changes in policy.  That™s going to still be an outstanding 

issue going forward.  Do you have any thoughts on how we wouldŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that™s what I™m raising
Šwe have to figure out how to 
deal with that
.  One possibility would be to specifyŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  A, B
, and C? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, ye
sŠI suppose.  If we™re going to do the ex ante, 
before
-meeting projection, then everybody would be asked to make a projection conditional on 
the policy prior to the meeting, and the forecast could be used to say, 
ﬁWe thought this was 
unsatisfactory.  That™s why we took the action we did today.
ﬂ  Alternatively, we could ask for a 

forecast conditional on one or more policy actions.  But that™s an issue that 
this particular 
exercise has made clear, and I™m just flagging it for discussion by the subcommittee. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It™s interesting to see the difference that people submit in 
terms of the policy, because you actually find out what people think 
about how 
efficacious the 
policy is
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, of course.  
That™s right.  That™s certainly one of the 
benefits of doing that.  But everything that we are considering here also has the cost of 

multiplying the number of projections and forecasts we™re asking people to do, and that™s 

something we need to take into account.  
President Lacker. 
       
              
         
           
          
MR. LACKER.  You mentioned parts of the consensus forecast process.  We™re asked to 
provide a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, and I™d urge the staff and all of us to give 
some thought to what that ought to mean.  As I read the instructions, I thought of f
our different 
interpretations of that.  You take as a given that what we™re trying to do in writing down a 

forecast is 
to write
 down the mean of a joint distribution of the economy and policy.  Well, if you 
ask us to submit a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, are you asking us to replace our 

reaction function with one that™s fixed at that path unchangingly, 
and averaging over that? 
What 
do all 
of 
the shocks have to be? 
What™s the most likely outcome that delivers that as the policy 
reaction
Šwhat
 economy is weak enough to justify that policy?  That™s a different question.  Or, 
do we take 
our reaction function and add-
factor it so that it delivers that policy 
as a mean? 
There™s a bunch of different ways you can think of doing that, but we ought to be precise about 

it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course
Šwe™ll have to be precise.  These are 
complexities. 
One possibility would be to have everybody, again, assume appropriate monetary 
policy and 
deliver that joint distribution 
that you™re describing; and then, 
try to see if th
ere™s a 
center of gravity 
of that, which looks like the consensus; describe that consensus; and then 
describe those wh
o differ and qualitatively how they differ.  So that would be one approach.  
Another approach could be, for example, to ask people to use a specific reaction function or to 

specify their own reaction function.  
President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. 
Yes
Šthank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I like the idea
, in principle, 
of having a consensus forecast based on status quo policy and then a consensus forecast based on 

the policy action.  I think, though, that 
in practice
, the latter is going to be very challenging
, because you could easily imagine that the Committee could come up with a choice of a policy 
            
  
     
                 
    
action that they had not considered ex ante.  And then it becomes very difficult to know how the 
timing would work and to 
get the logistics to work. 
CHAIRMAN BERNA
NKE.  No, absolutely.  And again, I think Governor Yellen™s 
subcommittee will solve these problems for us [
laughter] and bring that to us in October.  
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Let me just reiterate on this. I do think that the market expectation o
f the Committee™s policy as of a certain date, which encompasses all aspects of monetary policy, is 

a fixed point that we could rally around.  Everyone c
an give their prognostication based on that.  
That would give us just one exercise to do.  Usually the 
market ex
pectation is not a long way off.  
It might be somewhat off, but it™s not a long way off, and it would simplify the exercise in my 

mind and would keep it clear
er what we™re 
doing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s, of course, what the British and some others do. 

MR. BULLARD.  Ye
s. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Does that address President Lacker™s concerns?  I wouldn™t have thought 
so. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not exactly.  Only if it™s approximately 
right
. MR. EVANS. 
Yes
Šright. 
CHAIRMAN BERN
ANKE.  Anybody else?  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  Narayana made the point I was going to make. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments or questions? 
Again, we will be 
discussing this at the next meeting.
  President Evans. 
             
    
                    
   
   
        
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a question 
that™s a little bit different
? I
t was triggered by 
some comments that President Fisher made earlier in asking questions, where he alluded to the 
fact that some people around the table would be, however you put it, more accepting of a high
er 
inflation rat
e than others, or whatever.  And in exhibit 2 on page 5, this question comes to my 

mind, which is, 
there is an optimal control path that is shown that has inflation rising to
ŠI think 
it™s 2.3 percent, 
if it™s co
nsistent with previous Tealbook-
style analyse
s. I personally don™t see 
anything in this path that™s inconsistent with our long
er-run strategic approach that we adopted in 
January, and I just wonder if that™s the sense of the Committee or if there™s an important 

divergence of opinion there, which seems to be one of the points that President Fisher might 

have been raising. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we are clear that our objective
s are
Šthink of a 
quadratic objective function.  They™re symmetrical.  The
re is an 
increasing marginal cost 
of being away from each objective. 
We have a balanced approach, but people w
ill have different 
models of the economy, and they™ll have different weights in their objective functions.  So this 
is 
obviously not a purely value-fee projection.  
President Bullar
d. MR. BULLARD. Is 
exhibit 2 something that would be distributed as part of the 
consensus 
forecast
? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, nothing has been decided, but I would
n™t 
imagine 
we would want to do all of those things. 
MR. BULLARD.  So this is just an internal document, 
like the ones we always use. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. EVANS.  I wasn™t asking a question about communications.  I was asking more a 
question about how we interpret our long
er-run strategic document, 
because at various times
, we 
          
          
                
    
  make diffe
rent comments about these types of outcomes, and it strikes me that there™s less 
agreement on that particular observation than sometimes is given by the words that we use. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I™ve said in press conferences that it™s a symmetric 
objective a
nd we have a balanced approach, and so on.  
Anyone else? 
[No response] 
All right. 
Now we come to the main event. Let™s start ou
r economic go-round with President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Intermeeting data
, I think, 
have done little to 
alter the economic picture.  We
™re in a period of sluggish economic growth, clearly.  
Our Fifth 
District survey measures, which fell sharply in July, 
have 
bounced back to neutral readings now, 
and the tenor of our anecdotal reports has been middling of late, consistent with reports we™
ve 
been hearing since the spring.  While activity is weak, we
™re not seeing any signs in our D
istrict 
of a dramatic slowdown around the cornerŠ
or a dramatic pickup
, for that matter. 
I thought it was appropriate, Mr. Chairman, that at our last meeting you took a longer-
term perspective by focusing on economic growth over the entire recovery.  As you noted, real 

GDP growth has averaged around 2 percent since the recovery began.  I think 2.2 percent is the 

pre
cise number.  We keep seeing swings in growth every couple of quarters around that average.  
So it mak
es sense to focus on the longer-run path around which we™re fluctuating, rather than 
just the last quarter or two.
  At our last meeting, Mr. Chairman, you talked about why growth 
was so low, and you discussed the spider charts put together by Board economists Greg Howard, 

Robert Martin, and Beth Anne Wilson.  I believe they refer to them as butterfly charts, but I™m 

not taking a stand on insects here.  
The 
main purpose of their paper was to show that advanced 

economies recover as rapidly from banking and financial crises as they do from other recessions, 

and I thought they did a pretty convincing job of that.  
Their charts also show that the current 

recovery
 in U.S. GDP tracks quite closely the typical advanced economy recovery from banking 
        
                                        and financial crises
, as well as the typical advanced economy recovery from housing slumps.  
The message I take away from their work is that we shouldn™t have expected to do much better 
than what we™ve experienced, and I think that™
s consistent with the message from some other 
research along the same lines.
  Now, the authors don™t focus on the notion of a gap, however.  
And for many people right now, the motivation for furt
her stimulus is that the relevant gap is 
quite large. 
I was quite pleased to see the memo from Bruce Fallick and Jeremy R
udd on this subject.  
It™s 
a helpful, well-organized description of how the staff thinks about and estimates economic 
slack
Šlays it out
 quite clearly.  And I think this memo should help clarify our mutual 
understanding going forward. 
But I
™d like to make a suggestion or two for further clarifying our 
discussions.  My suggestion is that we distinguish carefully between two distinct concep
tual 

notions of slack.  One concept is defined by the number to which the unemployment rate would 

converge in the future in the absence of unanticipated shocks and under appropriate monetary 

policy.  This is essentially what 
we™ve referred to as the 
ﬁlonger-run normal rate of 

unemployment.ﬂ I think that™s what we called it in our consensus statement in January.  T
hat™s a 
fine term for it.
  When people refer to sustainable employment, this is the concept I think of
:  what the economy is going to converge to 
several years from now, after the current shocks we
™ve 
experienced have dissipated and
, under appropriate policy, we get back to some trend with no 
shocksŠ
the mean forecast out there.
  Now, this number probably doesn™t vary much over time 
because
, by defi
nition
, the effect of current shocks has faded out by the time the economy 
converges to this number.  In fact, this number might be close to constant over time, or it may 

vary only with some slow-moving and predictable things, 
such as
 the demographic compo
sition 
of the labor force and the like.  So I think when you look at a construct like the NAIRU, the non-
              
      
                              
 accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, it
™s constructed with this notion in mind.  I™
ll come 
back to 
the 
NAIRU in a minute. 
The second concept of 
economic slack
, which I think we should distinguish from this 
first one
, is based on the reference level of the unemployment rate 
with which it is most 
appropriate to compare the current unemployment rate for the purposes of assessing current 
monetary pol
icy.
  Equivalently, one can think of this just as well in terms of the reference level 
for output 
with
 which it™s most appropriate to compare current output for monetary policy 
purposes.  
This is sometimes referred to as the 
ﬁnatural rate,
ﬂ although some writers refer to this 
as the 
ﬁefficient rate
ﬂ and reserve 
ﬁnatural rate
ﬂ for something distinct.  But 
ﬁnatural rateﬂ 
tends 
to be the term that 
we™ve used around the table here and 
that 
others 
have used
, and it™
s what the 
staff memo uses.  So 
I™
m going to stick with that term for this reference rate. 
In some very simple models, these two concepts are identical.  But in general, they™re not 
the same.  Indeed, in our standard, modern, mainstream models, almost all of the shocks hitting 

the model should affect the natur
al rate, even if the longer
-run normal rate doesn™t vary much.  
Now, not all of the shocks that hit the economy should affect the natural rate.  That™
s very clear 
in these models as well, and I™
ll talk more a little bit later about 
the difference and
 what kinds 
of 
shocks fall in that category.  By the way, I™d mention that modern models are all extensions of 

the 
Solow 
growth model that the Chairman referred to at our last meeting. That model is 
deterministic, nonmonetary.  These mod
els are extended to include a role for monetary factors 

and to include the role of uncertainty and unpredictable shocks to the economy.  I think the staff 

memo would have been clear
er if it had distinguished between these two notions of slack, 
because the 
estimates they present in this memo
Šsome are aimed at this longer
-run notion, and 
some pretty clearly are aimed at this short
-run reference notion.  
For example, the NAIRU 
            
       
             
      
          
  
      estimates they present ar
e designed to estimate the long
er-run normal rate of unemployment, 
because 
they 
deliberately exclude high
-frequency factors, but our models tell us that™
s clearly the 
wrong benchmark for policy in a world in which the economy is hit by a range of shocks.  
So my 
suggestion would be that staff 
members
, when they present 
to 
us a gap or a natural rate concept, 
be clear about what they™re trying to present.  I™ll note hereŠ
and I
™ll come back to this in a 
second
Šthe discussion we had about adjusting the natural rate for the drought
; that
™s a high
-frequency 
adjustment.  But the logic for making that adjustment is really identical to the logic for 
this reference rate that responds to current shocks. I think it would also aid clarity if we, in our 

discussions, were mindful of this distinction between these two.  The gap between the current 

unemployment rate and the long-run normal unemployment rate is exceptionally high by 

historical standards, and that gap clearly represents a tremendous amount of human suffering.  

And I can understandŠeveryone should understandŠwhy that would add urgency to the search 

for remedies to that.
  But modern macroeconomics is pretty clear about the gap that™
s relevant 
for the conduct of monetary policy, and it™s conceptually different from the gap defined by the 

distance 
between whe
re we are today and 
where we
™re going to be several years from now. 
So how do you estimate policy-
relevant gaps? Well, you need a model because you
™re 
talking about a counterfactual; 
you
™re talking about something that doesn™t happenŠ
it™s a latent, 
unobserved variable.  You need a model to be able to extract something like that from the data, 

and different models, obviously, 
give you different estimates. 
The staff memo presents estimates 
derived from EDO, the Board™s New Keynesian dynamic stochastic gener
al equilibrium
 model.  
And it delivers 
an estimate of the current gap 
of 
a little under 3 percent, defined this second way, 
the natural rate way. 
That compares 
with 
the NAIRU
-based estimate that the Tealbook provides 
        
      
                 
  
         
     
       
     
         of about 4½ 
percent, so you can see 
that you can get a significant difference there
.  This 
illustrates the extent to which the model you bring to bear makes a difference. 
So how big is the relevant gap?  Well, I™ve said beforeŠand I think others around the 
table have said before
Šthat we don™t think it™
s large, and we
™ve tried to describe economic 
factors that, in theoretical models
, would affect the natural rate and so would
n™t
 add to the gap.  
So they™d reduce your estimate of the gap.  
Now, rather than repeat myself
ŠI know that hasn™t 
stopped 
me in the past
ŠI thought I™d take the opposite tack and talk about what™s in the gap.  
The economy in a model that™s taken to the data is envisioned as driven by shocks and other 
developments.  Those shocks 
all affect the data you see, but not all of th
em affect the natural 
rate.  So the things that affect the economy, but don™t 
figure 
into this natural rate, are the things 
that affect the gap. 
What could those things be?  Well, this depends, obviously, on the model 
you use to interpret the data, the mode
l you use to extract an estimate of the natural rate, and so 
determine the gap. 
Let™s take a look at
 EDO, the Board™s DSGE model.  Its 
estimate of the gap 
is based on the natural rate, as I said, and it™s near 3 percent.  What would it take for the gap to 

be that large in that model?  Now, I should caution here
:  What I
™m going to say is based on my 
understanding of the model conceptually, theoretically.  I haven™t looked at the empirical 

decomposition, but based on my understanding of what™s going on in t
hat model
Šthis is true for 
a lot of other models as wellŠ
you
™d have to believe 
that 
one of two sorts of things 
is going on 
for the gap to be large. 
First, you could believe that firms have not fully adjusted their prices in 
response to the downward shift in demand that occurred four years ago.  These models are based 

on the notion of prices being sticky temporarilyŠ
that people set prices and
, for a time
, they™
re 
not incented to
ward, 
or they
™re prevented from
, adjusting their prices to reflect developments 
that they
™re seeing at their doorstep.
  So this price stickiness keeps prices from adjusting.  A 
fall 
                                             
     in demand shows up in quantities rather than prices at first, and then later, as prices adjust, the 
adjustment shows up in prices rather than quantities.  So that™
s the general mechanism.
  To 
attribute it all to that, you
™d have to believe that there™s 
an incredible amount of price stickiness 
in this economy.  I don™t find that plausible, and I don™t think it lines up with other evidence we 

have on the degr
ee of price stickiness in the economy. 
The second class of things you could believe, in order to believe that the gap is large, is 
that the economy has been hit by a string of large shocks that have not affected the model™s 

natural rate but have affected t
he economy.  And this is what the model attributes the large gap 
to.  What would those shocks be? Well, in EDO, there 
are
 only two kinds of shocks that would 
affect the gap.  One is a string of upward shocks to the degree of monopolistic power that firms 

have in setting prices. Firms are monopolistic competitors.  They have a little bit of pricing 

power, not total, and the amount of pricing power they have is determined by the degree of 

substitutability between goods.  For some reason, goods are less of a substitute for each other 

now, so firms have more pricing power, and t
hat™s why prices haven™t adjusted
, quantities have, 
and the gap is high.  Alternatively, you could believe that a string of analogous shocks in the 

labor market ha
s occurred, so that workers have more bargaining power in setting wages and 
are 

able to extract a 
kind of monopoly power from the firms they work for.  Now, I don™t have direct 

observations on any of these.  You infer these from the model and the data.  You 
take the model 

as given, you infer these kinds of things.  But those don™t really match up, in my mind, to the 

kinds of anecdotal stories you hear from people.  You just don™t hear about firms having a lot 

more pricing power than they did four years ago, and it certainly doesn™t seem consistent to think 

of workers as having a lot more leverage now, either.  So I find both of these implausible.  
Now, 

as I said, this is based on my understanding of EDO
; my understanding of how the theoretical 
              
    
    
    
              
     
  
       
  
       model is built
Šthat is well documented.  In that EDO model, in the memo results, they didn™t do 
the decomposition.  They didn™t show us how much of the gap is due to sticky prices left over 

from 
2008 shocks, how much is due to monopoly power shocks, how much is due to wa
ge pricing shocks.  I said they don™t seem plausible, but the right way forward for us, in talking 

about these things, is to put some estimates on the table and do the decomposition.  W
e have a 
working group under 
way that works with a set of these models. 
There are 
other DSGE 
modelsŠPhiladelphia, Chicago.  What™s the other one? 
PARTICIPANTS.  New York. 

MR. LACKER. 
New York.  I forgot New York.  And there 
are
 others around the 
System.  I know 
that 
Atlanta operates a pretty elaborate model as well.
  So e
ach of these taken to 
the data would give you a different estimate of the gap, and they™d give you a different 

decomposition of what the gap was about.  We™d be able to look at those, if we had them in front 

of us, and say, ﬁWell, attributing the gap to this is persuasive to me.  It matches up with what I 

think is out there,ﬂ or, ﬁThis reason for the gap to be large isn™t persuasive to me.ﬂ  And we could 

have a discussion that goes beyond, ﬁI think the gap is big.
ﬂ ﬁNo, I think the gap is small.
ﬂ  ﬁNo, 
I think the gap is big.
ﬂ ﬁNo, I think the gap is small.ﬂ I think we could make progress by putting 
the cards on the table, by putting some more-
explicit analysis on the table. 
So that™s my suggestion for improving our discussion of the gap going forward.  As I 
said, the estimates of the 3 percent gap in EDO seem implausible to me compared 
with 
factors 
that I
™ve talked about that are likely to affect the natural rate rather than the gap
Šthings like 
the 
labor market
, skill problems, 
the 
housing overhang, and policy uncertainty, which 
aren™t 
captured by the models.
  We could have a debate then about what is in the model or not.  T
his is 
what goes into my thinkingŠthat we shouldn™t expect much from monetary policy now.  
                   
                     
 Moreover, we might be pretty close to where the policy-
relevant natural rate is right now.
  Thank 
you
ŠI took some extra time here.  I appreciate it.  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE C
HAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I don™t really understand why the DSGE model should 
be particularly relevant to the current set of circumstances, given that this is a financial shock, a 

huge financial shock, and my understanding is that DGSE models are very rudimentary, 
if 
they 

hav
e anything
, in terms of the financial sector.
  To go to the DSGE models 
as a source of 
determining the natural rate versus the NAIRU and 
the size of the gap seems a little bit 
ﬁoff the 
reservation
ﬂ relative to the source of the shock.  So I™m just curious what your reaction is. 
MR. LACKER.  Sure.  Let me say two things to that.  
The f
irst is that progress has been 
made in putting the rudiments of a financial sector in these models.  The New York model is a 

leader on that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  B
ut we™
re still in elementary school. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  The second thing I™d point out, though, is that if we™re going to 
think about the data we see, draw conclusions, and act on it, we™
re using either an explicit model 
or an implicit model.  There
™s no avoiding that.  Otherwise, what we™re doing is gibberish.  
An explicit model has the advantage of exposing all sides of the reasoning process to scrutiny by 

others.  You can say, 
and it
™s perfectly legitimate to think, 
ﬁAll right
Šyes, this factor that I t
hink 
is important is not in this model,
ﬂ and I just did that with EDO.  I just said, 
ﬁLook, it doesn™t 
have a very articulate labor sector
ﬂŠbut we can debate that, and we can look at the magnitudes 
and talk about that.  
So I think it
™s a vehicle for analysis and discussion that crystallizes our 
thinking, that pins things down, but I don™t think it™s constructive to say, ﬁX isn™t in the model.  I 
       
              
    
    
                have a free pass to say whatever I want.ﬂ I just don™t think that™s constructive.  I know that™s not 
what you were advocating. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, President Lacker.  You™
re a 
perfect straight man for me because 
I™m going to be rather brief 
[laughter] 
to preserve 
time for 
the main event. 
Reports from my 
District contacts were very little changed from August. 
Economic expansion remains positive but very modest.  Just a coup
le of comments from 

contacts.  First, housing-sector contacts and several of my banking directors repor
ted that 
residential real estate activity in general is clearly improving.  Prices have firmed in many areas, 

sales volume has increased, and permitting is rising.  Purchase mortgage applications have 

increased recently, and refinance activity remains positive. I have also seen data suggesting that 

the recent increase in purchases is bei
ng driven primarily by mortgage-financed homebuyers 
rather than cash investors.  Second, a director from a large management consulting firm offered 

the view that a number o
f his firms, very large corporate clients, have resigned themselves to a 
2 percent growth world, and that major actions these businesses might take to accelerate their 

growth are largely on hold.  We heard a similar theme from several contacts.
  And, third, 
inflation and rising business costs are not much of a concern among our contacts.  My director 

from the country™s largest home-
improvement retailer reported that suppliers are not asking for 
price 
increases in this environment. 
Let me shift to my 
Bank™s assessment of the national economy and outlook.  It has 
become pretty difficult, in my view, to reject the view that the economy has been on a roughly 

2 percent growth trend for most of the recovery.  Maybe I™m a little slow, but the recognition has 

gelled
 in my thinking, 
just in the last few weeks
, that this is the prevailing reality.  Based on 
                        
          
     
         recent estimates, this may even overstate the immediate reality.
  My outlook for GDP growth 
continues to show only modest improvement on this trend over the forecast horizon.  In 
particular, beyond this year and next, I remain less optimistic about the pace of 
GDP growth than 
the Tealbook.  With respect to employment, my baseline outlook has been a continuation of the 

trend of roughly 150,000 per month that has prevailed over the past two years.  This pace would 

be sufficient at current participation rates to make continuing but modest progress on the 

unemployment rate. However, last week™s job report makes it pretty clear that employment 

growth has fallen short of the 150,000 trend over the past four months.  Even though four months 

amount to a small sliver of time, I am concerned about the lack of any sustained progress on the 

unemployment rate since the beginning of the year.  It is getting harder to rule out the p
ossibility 

that returning to the 
scenario of 
150,000 jobs a month is at risk.  
My perception is that the well
-known uncertainty factors, including those associated with various downside risks, are 

contributing to some of the recent softness in the data.  I have no argument with the SEP bias that 

GDP growth risks are weighted to the downside, but I don™t rule out that these uncertainty drags 
could dissipate and that there is some upside potential.  For instance, some of the incoming 

information around housin
g and 
Europe has been mildly encouraging, and it
™s plausible that if 
the major sources of uncertaintyŠnotably, the fiscal cliff and European situationŠ
are resolved 

favorably, or more or less favorably, in a few months, the outlook actually could be brighter.  So 

it strikes me that this environment is not as clear
-cut as the situations that we faced on the cusp 
of LSAP1 and LSAP2. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Mr. Wilcox, did you want to add to the 
conversation? 
          
   
        
      
      
                      MR. WILCOX.  
Yes. I don™t have a detailed response to President Lacker™s comments, 
but I thought I might just offer a few observations.  Sometimes I
™m in sympathy with many of 
the points that President Lacker makes.  I think it™s impor
tant, though, to state that we take it as 
our remit to advise the Committee to the limit of our ability to measure the economy, to estimate 
and understand the economy, to observe economic processes.  We think it™
s critically important 
not to do more than that, and we™re profoundly aware of the extent of our ignorance and the 

ignorance of the macroeconomic profession at large, regarding key questions about how the 

macroeconomy works. 
I™
m reminded of a comment that Larry Summers once made in quite a 
differen
t situation
, in which he said, ﬁYou know, economics is an interesting field.  I doubt that 
when astrophysicists get together
, they debate the fundamental validity of the laws of gravity.  
And yet what we as economists do is, we have profound uncertainty about questions that are as 

fundamental as the laws of gravity.
ﬂ  We on the staff do make every effort to distinguish short-

run influences that we can identify.  For example, we have adjusted our reference level of the 

unemployment rate in light of influence
s that we can identify and estimate
, stemming from 
emergency unemployment benefits and from the quality of functioning of the labor market.  We 

have adjusted our measure of the gap between the actual unemployment rate and the reference
, 
or natural, 
rate of
 unemployment for those kinds of things.  But beyond that, we confront the real 
world in which data are imperfect, theory is deficient, policymaker and staff bandwidth is 

limited, and there are a lot of profound and fundamental debates to be resolved. 
With regard to EDO, it is a state
-of-the-
art DSGE model coming directly out of the 
intellectual tradition that President Lacker refers to. It
™s part, but only part, of the intellectual 

base that we consult in the course of putting together our analysis that we provide to the 

Committee.
  Now, whether the empirical properties of that model are plausible or implausible is 
                
                              
              
a little difficult for me to say.  They are what they are, and they
™re derived by an effort to work 
directly in that intellectual tradition.  W
e have pursued a diversified, 
multimodel strategy
, which 
we think provides our analysis with a greater robustness than would be the case if we had a 
single 
model or a single-
intellectual
-tradition strategy. 
So I
™m in sympathy with many of the 
points that President Lacker raises, but I think we need to recognize that the macroeconomic 

profession has a long way to go before we can deliver the kind of clarity and certainty that it 

seems to me is implicit in much of your remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President 
Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate Dave Wilcox™s comments 
there, and I™
ll have a few comments on the slack memo at the end here. 
Let me talk for a minute 
about the Eighth District economy, which continues to expand at a modest pace.  The drought in 

the 
District has been especially severe and is having an important effe
ct on agriculturally 
based 
businesses.  I generally agree with the Tealbook analysis of the 
effe
ct of the drought on the 
macroeconomy over the next couple of quarte
rs. 
District labor markets are improving slowly. 
The 
District unemployment rate, based on 16 D
istrict MSAs, has continued to decline this year 
and is, according to the most recent data, about 7.5 percent, noticeably below the national 

unemployment rate.
  Employment growth in the District has been slow, just a touch better than 
the national data, according to the most recent observations.  District real estate markets have 

improved during 2012.  Data on home sales for District MSAs, for instance, are up by 
a healthy 
margin compared 
with
 2011.  Specifically, year-
to-date home sales are up almost 13 percent in 
Louisville, 7 percent in Little Rock, 10 percent in Memphis, and 16 percent in St. Louis.  

Similarly, building permits for single
-family homes year to 
date in 2012 versus 2011 were up 
42 percent in Louisville, 14 percent in Little Rock, 46 percent in Memphis, and 23 percent in 
               
             
          
   
    
  
    St.
 Louis.  So I think that the housing part of the equation is moving off the bottom in 2012, and I 
find that encouraging. 
Natio
nally, I view the macroeconomy as being in a sluggish 
economic 
growth mode, but 
for a variety of reasons, I do not think the current constellation of data readings is one that should 
trigger outsized monetary policy action.  I view the U.S. economy as being on a path not too 

different from the one suggested in the work of Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rog
off as cited by 
President Lacker.
 They noted that post-
financial
-crisis or 
post-bubble economies tend to grow 
relatively slowly for a long time.  Our economy cl
early suffered through 
a collapse of a housing 
bubble, along with an associated financial crisis, so it is not really that surprising that the 

economy is following a path similar to the one experienced by other countries 
that 
have been in a 
similar situati
on.  In particular, the notion of a rapid return to the pre-
crisis
, bubble-influenced 
real GDP growth trend seems quite unrealistic accor
ding to the international cross-country 
evidence.  This, to me, is the leading hypothesis for our current situation.  I am concerned about 

the global slowdown and that, fed in large part by ongoing recession in Europe, this is affecting 

and will continue to affect U.S. multinational corporations.  These effects are quite apparent in 

my discussions with business contacts in 
medium and large firms in the 
District and across the 
nation.  Many are reporting troubling or worrisome movements in revenue and volume data 

during recent months.  While this bears watching, I do not think it is yet at the point where I 

foresee an especially severe impact on the U.S.  Some of this is certainly to be expected when the 

pan-European economy, which is actually somewhat larger than the U.S. economy, is in 
recession. 
I see U.S. inflation as subdued but generally close to target, unlike the summ
er and fall of 
2010, when nearly all measures of inflation were low and on a downward trajectory.  Again, this 
             
                 
   
   
             
  
     bears watching, but in my view, a threat of continued disinflation and possibly eventual deflation 
has not materialized, at least so far. 
Inflat
ion expectations are, by our own description, stable.  
Five
-year TIPS
-based expected inflation was about 208 basis points yesterday.  This, again, is 
not the situation of 2010, at least so far.  In addition, the five-year TIPS real yield of about 

minus 145 basis points is considerably lower than in 2010, suggesting that monetary policy may 

be much easier today than it was at that juncture.  In addition, I do not see financial stress as 

being particularly high at the current moment.  The St. Louis Financial Stress Index is showing 
a relatively tame reading. Of course, many factors could increase financial stress, but as of now
, those events have not occurred and, in fact, may not occur. 
I think it makes sense to wait and see what Europe can deliver during th
e fall.  As I
™ve 
told all of you before, I™
ve become 
more pessimistic on the medium
-term European prospects 
during the summer, as I have come to doubt that Europe has the type of either informal or formal 

institutional arrangements to deal with a crisis of
 this magnitude.  
Still, I think the jury remains 
out on that issue, so it would make sense for us to wait and see what the Europeans do, 
and see 

what happens.  
Certainly, recent declines in Spanish and Italian yields across the yield curve for 

government debt in both countries have been impressive 
and
 substantial, even if the medium-
and longer-term outlook for Europe is questionable.  
I am concerned that the ECB is not really 
easing aggressively in order to mitigate the 
euro
-area recession. Indeed, the ECB is preoccupied 
with selective debt purchases on a basis that requires some conditionality, which means that they 

have to wait for the country to react to their offer.  This throws off the timing of the relationship 

between the 
normal business cycle 
and 
monetary policy.
  So that™s keeping the ECB from acting, 
which makes me worried that the U.S. action could exacerbate the recession there by 

strengthening the 
euro.  And indeed, the e
uro has been stronger in recent weeks.
  You might say 
      
             
              
          
  
   
 we worry only about the U.S. economy, which I think is very true and very relevant, but this 
could end up feeding back to the U.S. in a detrimental way if we make the European situation 

worse. 
Longer
-term interest rates in the U.S. are already very low.  Ten
-year 
Treasury tr
ading in 
a recent session was around 170 basis points.  That™
s extremely low by rec
ent historical metrics. 
Longer
-term inflation expectations are in excess of 250 basis points, depending on which 
measure you use.  That implies negative real yields over a 
10-year horizon.  That™s an extremely 
long horizon to have a negative real yield.  I think the U
nited States 
can benefit from the lower 
yields that we have in place right now.  We can benefit from the flight to safety that has driven 

capital out of Europe, 
much as the U
nited States
 did during the 1997Œ98 
Asian currency crisis. 
Also, equity markets are at recent highs
Šfour
-year highs, 
if I™m not mistaken.  This seems to 
indicate among investors a certain confidence in the future of U.S. economic performance 

despite an ongoing worldwide slowdown, and I think the jury is still out a little bit on whether 

the U
nited States
 can be the strength in the storm here or whether we™re going to get pulled into 
the global slowdown ourselves.  Obviously, there are detrime
ntal effects from the rest of the 
world, but there are also offsetting 
flight
-to-safety effects in the U
nited States
.  So I think we 
could afford to see how that plays out for a few months here going forward. 
Labor markets in the U.S. are improving, although in a halting and uneven way.  It is 
sometimes noted that the national unemployment rate has not improved during 2012.  I might 

remind the Committee that this was also true in 2011.  We had 9.1 percent unemployment in 

January of 2011.  As of August 2011, 
we were also at 9.1 percent.
  However, today™s 
unemployment one year after that is 8.1 percent, 1 full percentage point lower.  That™s about as 

good as we can do in this game, about as good as we can do in one year™s time.  The U.S. 
              
    
       
       
          unemployment rate has 
rarely, if ever, dropped this much in one year during the past 25 years.  
This improvement, 
of course
, occurred unevenly, but it did occur nevertheless and from a 
starting point last year at this time in September that looked considerably darker than today
™s outlook.  
Some might say we did
n™t
 take action last year, but we took action through the m
aturity 
extension p
rogram.  That program is still in place and still on the table. 
In summary, as always, there are many ongoing developments that bear watching, but I 
think that the current readings on key aspects of the economy do not argue for outsized monetary 
policy action at this particular juncture.  I™m not saying I would never support it, but I don™t think 

that this moment is probably the right time. 
A few comments on the slack memo.  I do appreciate the memo, and I think it did a great 
job of outlining the approach to the slack issue that has been taken by the staff for, 
I belie
ve, 
many years at the Fed.  I thought it was accurate and outlined the issues very well.  The memo, 

to me, suggests that the ﬁ
get
-serious DSGE approachﬂ shows exactly how complicated this 
concept really is when you try to get down to it.  W
henever 
you
™re 
trying to fix something, it
™s good to know what you™re trying to fix.  And the great thing about the New Keynesian model is, 

you know what you™re trying to fix.  You™
re trying to fix the fact that there are sticky prices out 
there, and you can improve welf
are in that model in a certain way by certain types of monetary 
policy actions.  But different assumptions that you might make inside the model are quite subtle, 

and they can imply different welfare outcomesŠ
that is, different amounts of utility that actua
lly 
get delivered to households.  I think 
that 
there
™s no substitute going forward, that the Committee 
just has to take a stand on these complicated issues and we have to roll up our sleeves and say, 

ﬁWhat is it that we think we need
 to do?
ﬂ and ﬁW
hat is it that we want to fix?ﬂ
  The problem is, 
because of the subtleties inside these models, what we learned from the models is that you can 
          
        
                       
       inadvertently be doing more harm than good, depending on what™s actually going on in the real 
world and depending on whi
ch assumptions are really the ones that make the most sense. 
I think 
there
™s a very clear core idea, and you don™t have to read the whole literature to get at the core 
idea.  The co
re idea is that the flexible price level of output is a volatile object. 
Even in an 
economy that had no frictions whatsoever, there would be all kinds of shocks, and that level of 

output, which would be a Pare
to-optimal thing, would be moving around all of the time.  T
he 
actual level of output that we observe is probably not that level of output, and therefore there 

may be scope for a policy action.  But in any event, that volatile flexible price level of output is 

not going to be a smooth trend the way we traditionally have thought about it in macroeconomic 

circles since the 19
50s and 1960s.  Most of what we try to do when we think about potential 
output and measures of slack is to get a smooth trend.  I don™t think that that™s supported by the 

modern macroeconomic literature. 
The memo also makes it clear that there
™s tremendous 
uncertainty about estimates of 
slack, even if you™
re willing to swallow other assumptions about 
the 
statistical models or the 
economic models.  
As I
™ve emphasized in the past, even if all you want to do is forecast, and you 
don™t care about all of the the
oretical issues, the relationships between the slack measures and the 
actual inflation outcomes are questionable themselves and are weak and
, I think, 
have gotten 
weaker over time. 
I™ve talked about slack many times here, but I do think that, 
going forwar
d, it would behoove the Committee to put a clear model on the table.  W
e can argue about whether 
those assumptions 
are
 the right ones, whether 
we like them, 
and whether we think we can bring 
other evidence to bear on the particular assumptions.  And 
we can 
get it clear
er in our own heads 
how we think we™re helping matters with our policy. 
                                    
           I also thought it was very interesting in the memo
ŠI™ve often wondered about the term 
ﬁNAIRU.ﬂ  The memo makes it clear that the ﬁAﬂ no longer belongs in 
ﬁNAIRU,
ﬂ and in fact
, the ﬁNﬂ doesn™t belong in ﬁ
NAIRU
ﬂ either
Šso just ﬁ
IRU.
ﬂ It™s just 
ﬁIRU
ﬂ at the end.  T
he ﬁAﬂ 
stands for ﬁ
accelerati
ngﬂ 
and staff 
members 
make it clear that they™ve had to take that part out 
because it wasn™t working very well over maybe quite a long time period.  So I thought that that 
was interesting.  Maybe we should quit using the term, since the acceleration part isn™t in there 

anymore.
  Thanks a lot.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The past nine months remind me a bit 
of Samuel Beckett™s play 
Waiting for Godot. 
Rather than waiting for 
Godot
, we are waiting for 
the labor market recovery.  And like 
Godot, the recovery in the labor market continues to elude 

us.  
In the Beckett play, the character
s seriously consider suicide as their best solution to the 
seemingly endless wait.  I do hope 
that 
tomorrow we arrive at a better solution.  [Laughter] 
Unfortunately, last month™s labor market report was quite consistent with my submission 
for the e
xperimental consensus forecast.  I had a more pessimistic outlook for the next 18 months 
than the consensus forecast, and it assumed that we would not see robust employment growth or 

a significant change in the unemployment rate by the end of the yearŠ
or, for th
at matter, the end 
of next year
Šwithout further accommodation.  The modest employment growth did not surprise 
me, although I may not have sufficiently considered the possibility of the further declines in 
the 

labor force participation rate that were a striking feature of last Friday™s employment report, 

reducing the unemployment rate but for the wrong reason.  
One of the distinctive features of this 

recession and recovery has been the percentage of the unemployed who remain unemployed for 

greater than
 26 weeks.  Unlike the deep recession in 1982, in which there was a quick recovery 
        
                          
          and, as a result, a re
latively small increase in long
-duration unemployment, this recession has 
had a weak recovery, resulting in more long-duration unemployment.  Work being done by the 
staff in Boston that decomposes the 
Beveridge 
curve by duration of unemployment finds that the 
shift in the curve is primarily generated by workers who suffer long-duration unemployment.  

Faster growth in the economy would likely mitigate some of this problem. 
While some have attributed the slow recovery to a deleveraging process, I would put less 
weight on that argument.  Consumption and business investment have not been the laggards in 

this recovery.  Rather, government spending and housing account for much of the unusual 

weakness.  In fact, if you exclude housing and government spending from GDP for this recovery, 

it looks much like the previous two recoveries.  The unusually weak government spending is, in 

part, a result of the state and lo
cal governments pulling back in response to greatly diminished 
revenues, a direct consequence of the depth of the recession and the weakness of the recovery.  

Many were prepared for a revenue shortfall, with funds accumulated in their rainy day funds, but 

this recession quickly put most rainy day funds underwater.  Housing is usually a driver of most 

recoveries but has been absent for much of this recovery.  However, since the onset of the 

housing bust, the population has grown, per capita income has grown, 
interest rates are low, and 

prices are more affordable, resulting in tentative signs of a housing recovery.  This is a propitious 

time for considering additional stimulus to housing. 
If homebuyers feel that house prices are on 
the rise
Šas many indicators
 suggest 
and
 the Tealbook forecastsŠ
and that mortgage rates will 
remain this low only temporarily, we may start to get new homebuyers to commit before rates 

and prices rise. 
It is important to note the significant downside risks we are still facing.  While there have 
been some positive announcements about financial support out of Europe, the underlying 
                        
              
      
   solutions still require political support.  Domestically, while most are aw
are of the dangers of a 
fiscal cliff, the positive solutions still require political action.
  Should either of these risks 
materialize, we will need to consider a further array of tools: 
 possibly expanding QE even 
further, using asset purchases to target long rates
, or providing more commitment in our 
guidance.  An important addition to these tools might also be an expanded set of discount 

window actions.  The staff memo on this provides a good road map to possible ways forward.  

They include a variant of 
the Bank of England program, a mortgage program that would provide 
low-cost funding for banks to finance mortgage loansŠparticularly to those parts of the 

mortgage market that have been slow to recover, and programs that might require T
reasury 
support to reduce the credit risk entailed on certain types of lendin
g.  While some of these tools 
are likely to be most useful during a crisis where lending markets are disrupted, some could be 

implemented even in the current rate environment. I would encourage the staff to continue to 

search for creative ways that we can support those areas of the economy that are still troubled.  

As further progress is made, it may be worth discussing, either as an additional tool if the 

recovery continues to be quite slow or as a contingency plan should some of the tail risks 

materialize.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  During the intermeeting period, the 
economic data have confirmed that the ec
onomy remains stuck in low gear. Like the Tealbook, I 

expect only modest 
GDP growth in the second half of this year.  
Clearly, the economic recovery 
hasn™t been able to gain traction in the face of a variety of head
winds.  These include household-
sector d
eleveraging, tight credit for many potential borrowers, fiscal retrenchment, and global 
uncertainties.  Given these headwinds, absent further monetary policy accommodation, I would 
          
  
          
         
    
     expect sluggish growth and no meaningful progress toward our employment mandate until 2014.  
Indeed, when judged on a policy-consistent basis, my outlook is somewhat more pessimistic than 

the Tealbook forecast and consensus forecast, with slower 
GDP growth and a higher path for the 
unemployment rate. 
In gauging the medium-
term ou
tlook for the economy and the stance of monetary policy, 
I find the 
Kalman
-filter model that I developed with Thomas Laubach to be a useful tool.  A
fter 
this morning™s discussion, I™
m a little nervous about going into the 
Kalman 
filter, but I
™m assured 
that Thomas is ready with a white board to answer any technical questions regarding our model.  

But this model seeks to distinguish between transitory and highly persistent supply and demand 

influences on economic activity.  In response to President Bullard™s 
earlier comments, I would 
stress that in our model, we do not impose any restriction that potential output growth is smooth.  

We let the data speak to that.
  The highly persistent influences on demand can be summarized by 
what we call the natural rate of 
interest.  In the model, a highly persistent reduction in demand 
lowers the natural rate of interest.  And I think importantly for thinking about the stance of 

monetary policy and a number of issues around that, our balance sheet policies should boost the 

natural rate of interest, all else 
being 
equal, in this empirical model. 
So, influenced by Board 
staff research that highlights the information content of gross domestic income along with gross 

domestic product, I™ve estimated a modified version of the LaubachŒ
Williams model using both 

GDI and GDP.
  The current estimate of the natural rate of interest from this model is about 
minus 75 basis points.  The current real funds rate, therefore, is only about 1 percentage point 

below this estimate of the natural rate.  This implies that the current extent of monetary 

accommodation, including our balance sheet policies, has only modestly exceeded the severe 

headwinds that we™re facing in our economy. 
         
          
        
                             Given my forecast
s for subdued 
economic 
growth and very little pr
ogress on the 
employment mandate over the next few years, my SEP projection assumes considerable 
additional monetary policy stimulus.  In particular, I assume a new program of open-
ended 
purchases of 
Treasuries and MBS.  They expand the Fed™s balance sheet
 by about $1 trillion over 
the next year or so. 
And with this stimulus, I expect a faster recovery, with real GDP growth of 
2½ percent next year and 
3¼ percent in 2014, with the unemployment rate edging down to 
7.9 percent at the end of next year and 7.3 percent 
at the end of 2014.  
I see the risk
s to this 
outlook as skewed to the downside.  Another bout of brinkmanship around the fiscal cliff seems 

likely, if not inevitable.  The problems plaguing Europe also remain daunting, with considerable 

risk to our economy if the financial crisis intensifies. 
Here I would just echo the comments made 
earlier by Vice Chairman
 Dudley.  I share those views and was somewhat more pessimistic than 
perhaps the Tealbook™s description of recent events in Europe.  The bold program that the ECB 

has announced will certainly buy some short-run relief, but the underlying problems remain
:  a 
lack of political federalism, an unsustainable fiscal outlook, and disparities in economic 

competitive
ness across Europe.  So, in summary, the ECB™s actions may serve as a useful bridge 
loan.  
I hope it is not a bridge loan to nowhere. 
The fiscal cliff and the crisis in Europe are not just risks to the outlook; 
by increasing 
uncertainty
, they 
also 
seem alr
eady to be adding to the factors slowing our recovery.  It seems 
everyone I talk to stresses that uncertainty is holding back hiring and investment.  Indeed, 

uncertainty appears to have virtually paralyzed some businesses, prompting them to postpone 

capita
l spending and delay payroll expansions.  So a key question for monetary policy is whether 

this rise in uncertainty should be viewed primarily as a shock to demand, which lowers both 

output and inflation if not counteracted by additional monetary policy stimulus, or as a shock to 
            
    
       
                
           
   
supply, such as the drought, which lowers output but boosts inflation.  R
ecent theoretical and 
empirical research has addressed this question.  As I described back in December, empirical 
research by my staff at the San Francisco Fe
d finds that over the past 30 years, 
higher uncertainty 

operates like a negative aggregate demand shock that reduces both economic activity and 

inflation.  Following uncertainty shocks of the types that we currently face, expenditures on 

consumer durables, investment, short-
term interest rates, and inflation all fall
, while 
unemployment rises
, in this analysis.  
Now, I
™m sure President Lacker will be very happy to hear 
what I
™m about to say, and that is that we also looked at this issue in a fully micro
-fou
nded 
DSGE model.  This finding that uncertainty acts primarily as a demand shock is confirmed by 

the research using such DSGE models, both by my staff and by academic researchers. 
An increase in uncertainty causes households to save more for precautionary reasons.  This a
ffects 
both supply and demand in the models.  However, in these models, the demand effects are by far 

the dominant ones.  This is because the negative effects of an uncertainty shock on consumption 

are amplified when prices are slow to adj
ust, causing businesses to cut production further.  
This 
implies that uncertainty shocks lead to a negative output gap, a fall in inflation, and this is 

consistent with the empirical evidence I mentioned a moment ago.  All told, both theory and data 

sugges
t that the uncertainty shocks that I believe are holding back
 our economy today really 
should be seen more as adverse shocks to demand, which monetary policy should aim to offset. 
Turning to inflation, the medium-term outlook has not changed.  I continue t
o expect 
overall PCE inflation to remain below 2 percent for the next few years, and I view the risks 
to the 
inflation forecast as balanced. 
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 
           
   
                           MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like Presi
dent Lockhart, I
™m going to 
keep my remarks on economic conditions particularly brief today because I believe that we have 
more agreement on the outlook than we have on the policy implications of the outlook, which 

means 
that 
I™m not going to be as brief in my comments on policy 
tomorrow. 
My 
District 
business contacts remain concerned about the risks to the outlook, yet they are generally 

reporting only small changes in activity levels in their own businesses.  A few of my business 

contacts point to either a coming slowdown or a coming acceleration in their sales.  Their 

comments are consistent with the holding pattern around today™s 2 percent growth rate.  
In my 
current outlook, I expect the recovery to remain in this holding pattern for the rest of this y
ear 
and then generally pick up to a GDP growth rate of a little more than 2½ percent in 2013 and a 

little more than 3 percent in 2014.  In order to achieve these projected growth rates, I assume that 

we provide further policy accommodation by extending the period of very low rates into 2015. 
Among the data released since our last meeting, the August employment report stands 
out.  It was particularly disappointing in that the BLS confirmed that the economy had made very 

little progress in labor markets over 
the summer. While the month
-to-month swings in the 
household survey make the progress on the unemployment rate difficult to interpret, the decline 

in the employment
-to-population ratio to essentially its post
-recession trough makes it clear that 
there has
 been little sustained progress in labor markets.  Nonetheless, as GDP growth picks up 
over the next two years, I am expecting that we will make gradual progress on unemployment.  

As mentioned in the memo on economic slack, the Cleveland staff has taken a close look at the 

flows into and out of unemployment to examine the natural rate of unemployment.  This research 

finds that the trends of flows into and out of unemployment, often referred to as labor market 

churning, have been f
all
ing for several years.  This decline in labor market churning implies that 
             
                   
  the current path to full employment will likely be slower than in past cycles. 
Some 
commentators treat the slow progress on reducing unemployment as evidence that the natural 
rate 
is far higher.  However, in the Cleveland Fed model, a faster pace of GDP growth does 

lower the unemployment rate more quickly.  While this result is supportive of monetary policy 

accommodation, it doesn™t answer the question of the effectiveness of our no
ntraditional 

monetary policy tools. 
Turning to inflation, I have made only small changes to my outlook for inflation.  I agree 
with the Board staff that we
™re likely to see more disinflation in core PCE rates, but my forecast 
doesn™t get quite as far away 
from the 2 percent rate as the Tealbook anticipates. 
The risks to my economic outlook remain primarily to the downside for GDP growth.  
Although market participants seem to be taking a more optimistic view that Europeans will solve 
their problems, a 
crisis
 in Europe remains a large risk to 
the recovery in the U
nited S
tates
.  In addition, the fiscal cliff poses a significant risk of 
a dramatic slowing of the U.S. economy.  
These risks to growth imply that unemployment could end up higher than anticipated.  On 

inflation, I continue to see the risks tilted toward the downside, given th
e significant downside 

risk
s to economic activity and 
the
 low levels of 
some measures of 
inflation expectations.  In my 
view, these risks to growth, unemployment, and inflation make the outlook more uncertain than 

normal.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Following our July meeting, the key question 
was whether the incoming data would finally begin to show substantial and sustainable 

improvement in labor markets.  It™s pretty clear that the answer to that question is no.  Without a 

doubt, 2012 will go into the books as another year of unsatisfactory economic performance.  This 
                    
         
         
           
  
 is the third year in a row 
of growth around 2 percent.  This pace of growth leaves 
resource slack 
quite large. 
At the same time
, the inflation outlook is not threatening, and numerous theoretical 
and empirical analyses show that there are ways to provide additional accommodation th
at will 
improve this economic situation. 
In terms of recent developments, the problems that we™
ve characterized as downside risks 
earlier in the year have materialized into actual headwinds.  They are gathering in strength. 
My 
business contacts noted that 
their current operations are being adversely affected by increasing
ly negative forces in the U.S. and around the world.  Similar to some comments that President 

Lockhart made, apparently CEOs are sharing their gloomy outlooks with their fellow CEO 

interlo
cutors, and this has the potential to reinforce downward expectations and spiral into even 
softer spending and hiring.  
For example, one of my regular contacts repeated comments he had 
heard from the CEO of a major U.S. conglomerate, 
who was a former Fed Bank chair 

somewhere.  According to my contact, this CEO instructed all of his business units to plan for 

the possibility that the U.S. will experience a lost decade
, like Japan.  I think that™s disturbing.  
With regard to Europe, many of my contacts thought the odds of truly awful outcomes had 

declined, and that™s a positive comment.  The recent ECB announcements regarding outright 

monetary transactions give the fiscal authorities somewhat more time to maneuver, but the 

additional bond buying will be condit
ioned on fiscal consolidation that likely will be difficult to 
achieve and bad for growth in those countries.  And without stronger growth, the periphery 

countries are going to face repeated crisis events over the next several years. As one financial 

contact we spoke to put it, 
ﬁAll the Europeans have done is transform an acute problem into a 
chronic one.
ﬂ  The other elephant in the room is the U.S. fiscal cliff.  On the upside, my contacts 
say 
that 
surely the parties in Washington will find a way to limit 
the damage after the election
.           
                       
        But on the downside, many currently see uncertainty over the cliff weighing on activity, and no 
one can rule out the possibility of a messy outcome that would result in very significant fiscal 

drag hitting us around the turn of the year. 
One bit of positive news is that I™m hearing commentary that indicates monetary 
accommodation is helping.  Several financial contacts say that today™s low rates are leading them 

to increase investment, and that should facilitate futu
re activ
ity. 
For instance, we heard 
comments on how funding for distressed properties has increased and capital is being redeployed 

to the residential sector. Indeed, there™s been a 
lot of talk about residential construction 

improving, as several have noted.  Furthermore, refinancing continues to help firms strengthen 

their balance sheets, putting them in a position to increase investment or pass on funds to 

someone else more likely to spend them, as you pointed out at our last meeting, Mr. Chairman.  
I should 
note that while lo
w rates are pushing some to undertake more investment, our financial 
contacts do not say that 
they are seeing excessive risk
-taking or anything approximating 
financial 
froth
.  And in the past, they™ve not been shy about pointing that out when they have seen that. 
As I said earlier, condition
ed on our current policies, the outlook for 
economic 
growth is 
unacceptable.  It™s unacceptable in part because recent data reinforce the obvious point that high 

inflation is not a concern, certainly not relative to our long-run objective and certainly not within 

our balanced approach strategy.  And it™
s unacceptable because mainstream monetary analysis 
clearly indicates that there are means of providing more accommodation that can improve these 

outcomes
.  The Board staff analyses clearly demonstrate this.  The LSAP memos had simulations 
that pointed that out, FRB/
US™
s optimal control simulations and 
the nominal-income-
level
-targeting simulations point that out, too.  Mike Woodford™s careful analysis in h
is Jacks
on Hole 
paper showed the same. 
       
    
        
           
    
    
   
               
  
        While I™m at this point, let me make a couple of comments about DSGE models, which 
were discussed earlier today. It is certainly the case that we are presented with results from four 
models that are currently being l
ooked at: 
the 
EDO model out of the Board, our Chicago model, 
Philadelphia™s model, and New York™s model.  A 
question that President Lacker was asking was
, in the context of these models, how big 
is 
slack, 
and 
how is it measured
?  At some level within 
the 
context of these models, this is a bit of a red herring.  For instance, if you look at the 

projections, all of the inflation forecasts coming out of these models are under our 2 
percent goal, 

and that™s true through 2015.  So, 
even
 in a model that™s lookin
g at whatever measure it is that™s 
holding back inflation, 
there is no
 inflationary pressureŠand some of the models have much less 
inflationary pressure than others.  The second point is that the theory in these models is really 

about marginal costs.  That
™s the fundamental variable.  The firms in these models are faced with 
the following question: W
hen I get to change my price and I™ve seen things change, what™s my 
margin
al cost structure that tells me how much I should increase my price, given that I won
™t be 
able to do it next time for sure? What have 
I face
d, w
hat am I expecting others to face, and 
things like that? 
Slack i
s often viewed in these models as a useful proxy at best.  I
f there™s a lot 
of slack, then your marginal costs won™t be rising
; they™ll be low, and things like that.  But the 
fundamental is really about marginal costs.
  And so, when you think about that, these models are 
really looking at the inflation data and everything around those data and saying, ﬁWe just don™t 

see inflationary pressures.ﬂ I can™t tell you exactly what the resource slack is that is embodied in 

that, but we don™t see inflationary pressures, and that™s coming out of all four of the models that 

we™re presented with quarterly. 
Another point that President Lacker ra
ised is, if sticky prices are really what™s 
fundamental here, why haven™t they adjusted already
?  And you hear that a lot.  In these models, 
                     
   
  
     
    
         
      
     a lot of asynchronous price adjustment for whatever reason is 
given
, and John Taylor has 
contributed importantly to exactly that point going way back over the last 20 or more years.  
But 
even allowing for the fact that maybe there would have been adjustments already, I think it™s 
reasonable to assume that we™ve been hit with a sequence of negative aggregate demand shocks 

along the lines 
that I 
believe 
President Williams™
s comments were pointing at.  At least we™ve 
certainly been surprised the last three summers in a row that output has been lower than we were 

projecting, s
o something different is at work.
  And then it™s 
also the case that 
inflationary 
expectations matter in these pricing equations and models.  This is a little more delicate and 

subtle.  Apparently inflation expectations are stable in all of these models, but there 
are
 subtle 
modeling choices at work in each of them about what the stochastic process is for marginal cost 

pressures and how they™re updated and what inflation expectations are.  This gets at a point of 

dissatisfaction
Šwhen I talk with various people in the Federal Reserve, they might say, ﬁI do
n™t 
like looking at the FRB/
US projections because I see all 
of 
this monetary accommodation 
coming, and I don™t see inflation coming, a
nd why is that?
ﬂ  I talk to people, and they worry a lot 
about inflation.  
We aren™t able to model that
Šapparently not sa
tisfactorily, 
because they all 
come back to the same place, which is
, expectations are well anchored or the stochastic process 
is 
mean
 reverting at some level, and so we just don™t see things getting out of hand.  I want to 
point out 
that this is not 
a FRB
/US question per se, but it™s a statement about how much we 
really 
know within the context of well-articulated macro models.  It™s way beyond just FRB/
US. 
All of our DSGE models have that same feature. 
So the bottom line, Mr. Chairman, 
is that this is the
 third summer in a row that economic 
growth has failed to achieve escape velocity, and the economy™s liftoff has fizzled on the 
          
                 
               launching pad.  It seems clear that the outlook crosses the threshold that justifies more action.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Thank you.
  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When we were in Jackson Hole, 
we got to hear you, Mr. Chairman, talk about the tools we have available.  You described our 

asset purchase tools and our communication tools, and so I™d like to give you some feedback 

from the 
Ninth District about how we™re doing on the communication front.  I get the same kinds 
of questions, I would sayŠusually from different people, but they sometimes come from the 

same person
.  The first comment is
, as the FOMC 
considers its date to keep rates low through 
late 2014, people are concerned, 
why is 
it that 
the Fed 
is 
committed to keep
ing 
rates low for two 
years
?  How could the Fed commit like this without thinking about the fact that the world could 
change in some fashion
?  And the second 
comment is
, by saying that interest rates are going to 
be low for that long or 
are expected
 to be low for that long, the Fed is signaling that conditions 
will be weak, and that
, in and of itself, is suppressing demand.  Now, of course, I say to them, 
ﬁNo, you misunderstood what the FOMC is intending to say to you.  It is meaning to 

communicate that the economic conditions threshold for raising rates is now higher than you 

might have thought.  The recovery has to be further along than you might have thought.ﬂ  A
t this 
stage, my questioner says, 
ﬁWell, that makes sense, but why didn™t you guys just say that?ﬂ  A
t that point, I usually turn the conversation to something about fracking 
[laughter] because that 
seems to work.  To me, this kind of dialogue suggests 
that 
we need to communicate more clearly 
about our reaction function.  And communication about our reaction function is sometimes 

motivated in terms of accountability and transparency, and these are, I think, good motivations.  
      
       
    
                           
       But as my brief summary of my 
Ninth District colloquies indicates, communication about 
our react
ion function is also an 
essential
 ingredient to the effectiveness of policy. 
Now, the changes that have been made in B(5) relative to what was in the previous 
FOMC statement in July
ŠB(5) 
now represents even more of a commitment because actually the 
conditioning clauses have been removed, although 
many readers were not paying close attention 
to those conditional clauses anyway.  I think the lead-in sentence to B(5) is much better, but I 

have to say, most people don™t read the words that carefully in the FOMC statement.  Their 

takeaway is the year.  That™s the main thing they™re hearing. 
So before we communicate 
our reaction function, we have to start thinking about how we 
formulate one, and as I™
ve m
entioned before, I think that a good reaction function should have at 
least two inputs
: some measure of inflationary pressures and some measure 
of labor 
market 
underutilization.  These inputs would capture how well we™re doing in terms of our two 

mandates
, and our policy stance, I would think, should evolve as these inputs change.  
I see this 
as the basis for the approach that President Plosser, President Williams
, and I are following in 
our alternative policy statements.  The K
PW statements emphasize only those changes of the 
data that are viewed as leading to changes in measures of inflationary pressures and labor market 

underutilization.  
And then the KPW statement
s translate those changes in inflationary pressure
s and labor market underutilization into 
the rationale for the 
Commit
tee
™s policy decisions.  
At this 
point, I™ll digress briefly to say that I think we™ve completed our cycle of going through the 

parallel FOMC statements, and President Plosser, I believe, will bring forward the KPW 

approach to t
he 
subcommittee on communications for further consideration.  So I™m sure the 
subcommittee members are glad to hear that.
  That said, just like the FOMC statement itself, the 
               
                    KPW memos are very oriented around changes in monetary accommodation and how they 
relate 
to changes in conditions. 
Ultimately
, though, 
a Committee reaction function has to translate the level of 
inflationary pressures and the level of resource utilization into a decision about the level of 
monetary accommodation.  A 
key challenge we
™ve
 struggled 
with is that it™s much easier for us 
to reach accord about the changes in these variables than it is for us to reach accord
, at least 
qualitatively, about the levels of inflationary pressures and the levels of resource utilization.  A
s we saw fr
om submissions of the consensus forecast, there are very different views around the 
table on that.  Some might see this heterogeneity as precluding the possibility of developing a 

Committee reaction function, but I think this is where the consensus forecas
t process is a very 
useful way forward.  It provides a way for us to come together behind a 
Committee view about 
the medium-term inflation outlook and about the economy™s performance relative to the 

employment mandate, conditional on our current policy stance now and as anticipated.  
Then we 

can usefully formulate the Committee™s reaction function as a mapping from that consensus vi
ew into policy choices.  ﬁMedium-
term inflation is too high relative to target
ﬂ:  That would say you 
should contemplate reducing accommodation.  ﬁThe unemployment rate is too high over the 

medium run relative to 
mandate
-consistent levels
ﬂ:  Then the Committee should contemplate 
adding accommodation. 
Mr. Chairman, the Committee™s consensus view about the economy seems clear, and it™
s been described in many recent FOMC statement
s. The Committee expects inflation to be at or 
below target over the medium run and unemployment to continue to be elevated fo
r some time 
relative to mandate
-consistent levels.  That consensus viewŠ
inflation 
running too low; 
                 
        
                         unemployment, too highŠimplies a need for additional accommodation, accommodation that 
would lower unemployment while keeping inflation near target. 
I open
ed by discussing a public desire, 
at least in the Ninth District
, for greater clarit
y about our reaction function.  In the next go-round, 
I™ll describe how
, by fulfilling that desire
, we 
can also provide additional accommodation.  And I™ll return to the question being posed to me 

implicitly by my Ninth District interlocutors
:  Under what conditions 
will
 the FOMC begin to 
raise the fed funds rate? I will argue that our communications often suggest the FOMC is 

unwilling to tolerate low unemployment, even if that low unemployment rate is not translating 

into medium-
term inflationary pressure
s.  And I think p
aragraph 5
 of 
alternative B offers us an 
opportunity to clarify our attitude toward low unemploymentŠthat we™re not against low 

unemployment 
if it doesn™t lead to medium
-term inflationary pressures. Maybe that clarification 
could provide stimulus that™s appropriate in light of the Committee™s consensus outlook.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
The 10
th District economy continues to 
expand at a moderate pace. Our retail, restaurant
, and auto contacts reported higher sales and 
expect gains in coming months, particularly those in the auto sector.  
Energy activity expanded 

further as gains in oil drilling outpaced declines in natural gas drilling.  Housing marke
t conditions continued to improve, and construction activity increased for both residential and 

nonresidential sectors.  
Manufacturing activity in the 
District expanded at a slightly faster pace in 
August.  The number of contacts in our manufacturing surve
y who 
were expecting higher levels 
of production and shipments in six months moved notably higher, and expectations of 

employment gains remained in positive territory. 
One component of our survey that has softened 
      
    
       
                           over the past several months is the expec
ted level of new export orders.  The number of contacts 

reporting higher levels has been declining but still outweighs those expecting an outright decline.  

So far this year
, total 
District exp
orts remain above their level a year ago, though exports to 
Eur
ope have been decreas
ing. 
In terms of the D
istrict labor market
, initial claims for 
unemployment insurance have declined notably over the past few months, and layoff 

announcements have been modest.  Still, employers remain quite cautious about expanding their 

payrolls.  
In terms of ag
ricultural
 conditions, U.S. net farm incomes are 
projected to reach their 
second
-highest level in history despite the worst dr
ought in three decades. Farm incomes are 
being supported by higher crop prices and crop insurance payments, 
which are offsetting 

declines in production and livestock profits.  In addition, the persistent, strong demand from the 

ethanol and export sectors continues to strain low crop inventories and could 
place upward 

pressure on prices heading into 2013 as reflected in futures markets. 
Turning to the national outlook, the recovery has been progressing mostly in line with my 
expectations.  Overall, I take a similar view as the 
Tealbook in that incoming dat
a since the last 
meeting ha
ve not materially affected my outlook for 
economic 
growth.
  For the second half of 
this year, I anticipate 
that 
firms will remain reluctant to undertake large expansion projects or 
aggressively add to payrolls because of the near-term risk.  In particular, I noted in the most 

recent NFIB survey that small businesses cite taxes and the regulatory landscape as their most 

pressing problems, with poor sales third on the list.  These issues are reaffirmed when I talk with 

my business contacts, 
and suggest that monetary policy may find it particularly challenging to 

offset headwinds of this nature.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 
                    
                         MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Incoming information since our last 
meeting suggests that economic conditions in the 
Third
 District have continued to improve 
modestly.  Although labor markets and manufacturing remain subdued, the housing sector and 
retail
 sales have strengthened notably.  Housing markets in the D
istrict are 
showing their 
strongest signs of recovery since the recession began.  House prices are up significantly in the 

second quarter in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.  Housing permits driv
en mostly by multifamily
-sector housing have been on an upward trend, and residential builders and real estate agents both 

reported increased activity in August.  
The commercial real estate market is also showing 

continued signs of strength.  Tightening in the office market in C
enter 
City
, Philadelphia, 
is 
placing upward pressure o
n rents.  
Retail sales in the region have grown somewhat faster over 
the intermeeting
 period, and auto sales have continued to increase at a good pace. 
Turning to the nation, based on incoming information, my forecast for the second half of 
this year is not terribly enlightening. It™s modest
, and I think it will continue to be over the 

coming six months.  
How
ever, my medium-term and longer-term forecasts have not changed 
very much and, indeed, point to a continuing modest recovery.  Given the large size and nature 

of the shocks that hit the economy, a slow recovery, 
as we™ve heard
, is actually the most likely 
outcome.  It™s not necessarily evidence that our monetary policy stance is inappropriate.  Indeed, 

many of the rules reported in Tealbook 
B suggest 
that policy is about right.  Political and fiscal 
uncertainties at home and abroad still cloud the outlook and are holding back business 

investment.
  Overwhelmingly, 
the anecdotal evidence suggests that business leaders
™ reluctance 
to invest and hire i
s driven by uncertainty, not excessively tight financial conditions.  Households 
continue to deleverage, and that™s holding back spending as saving remains high.  My concern is 

that 
none of the
se headwinds will likely be ameliorated or substantially affected in the near term 
                
    
                             with further monetary easing or the 
further 
easing 
of 
financial conditions.  That doesn™t seem to 
be a constraint. 
I know I™m not alone in having wished for a stronger employment report last Friday.  
The 
payroll increase in August and the downward revisions to June and July were disappointing.  
Despite the strong actions that the Fed has taken, the unemployment rate remains above 

8 percent.
 This has generated a discussion about whether the continuing high levels of 
unemployment are structural or cyclical in nature. I actually don™t find this conversation very 

useful, particularly for policy.  Rather, 
I believe 
it™s better to think about whether the high level 
of unemployment can be addressed by further easing of financial conditions, whic
h is what 
monetary policy would entail.  
It seems to me that before we conclude that unemployment calls 
for more monetary policy accommodation, we must understand more about the nature of the 

shock that™s caused high unemployment and its unwelcome persiste
nce.  This is consistent with 
President Lacker™s observations.  It™s not about whether unemployment is 
cyclical, structural, 
permanent
, or temporary, necessarily.  It™s about understanding the nature of the shock that™s 
causing the problem that we observe. 
There™s still a lot we don™t understand about the labor market and its ongoing struggles.  
Academic and public debate expresses a wide range of views, and we should be humble about 

our state of knowledge.  We™ve discussed, for example, the difficulty of t
ransferring skills from 
one sector to another.  Those who lost their jobs in construction will have a hard time going to 

other industries.  But this type of unemployment cannot be solved by monetary policy.  

However,
 it™s not the only source of mismatch.  
Skill mismatch can occur within sectors, not just 
across sectors. 
Jai
movich and S
iu point to what™s called job polarizatio
n.  Job opportunities in 
middle
-skill occupations, which tend to be focused on routine tasks, 
are disappearing because of 
                
                  
          changes in 
technology and other things, while low-
skill
 and high-skill job opportunities are in 
fact increasing.
  The employment share of routine occupationsŠthis middle group, which 
includes jobs 
such as machine operators, meat
-processing plant workers, and 
office a
nd administrative supportŠ
has been decreasing since the mid
-1980s.  At the same time, the 
employment share of nonroutine cognitive occupationsŠincluding surgeons, lawyers, and, 
of 
course, economistsŠand that of nonroutine manual operationsŠ
whether it be janitors, 

gardeners, bartenders, 
or 
home health care
Šhave been rising. 
In other words, there appears to 
be a polarization in the job market to
ward the low and the high, 
or the tails of the distribution
, and away from the middle.  During the three jobless recoveries since 1991, the level of 

employment in these routine occupations has never recovered to pre-
recession levels.  The 
absolute level appears to fall and fall permanently.  The fact 
that 
this job loss seems to occur 
sharply during rece
ssions makes it appear to be cyclical, but it does not recover.  This is a 
phenomenon that cannot be addressed by monetary policy.  
For t
hose who point to low w
age 
growth as evidence against mismatch
, it™s interesting to note that real wages in the tail of 
the 
distribution actually seem to be rising modestly, unlike in the middle of the distribution.  Again, 

we do not have definite answers to what™s happening in the labor market, but we need to 

consider that evidence exists that the problems may not be amen
able to monetary policy 
or easing of financial conditions. 
The FOMC has applied a high level of monetary stimulus during this recession and 
recovery.  The fed funds rate has been effectively zero for four years, and we 
have said we 
expect 
it to remain 
there 
at least through late 2014.  We have implemented two rounds of asset 
purchases, followed by the maturity extension program.  Yet unemployment remains high.  

Given this evidence, one could draw two possible conclusions.  One is that monetary policy is 
         
    
    
                   
  
         
   
   
   the right tool, but we just haven™t implemented a large enough program.  Given the sluggish 
employment response to date and the large amount of stimulus that has been supplied
, it seems 

as though 
it™s increasingly plausible that further monetary accommodation
 is not going to be 
effective in quickening the pace of recovery to 
a higher 
level
 of employment
, much as we wish it 
could. 
One still might argue that because high unemployment is very costly and we are 
uncertain about the effect of more monetary policy accommodation, we should try it.  What do 

we have to lose?  Well, in my view, 
we have a lot to lose. The large
r the balance sheet becomes
, the higher 
are 
the risks to the economy that we will not be able to exit in a way that preserves 
price stability, maximum employment
, or 
our own credibility.  Ever-more-
aggressive action 
increases the r
isk of poor outcomes in the not-too-distant future or maybe the distant future.  
To avoid this, we are going to have to be relying on tools that are not guaranteed to work.  Inflation 

expectations, while stable, are stable 
until they™re not.  Should inflation begin to rise quickly, we 

may have to contract our balance sheet at a very fast pace or perhaps raise IOER very rapidly. 

Will that be disruptive to markets? We won™t 
know until we face that situation.  If our policy is 

not very effective at influencing unemployment rates, then inflation could begin to rise well 

before unemployment has shown much of a decline.  Will we have the fortitude to take the 

necessary actions to reduce accommodation
, and if so, how well will we be able to communicate 
our rationale?  Would we disrupt markets? Would we reverse the progress on unemployment? I 

have grave concerns that we are sowing the seeds of a very complicated exit for little or
 no benefit to the unemployment rate today.  
We say these exit risks are manageable, and I™d like to 

believe that they are, but we really don™t know that.  Given the unprecedented nature of the 

actions we™ve taken, how manageable these risks are is really 
unknowable at this time.  
We are 
       
      
                 
         
    
     
     
   
       and will be in uncharted waters.  That™s one reason I strongly urge us to be prudent.  To my 
mind
, at this point, costs of further action greatly exceed expected benefits.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank 
you.  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, just as 
President Lacker was 
a straight man for President 
Lockhart, in a 
way
, President Plosser has been a straight man for me
.  L
ike President Pianalto
, I will interlocutate 
[laughter] 
more tomorrow than I plan to do today. 
President Williams made a very important point. 
He talked about how uncertainty has 
paralyzed most businesses and how uncertainty acts as an aggregate demand shock.  I agree with 

that analysis. I hear that from my contacts.  The ques
tion is, is monetary policy effective in 
offsetting this form of uncertainty?  President George mentioned the National Federation of 

Independent Business.  She cited some data.  What she did not cite was that 93 
percent of that 

sample makes clear that they
 do not wish to borrow, 
either because of uncertainty or because 
they have access to capital that
™s abundant and cheap.  In my own surveys 
as preparation for this 
meeting, I asked a simple question
: If the actions we were to take at this upcoming meeting 
were 
to reduce your cost of capital by 25 basis points or more, what would it do in terms of your 

investment plans? I deliberately sampled larger companies because that™s 
where cap
-ex come
s from.  Employment comes from small
 and medium-sized businesses.  
We assume that, just by 

sheer wei
ght of numbers, significant cap-
ex come
s from large corporations.  And I would say 
that 
9 out of 10 said it would not change 
thei
r investment plans, even if we took action that led to 
a reduction 
of 
1 percent or more in the
ir cost of capital.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 
                       
     
                           
    
        VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  First, I want to make a comment on President Fisher™s 
last remark.  My understanding is that capital spending has never been particularly i
nterest rate 
sensitive.  It™s really driven by demand and capacity utilization, things of that nature.  So I 
wouldn™t expect that to be a really strong channel by which monetary 
policy stimulates the 
economy. 
MR. FISHER.  Can I just make a point to that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
.  Sure. 
MR. FISHER.  At least in the drafts 
of our statement, we were 
saying that 
business fixed 
investment was weak.  The question is, are we affecting business fixed investment?  And, more 

important than 
that, are we affecting employment? 
My point is that in the responses I™
m getting 
to anecdotal 
inquiryŠ
not systematically organized, although the systematic surveys that we see, 
through the NFIB and others, show 
that it is questionable whether or not we are ac
tually 
affec
ting employment.  The question is, 
are we affecting employment 
over the short term or the 
long term?  We have a wealth effect.  The Chairman has made that a very strong argument, 

including 
at the last meeting. 
If you™re advising 
a corporation about what to do with the savings 
that they can achieve through cheaper capital
, they can invest it in greater plant or equipment 
expansion, they can buy back their stock, or they can increase their dividends.  And I would 

argue that the former would have 
a more immediate impact on employment creation than the 
latter. 
Excuse me. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
My point was that I don™t think very many people in the 
room would debate the point that capital spending is not going to be very influenced by small 

changes
 in interest rates.  So I don™t think that™
s something that we have a big disagreement 
about around the table. 
                    
             
    
          
           
    
    As far as the outlook is concerned, since the last meeting, I think there™
s been very little 
change with respect to the U.S. data.  Some data are 
a bit better
Šthe retail sales data, the motor 
vehicle sales data.  Some are 
worse
Šlike the ISM, which fell below 50, and the components of 
the ISM were particularly weak. 
Inventory strength actually held up the ISM, which is a little 
concerning.  T
he cap
ital goods orders have clearly been weak.  I™ve noticed that, if you look at 
the nondefense capital goods orders ex air, the rate of orders now has 
fallen below the rate of 
shipments, and this is actually not a positive indicator for what™s going to happen 
to capital 
spending going forward. In terms of payrolls, I was prepared to come into the meeting, if we had 

a strong payroll employment report, to argue how noisy the data 
are
 and how we can™t take a
ny signal from 
that
. But the reality is, if you really
 look at the trendŠand understand that there™
s a 
lot of noise in the 
series
Šthe last two months, 118,000 per month
; so far this year
, 139,000 per 
month
; in 2011, 153,000 per month.  Now, there™s noise month to month, but if you look at the 

longer-
term tren
ds, 
what you see is basically either a flat trend or maybe a gradually slowing 
trend.  So that™s what I would take away from the payroll data. 
There are 
also two other negative developments that I think are really worth highlighting.  
First, I think the external environment continues to worsen.  We™ve talked a lot about Europe, but 

we haven™t really talked very much about China.  ChinaŠif you look at the 
official GDP growth 
numbersŠ
is still okay; 7.6 percent, I think, 
was 
the number for the last quarter.  But if you look 
at the actual indicators coming out of China
Šlike 
trade
, for exampleŠ
it would not at all 
surprise me if it turned out that the Chinese sl
owdown was much more substantial than what the 

official indicators 
show.  
We™re also going to be seeing a further shock to real income over the 
near term from higher oil, gasoline, and grain prices.  T
he grain price effect is going to be 
particularly probl
ematic for the EMEs
, where f
ood is a much larger share of the consumption 
          
  
      
          
        
        
     
    
 basket.
  Also, as many other people have noted, the risks in early 2013 are tilted to the downside 
given what
™s going to happen on the fiscal front.  I don™t think any of us knows 
with any 
certainty what
™s going to happen, but the uncertainty between now and then is negative for the 
outlook.  And I think most of us 
believe 
that we
™re probably going to end up with some greater 
degree of fiscal restraint in early 2013 than what we have 
right now. 
So to me, the economic outlook calls for us to do more.  Now, I agree that the tools we 
have are not that powerful.  But rather than concluding from this that we shouldn™t use them, I 
conclude that we should use them more forcefully.  I think 
a failure to act forcefully at this 
meeting would be very damaging to confidence; 
it would imply that we
™re out of ammunition or 
almost out of ammunition
; and it 
also 
might signal that we were cowed by the political 
environment, which I think would be very u
nfortunate.
  When I consider the risks to action 
versus inaction in an uncertain world, I also view the outcome very much as quite 
asymmetric, 
with the bias clearly on the side of action.  
Consider two alternatives
:  We do more, and the 
economy is stronger 
than expected
; versus, 
we do very little
, and the economy disappoints.  
Which creates the greatest disappointment? Surely the latter. 
I would be very happy if we did 
another round of LSAPs, extended the guidance, et cetera, and the economy turned out to 

surprise us and did better than expected.  In that case, we could cut off the LSAP program early, 

and the balance sheet wouldn™t have grown very much.  In contrast, if we do nothing and the 

economy disappoints, I think we will rue that as a lost opportuni
ty. I also think the timing is 
right.  The ECB did something very forceful at their last meeting, and following on right behind 

them might actually provide a firmer underpinning or momentum to confidence and market 

sentiment. 
       
         
             
           Now, what
™s the lesson of the past few years? Well, I think the lesson of the past few 
years is 
that 
we™ve been consistently disappointed on the 
economic 
growth side of the equation.  
There are two explanations for this.  One is that the headwinds were greater than what we 
thought, but there™
s another explanation as well
Šthat maybe monetary policy is not as 
accommodative as we thought.  And this goes back to President Williams™s 
comments. 
I™
m pretty convinced that monetary policy stimulus effects probably become attenuated over time, 
because part of the way that monetary policy works is by affecting the timing of spending 

decisions.  We don™t really have an experience where we
™ve had a period like this in which 

monetary policy has supposedly been very loose for many years in a row.  A
nd I expect what 
we™re seeing is that the monetary policy impulse to the growth side is actually lessening over 
time.
  Regardless of whether you say it™s consistent disappointment because of headwinds or 
consistent disappointment because monetary policy is not as 
stimul
ative
, as we thought, I think 
either way
, they both imply that we should do more.  
We™ve essentially foreshadowed forceful 
action in the August FOMC statement, the minutes to that meeting, and the Chairman™s Jackson 

Hole speech, so I think it™s time to follow up on what we™ve foreshadowed with action at this 

meeting.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anybody for coffee?  Coffee is available.  Why don™t we 
take 20 minutes and return at 3:10? 
[Coffee break] 
CHA
IRMAN BERNANKE
.  This i
s a prompt group.  I like this. 
MR. 
LACKER
.  Thanks to Debbie.  Thanks to the Deputy S
ecretary. 
MS. DANKER.  Happy to help. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  All right.  Governor Yellen. 
      
    
      
           
                     
     
  
    
MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The two employment reports we have 
received since our last meeting confirm that the economy is growing too slowly to generate any 
meaningful progress in improving labor market conditions.  They™re consistent with an economy 
that is expanding at or near its potential.  And although I was heart
ened by July™s strong reading 
on consumer spending, I agree with the staff™s reluctance to make too much out of one month of 

better data.
  Taking a broader perspective, incoming data provide no evidence of any 
fundamental change in the outlook for the better.  I agree with the conclusion, too, of the staff 

memo for this meeting that the preponderance of evidence points to a large margin of labor 

market slack. 
If payroll gains are sustained at their recent paceŠaround 125,000 per month in 
July and AugustŠ
there
™s a good chance that we will look back on a lost decade.  The SEP 
forecast I submitted this round shows unemployment hovering above 7 percent at the end of 

2014, even with substantial additional policy accommodation.  Moreover, continued progress at 

the pace we have seen recently is a big ﬁif.ﬂ 
Readings from some forward
-looking indicators, 
such as the expectations component of consumer sentiment and new orders for nondefense 

capital goods ex aircraft, do not bode well for household and business spending in the months 

ahead. 
Amid the search for explanations of the painfully slow recovery, there™
s been a lively 
debate about the role of economic uncertainty.  Now, there are many different sources of 

economic uncertainty, but many of you have highlighted uncertainty about economic policy, 

especially about European policy responses and about the outlook for U.S. fiscal policies.  

You
™ve noted that this policy uncertainty has been restraining household and business spending.  
And several of you have hypothesized that this might account for the weak spending and hiring 

we saw last spring. 
If uncertainty about economic policy as opposed to uncertainty about the 
                      
     
                    broader economic outlook, accounts for why employers were deferring hiring and investment 
decisions, then a lifting of that uncertainty might arguably provide a significant boost to 

spending.  Under a favorable scenario, for example, we could see some resolution of fiscal policy 

uncertainty in the months after the election.  My own view is that policy un
certainty has been 
exerting some negative influence on aggregate demand.  Some systematic evidence of its 

influence comes from empirical work by Nick Bloom at Stanford.  Bloom and his coauthors have 

developed a high-frequency measure of economic policy uncertainty, and they™
ve related this 
measure to key economic variables, such as payroll employment growth.  They show that 

increases in economic policy uncertainty foreshadow declines in output, employment, and 

investment, and that high levels of policy uncertainty in recent years, such as uncertainty about 

future tax policies and the debt ceiling, have hampered the recovery. 
But economic policy uncertainty is only one of many factors relevant to the economic 
outlook.  And the evidence, as I read it, strongly suggests that an uptick in policy uncertainty 

cannot account for last spring™s slowdown.  Bloom™s index of economic p
olicy 
uncertainty 
spiked up in the summer of 2011, but by March it had fallen back two-thirds of the way toward 

pre
-recession levels. 
It remained at low levels in April and May, at the very time when the 
economic recovery was sputtering.  On the premise that economic policy uncertainty affects 

economic activity through consumer and business sentiment, it™s also worth noting that several 

ind
exes of consumer sentiment and business optimism peaked in April or May.  
So an increase in 
economic policy uncertainty does not seem capable of explaining the spring slowdown.  This 

suggests to me that spending is unlikely to surge, even if policy uncerta
inty were to diminish in 
the months ahead.  Unfortunately, our current economic malaise has substantially deeper roots 

than just uncertainty about the future direction of economic policy, and these headwinds are 
           
       
    
        unlikely to soon subside. Uncertainty, broadly defined, does, however, influence my thinking 
about monetary policy.  Uncertainty provides a reason why we should act forcefully now to 

strengthen the recovery, rather than trying to keep our powder dry.  Given the downside risks to 

the current outlook, and the constraints on our ability to provide stimulus while the funds rate is 

at the lower bound, the best we can do at this point is to ensure that the economy is as resilient as 

possible in case we are faced with fiscal gridlock, a European debacle, o
r other negative shocks. 
Another argument for strong action relates to h
yste
resis.  We face the worrisome risk that 
the longer the economy operates with such high levels of slack, the more likely it is that the 

downturn will have a lasting negative impact on employment and potential output.  I™
ve seen no 
strong evidence for h
yste
resis effects yet, but our current situation is unprecedented, at least in 
recent U.S. history.  
In the early 1980s, the unemployment rate fell almost 
4 percentage points 
over the 2¾ years following its late 1982 peak, to 7 percent.  By contrast, since its most recent 

peak in October 2009, the unemployment rate has fallen less than 2 percentage points.  

Moreover, h
yste
resis effects may become evident not only in the unemployment rate, but also in 
labor force participation.  As the Tealbook box shows, the participation rate remains far below 

the staff™s estimate of its demographic trend rate, and persistently poor job-finding prospects may 

well leave a permanent imprint on the particip
ation rate.
  Taking this argument one step further, I 
would argue that just as there can be permanent costs of allowing unemployment to remain high 

for an extensive time, there can also be permanent gains in output and employment in a high-

pressure labor market.
  We saw some evidence of this in the late 1990s, when h
yste
resis seemed 
to be working in reverse by pulling population segments into the labor force that for a long time 

had been excluded.  Chronic labor shortages induced firms to invest more heavily in training, 
         
        
       
                        
and it fostered upward mobility as firms moved employees up through internal job ladders more 
rapidly. 
Hyste
resis provides a rationale for 
a more expansionary monetary policy.  The argument 
runs as follows.  Our usual loss function is symmetric around 
the 
NAIRU.  It thus assigns equal 

costs to given size deviations of unemployment above and below 
the 
NAIRU.  But with 
hyste
resis
, the penalty for a deviation of unemployment above 
the 
NAIRU should be greater than 
that for an identical deviation of unemployment below 
the 
NAIRU.
  The implications of such an 
asymmetric weighting of unemployment gaps for optimal monetary policy in the present 

circumstances are substantial.  Bob Tetlow, a staff member in the 
Board™s 
Division of Research 
and Statistics, has been exploring optimal control simulations where the loss function depends on 

the squared deviations of a transformation of the unemployment rate from the NAIRU, rather 

than on the squared deviations of the unemployment rate itself from the 
NAIRU. 
This is a 
tractable technique for, in effect, assuming an asymmetric loss function.  In Tetlow™s 

simulations, the only policy tool available is the path of the federal funds rate.  His results 

showed that even a moderately lower weight on unemployment undershoots below the NAIRU, 

relative to overshoots, could postpone the timing of liftoff substantially. 
Based on all of these considerations, in tomorrow™s policy go-round or maybe this 
afternoon™s, I will argue that strong policy action is called fo
r at this meeting. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was going to make comments about my 
forecast compared 
with
 the consensus, but I™m not entirely sure which one of the consensus 
forecasts to compare it 
with. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You pick. 
[Laughter] 
          
              
                      
        
       MS. DUKE. I
™ll just say that I think it
™s not inconsistent, but there are four assumptions 
that are a little bit different in my forecast than in the Tealbook and
, maybe
, in the forecasts of 
some of you.  Th
e first one 
is that there is an underlying strength in the fundamentals of the 
economyŠ
such as balance sheet strength, debt service capacity, and credit supply
Šand that this 
strength is being masked by low levels of business and consumer confidence as well 
as concern 
about risks posed by Europe and the fiscal cliff, but that whenever loan demand picks up, 
the 
credit supply will be fully available to meet it. 
The second
 one is 
that it
™ll be especially difficult 
to interpret data over the second half of this year and the first half of next year, as investment and 

purchase decisionmaking is increasingly either paralyzed or distorted by uncertainty about 

federal tax and spending policies, and that, on balance, the uncertainty itself will depress activity 

and lead to weaker outcomes for 2012 and 2013.  Third, the one place I do still see a potential for 

an upside surprise is in housing, and I 
believe
 purchasing mortgages might be helpful here, but 
not necessarily in the ways that you might think.  And, finally, I 
have assumed that we choose 
alternative B today
.  Furthermore, in light of my assumptions about the fiscal cliff, we™
re more 
likely to face deteriorating conditions than simply unsatisfactory progress as we approach the 

end of the year; 
and that the deter
ioration will lead us to continue asset purchases well into 2013. 
In recent meetings
, I™ve talked at length about my belief in the first assumption, and I™
m not going to repeat that today.  But I™d like to discuss assumptions 2 and 3 in this round and 

rese
rve comments about assumption 4 for the policy round.  
Beginning with my pessimism about 

the rest of this year and the first part of next, almost every conversation that I™
ve had with a 
business person or a banker recently has ha
d the same theme: 
Things s
eem pretty much the 
same
Šslow, steady improvement in business fundamentals, but with a new tendency to put all 

long-term investment or expansion decisions off until after the election.  Oddly enough, these 
                     
             
                  
businesses have the luxury of postponing decisionm
aking precisely because things have 
improved.  They™ve strengthened their balance sheets and found ways to grow the bottom line 
even in the face of sluggish top-
line growth. In fact, their profitability
-improvement efforts are 
likely at least partly 
responsible for the slow improvement in labor markets.  Indeed, the business 
investments that do get the green light are mostly directed at saving labor, and no one mentions 

any plans for hiring.  I believe the marked slowdown in business spending that we™
re already 
seeing is 
a direct result of a wait
-and
-see attitude. 
As we get closer to the end of the year and the expiration of tax cuts, implementation of 
expense sequestration, and expiration of fixes for doctors and alternative minimum taxes, 

businesses 
and individuals will have to start making adjustments for what could happen, whether 

or not it actually does.  For example, contractors who expect that they™
ll have to cut staffing if 
their contracts are affected by sequestration are legally required to is
sue layoff notices in 
advance, even if the spending is not ultimately cut and the layoffs don™t actually happen.  Those 

who receive the notices will surely adjust their spending accordingly, and this potential pall on 

holiday spending has to be making retailers nervous about their inventories.  Those same 

retailers are having to pull the trigger now on their inventory decisions in the face of a potential 

shutdown of E
ast 
Coast ports by a longshorem
en™s
 strike.  So who could blame them if they 
decide to shav
e a bit off their purchases just to be sure? 
Health
-care companies are especially 
cautious as they plan for both sequestration and implementation of health-
care reform.  Simple 
operational changes, like tax withholding tables, have to be put in place for all businesses.  For 

individuals, asset sales decisions, especially for sales of businesses, will have to be made soon to 

ensure the current capital gains tax rate. I had the personal experience of doing a new will 

recently, and my lawyer explained to me 
that things would be very different if I died this year or 
              
                
        
   
         
 in January [laughter].  For these reasons, I believe that the fourth quarter is going to be 
affe
cted 
by the fiscal cliff regardless of its ultimate resolution as businesses
, in particular
, hit the 
brakes. 
And I ca
n™t convince myself that a lame
-duck Congress will somehow resolve all of the fiscal 
issues by the end of the year, no matter how the election turns out.  In fact, the best case I can 
construct is a temporary extension that pushes the poli
tical wrangling well into the first quarter 
of next year.  And after the debt ceiling brinkmanship we saw last time, I think a perfectly 

plausible scenario is a plunge off the fiscal cliff
, on the assumption that some sort of deal will be 
easier to construct after the damage becomes more obvious.
  So I think we have to make 
contingency plans for how we can shore up confidence in the face of a really bad outcome, 
rather 
than thinking just about 
how we react if the recovery stays unsatisfactorily slow.  For these 
reasons, I
™ve taken on board a bit of a lean toward the 
ﬁFiscal 
Cliff
ﬂ scenario in the near
-term 
portion of my forecast. 
In contrast, my continued optimism about housing and the underlying strength in the 
economy shows through in my medium-
term foreca
st.  I think 
that 
the inventory factors that 
began to emerge early in the year are now taking full hold in house price movements, and that 

the momentum arrow is pointing up.  This makes a difference.  
The s
taff estimates that roughly 
3 million households, 
almost 
one-
fourth
 of underwater households, moved from a negative to a 
positive equity position in the second quarter.  The Tealbook baseline forecast assumes a 

5 percent increase in house prices this year that
™s already pretty much baked in, 
followed by a 
leveling
-off.  But some models are predicting continued strong gains in house prices.  Staff 
forecasts of house prices and residential investment are on the conservative side, tempered by 

concern about foreclosure pipelines, 
the elevated level of vacant h
ouses, weak household 
formation, and the tepid pace of 
the 
housing recovery so far. 
                                  Here I think there™
s reason for more optimism. 
Foreclosure pipelines are full because the 
exits are still clogged, but the pace of new delinquencies has slowed markedly.  
The exits are no 
longer clogged by national moratoriums or retooling for new modification programs.  The 

current backlog is more closely tied to state
-specific or operational issues that seem to me 
unlikely to suddenly clear and release a flood of foreclosures onto the market.  
As for the vacant 

inventory, a large portion of the vacant homes not listed for sale 
is outside of bank REO 
inventory.  
Becaus
e we don™t know why they™
re held off the market, I
™m not sure we can make 
assumptions about their sudden return to the market.  I view the potential for pent-up demand to 

show through in faster household formation and put upward pressure on house prices as even 

more likely than the potential for a surge in foreclosures to hold prices down.  At some point, 

demographics win.  Those kids now living at home with their 
parents will not stay there until 
they™re 40.  
[Laughter] 
And when they do form households, they™re going to require housing 
units, whether rental or owner occupied. 
MR. 
FISHER
.  We™re going to hold you to that. 
MS. 
RASKIN
.  Ship them to Betsy™s house.  [Laughter] 
MS. DUKE.  To me, this represents the one area of dry tinder in the economy that could 
be lit with a spark of confidence.  To be sure, mortgage lending conditions are still extremely 

tight, but some recent developments should help.  The specte
r of putback risk has reportedly 
been holding back loans to borrowers at the lower end of GSE standards.  
The 
FHFA has now 

committed to reducing putback risk beginning in January 2013 through better front-end quality 

control and time limits on liability.  Wit
h house prices on the rise, fewer loans should fall 

through 
because of
 appraisal issues.  Regulatory uncertainty should clear, 
as new regulatory 
               
     
                  
      
          requirements for loan origination, securitization, and servicing are likely to be finalized in the 
coming month
s. Probably the biggest drag on lending is the shrinkage of loan origination capacity.  The 
industry is showing signs of strain in what looks to be only a tri
llion
-dollar origination year, 
compared 
with 
a peak origina
tion of $3 trillion not that many years 
ago. 
But if high profits are 
the best fertilizer, we should see more banks entering the business.  I want to investigate actual 

data, but anecdotally, the bankers I spoke with this time 
who
 were in the mortgage business were 
actually having record profits, while those who weren™t in mortgage origination were wondering 

about their survival.  I™
m talking about the difference between a range of 
0.5 to 0.6 ROA, 
for 
those with no mortgage business, versus one of 1.30 to 1.50, for those with a mortgage business.  

So, for all of these reasons, I think there™s a lot of meat left on the house price and housing 
finance bone, and I™
m optimistic about that part of the forecast.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO
.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Because
 John captured my views on the 
economic outlook, I™m going to jettison most of what I would have said.  In fact, I think John 

captured my views better than I had captured my views.  So I thought I™d turn back to labor 

markets
, moved by some of Charlie Plosser™s comments.  The first comment I™d make 
is that it™s 
important to distinguish between cyclical lab
or market conditions and longer-
term labor market 
issues.  I don™t think there™s any doubt that we™ve got some chronic labor market issues in the 

United States.  There
™s been evidence of declining dynamism in U.S. labor markets for well over 
a decade.  There certainly is a substantial sense tha
t people currently taking lower-
income 
service
-sector jobsŠ
if they had better ed
ucation and trainingŠwould be available for jobs that 
might then 
be created with higher value added. 
What Charlie referred to as polarization is 
                         
     
                   
  
     
   undoubtedly true, but again, a chronic issue rather than a cyclical one.  I actually think that 
unlike so many other questions, there™s been a substantial convergence of viewsŠnot entirely, 

but a substantial convergence of viewsŠaround the proposition that a relatively small portion of 

the big jump in unemployment that we™ve seen is attributable to structural fact
ors. There
™s been, 
as you all know, substantial, good, and careful work from the Federal Reserve Banks of 

Cleveland, New York, 
and San Francisco over the past several years that
 has supported that 
conclusion.  A
nd I think among academic researchers, the c
onvergence is also manifesting itself
, as shown most recently in Ed Lazear™s paper at Jackson Hole, following on, by about five 

months, Jesse Rothstein™s paper, 
which surveyed much of the same material and came to many 

of the same conclusions. 
Jeff
, at the last meeting
, suggested that a paper done by Richmond Fed research staff was 
a dissonant voice on this basic proposition that structural unemployment was not a big part of the 

story.  This paper, of course, starts from a very different perspective on long-
term unemployment 
than the literature I just referred to a moment ago.  The Richmond Fed paper argues that an 

unobserved heterogeneity among unemployed workers means that newly unemployed workers 

have inherently different exit rates
, and that over 
time, the composition of the pool of the 
unemployed shifts toward workers who started with the lower exit rates.  I looked at the paper 

after Jeff talked about it at the last meeting, and I spoke with others here at the Board about it, 

and I actually don™t think it establishes a case for structural unemployment. There are a lot of 

empirical and technical questions about the paperŠ
it™s certainly interesting 
and may well have 
significant merit
Šbut I actually don™t think it™s making a structural argument, at 
least not if we 
think of ﬁ
structural
ﬂ as referring to nontransitory unemployment that can™t be affected fairly 
directly by fluctuations in aggregate demand.  It would be unsurprising to learn that firms are 
                
      
        
  
          more likely to lay off relatively less
-valued employees whose lesser perceived abilities may 
mean that they™re less likely to be quickly plucked up by a firm that is hiring.  That phenomenon 
is entirely consistent with 
a demand
-driven increase in unemployment.  
More generally, the 
Richmond Fed model attempts to decompose the variation in the pool of the unemployed over 

time.  So it addresses the reasons for fluctuations in unemployment over historyŠin recessions, 

but also in recoveries.  The reasons for unemploym
ent increases also explain the reversals that 
take place during recoveries.  That is, as there are fewer unemployed
, firms cannot afford to be 
as demanding and thus are more likely to turn to the pool of the supposedly less 
valuable 
workers. 
This seems
, to me at least
, more a 
cyclical than a structural explanation
, and thus, 
again, whatever the ultimate merits of the paper, I don™t think 
it really undercuts the consensus 

reached in the papers to which I referred earlier. 
One final thought on structural unemployment, 
and this relates a bit to what Janet was 
saying a moment ago.  The Richmond paper describes something as the ﬁtrue duration 

dependence
ﬂ position, as opposed to the ﬁunobserved heterogeneityﬂ position that it takes.  The 

true duration dependence position is that, quite apart from any inherent worker qualities, the bad 

luck of being unemployed for an extended period will itself begin to erode the overall 

employability of enough workers that there 
will 
be macroeconomic effects. As Janet said, 
histo
rically
, we haven™t seen much evidence of this in the United States, though many, myself 
included, have thought that the severity and duration of the current employment problem could 

produce some observable h
yste
resis effects this tim
e around.  L
ogically
, one would think that at 
some point these effects would manifest themselves.
  But I have to say, 
to date
, there still isn™t 
much indication of any such effects.  And indeed, I think if one looks at what™s been happening 

to long-term unemployed, you might sa
y there™s actually been a little bit of an improvement in 
                                       
their performance, which would suggest that we™re not sliding closer toward h
yste
resis, but that, 
once again
, for reasons not entirely understood, the U.S. 
labor market seems relatively insulated 
from those effects. But again, as Janet said, basically
, whether you believe that h
yste
resis is 
around the corner or not doesn™t change your policy prescription.  If you think that it hasn™t 
clicked in to date but it might, that™s an argument for greater stimulus now in order to stop it 

from happening.  If you think that there™s unlikely to be h
yste
resis and thus the cyclical 
explanation dominates, then obviously the unemployment should be susceptible to increased 

aggregate demand stimulus.  So, in that sense, I think 
these arguments
 happily converge around 
the same policy prescription.  And for me, 
this all, again, reinforces the view that the story of the 

economy is still one of inadequate aggregate demand.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  First
, I™d like to thank Governor Tarullo for reading the Richmond Fed 
paper
.  Second, I™d like to point out 
that
Šin terms of the distinction I was making before 
between what the unemployment rate would converge to in the long run and the reference rate 

that™s relevant for current policyŠ
a shock that hits the economy today, if it™s a structural shock 

that™s permanent and long lived, 
it is going to affect the longer-
term normal rate of 
unemployment
. But whether it™s permanent or transitory is irrelevant for whether it affects the 
policy-
relevant rate today.
  See what I™m saying? It doesn™t matter if it fades out right away or if 
it™s going to last a long time. It could affect the policy
-relevant rate to
day either way. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How does that handle policy lags?  Monetary policy doesn™t 
work for 
a while. 
       
                     
                 MR. LACKER.  I think that™s orthogonal.  I think that™s tangential to this question.  In the 
models, you™ve got policy lags.  Policy tak
es effect over time, but it™s still the case that you™re 
carrying around this reference rate
ŠPresident Bu
llard talked about a flex price equilibriumŠ 
and it™s affected by both transitory and permanent shocks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook has not changed materially since 
the JulyŒ
August meeting.  Maybe incoming data ha
ve been mixed, but forward-looking 
indicators still remain consistent with an economy growing in the near term in 
a range between 
1½ per
cent and 
2 percent. 
Similarly, the fact
ors shaping the medium-term outlook have not 
changed significantly
; the general contours of my outlook remain the same.  Yes, some of the 
incoming data during the interme
eting period suggested modest increases in household spending 
and employment, and the household sector showed some further slight signs of improvement.  

But no data 
are 
yet showing a basis to believe that these modest increases will be sustained to 
such an extent that faster momentum might be expected
.  Indeed, other data, such as those for 
business spending and consumer confidence, remain soft.  It is not yet obvious that this path, 
or 

even
 a couple of months of stronger-
than
-expected economic activity
, could reduce the amount 
of slack in labor market
s or alter the trajectory of expected inflation to a degree that would 
obviate the need for a further easing of monetary policy.  
Last week™s employment report
Š payroll employment only 55,000 higher than reported in July, 
after taking into account 

revisionsŠdoes not suggest above-trend 
economic 
growth or a declining trend in the 

unemployment rate.  It suggests, 
instead
, that the unemployment rate is likely to move sideways 
with no sign of a substantial and sustainable strengthening in the pace of economic recovery. 
               
                          And this unsatisfactory modal projection is what exists 
before
 even considering downside 
risks to the outlook.  One particular downside risk that remains quite elevated relates to what 
we™ve been talking about
Šthe depressed level of labor participation and the enhanced level of 
long-
term unemployment. 
The decline in the labor force participation rate since the
 beginning of 
the recession is ominous, and although the Board staff predicts that over the next couple of years 

the labor force participation rate will flatten out, the recession
, as Governor Yellen described, 
may well have permanent effects on the labor force participation rate
, just as the high-
pressure 
labor market of the late 1990s pulled people back into the labor force 
who
 had been excluded for 
a long time
Šonly now, unfortunately, 
in reverse. 
In addition, with a substantial and growing 
proportion of unemployed workers having been jobless for long periods, we face an elevated risk 

that such a high level of long-term unemployment will persist long enough to permanently 

depress labor supply and potential output.  Unlike downside risks emanating from the European 

crisis and U.S. fiscal policyŠ
which
, were they to occur, 
theoretically can be addressed with 
accommodative monetary policy after the fact
Šthe potential h
yste
resis created by drops in the 
labor force participation rate and increases in long-
term unemployment will prove intractable to 
address with accommodative monetary policy that isn™t inflationary.
  So I find the particular 
downside risk of h
yste
resis to be especially pernicious because it™s difficult to address after the 
fact. 
But
, more optimis
tically, it is one downside risk that monetary policymakers do have some 
ability to mitigate prior to its occurrence. 
Similarly, I wonder about the permanent or transitory nature of household and business 
expectations.  The economic outlook appears damped by some form of pessimism.  Look at the 

Michigan survey question on the proportion of households expecting unemployment to improve.  

Earlier this year
, that number had recovered, but now it has dropped down again.  
Similarly, 
      
        
     
                         
  households™ income expectations for the coming 12 months have hardly recovered at all since the 
recession despite the fact that actual income has somewhat increased.  On the business side, 

expectations for business conditions six months hence as measured in the Empire State and 

Philadelphia Fed surveys have dropped back sharply again.  In the case of the Empire State 

survey, they™re back close to levels seen during the recession.  Capital spending plans also don™t 

look great.  Surveys from the National Association 
for
 Business Economi
cs show capital 
spending to have dropped sharply in the second quarter.  Surveys from the National Federation 

of Independent Business show capital spending to be gradually rising, 
but still remaining at less 

than half of 
its pre
-recession level. 
It™s diffic
ult to project whether these expectations will 
transition from being temporary blips to permanent shifts, but the fact that these expectations 

have tried to recover from the recession before but been knocked back, sometimes more than 

once, might be a facto
r that could keep households and businesses from getting too hopeful 
again. The longer we have an economy that looks bleak as far as the eye can see, the more this 

bleakness gets built into expectations.  Households and businesses now see a recovery slow to 

materialize.  They assume that things will get better because they always have, but then th
ings 
don™t 
get better
.  So households and businesses start to wonder if this is just a delay or if it™s just 
the new normal.  If they think it™s the new normal, it could become just that.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In terms of the outlook, I™m reasonably close to 
the consensus forecast you put forth, and just a shade more upbeat than I was at ou
r last 

meeting
Šthat is to say, maybe a tenth or two lower on the unemployment rate for 2013. 
I™ve 
interpreted the incoming data since the last meeting inclusive of the jobs report on Friday as 

approximately a 
wash and feel 
as though the situation in Europe looks just a bit brighter.  So, 
             
       
     
   
                    
  
 overall
, I would say it appears we™re still about as 
ﬁstuck in the mud
ﬂ as we have been over the 
last several months, and I agree with Governor Tarullo™s characterization that it™s largely an 
aggregate demand phenomenon. 
In trying to think about the factors that are leading demand to be so sluggish and about 
the channels by which monetary policy might be able to help, I™ve been struck by a few pieces of 

survey evidence.  Now, they turn out to be the s
ame pieces of survey evidence that Governor 
Raskin was just referring to, thereby scooping a fair portion of what I was going to say. 
MS. RASKIN.  It happened to me for a long time.  [Laughter] 

MR. STEIN.  I™m going to 
just start juggling next time. 
Anywa
y, just to underscore, 
really
Šon the Michigan survey, we had a very interesting briefing a few weeks ago by Claudia 
Sahm,
 in R
esearch and 
Statistics
, who
™d been looking carefully at these data.  And the gist of the 
finding is, not only 
is it 
low, but 
also, basically
, it fell 
from
 2007 to 2009, and it really hasn™t 
recovered since.  Moreover, it™s not well explained by household characteristicsŠt
here™s a large 
negative residual there in a way that seems different from previous experience. 
In a similar vein 
but mu
ch less scientifically, I looked at a different survey, the Conference Board™s Consumer 
Confidence Index, which also fell in August.  Very much to your point, they do a breakdown of 

the index into views of the current situationŠ
a present situation in
dex
Šand a future 
expectations piece, and all of the drop was coming from the future expectations piece.  
So I was 

curious.  I went back and compared it 
with
 previous peaks of unemployment that we™ve had.  
The ones I looked at were May 1975 and December 1982.  W
hat you see is
, at those times when 
unemployment was also very high, if you ask
ed people about the present situation, it was dismal, 
but if you ask
ed them about future expectations, it was not nearly so bad as it is today.  These 
are 
just a couple of data points, but 
they™re 
consistent with what I take to be the spirit of Claudia™s 
                  
             
         
    
 work, which is, it™s as if, given where we are today and given the current situation, 
people feel 
the future is considerably more pessimistic
.  And again, I think this is pessimism as opposed to 
uncertainty, which has a slightly different implication because it™s less clear that, if the fiscal 

cliff resolves itself, this kind of thing gets fixed. 
Another survey on the business side
: I just yesterday got a s
urvey that Duke University 
does in conjunction with 
CFO 
magazine
, where they talk to 900 CFOs of U.S. firms.  One of the 
new questions in there this time
ŠI think, 
actually
, Steve Sharp
e helped them design this 
questionŠasked the firms if they would in any 
way change their capital spending plans for a 
given change in interest rates.
  Here
, it is strikingly like a large
-sample version of President 
Fisher™s CEO conversations, where only 3 percent of the firms say they would in any way 

change their capital spen
ding for a 50 basis point movement in rates.  
Now, I take Vice 
Chairman
 Dudley™s critique here.  First of all, in this one, unlike consumer confidence, we don™t 
have a benchmark
, so I don™t know what people would say in normal times
.  But as a Bayesian
, I™m inclined to think that there™s something going on here, even though I wouldn™t say it™s a huge 
thing. 
So, putting this together
Šnow, 
this part is very impressionistic, but I gue
ss the overall 
feeling I get 
from 
looking at these various pieces of survey e
vidence is the sense that when we 
make a policy move now, we™re playing more for whatever effect we can have on consumer and 

business confidence than for the normal hydraulic 
effe
ct we would have on financing conditions 
per se.  That is to say, we may know more about how to move interest rates than about how to 

influence confidence, but it™s the latter that, in some sense, is the dragging anchor.  This is not an 

ﬁalways
ﬂ situation.  I think it™s, in some 
respects, 
the opposite of where we were in 2009 at the 
                     
                    
  
  time of QE1
, when really the thing to do, the imperative, was to fix financing conditions, and 
people would figure it out one way or the other. 
I don™t know if this has any implications for policy. I
t strikes 
me that
, if this is right, it 
should color particularly how we think about the communications aspect.  I, 
like many others 
here
, believe
 that the need for action is clear, but I think, less so than usual, the bond market is 

not really our primary audience.
  So maybe when we think about policy, 
we want to worry less 
about putting together the biggest, most inclusive package that has the maximum bond market 

impact
, and worry more about, how do we deliver a simple and coherent message that normal 
humans can understand, as opposed to mainly Fed w
atchers
?  I think we™ll have a chance to talk 
about some of these issues.  I™m not sure if this concept is fully operational, but I have this 

conviction that we really have to think about our audience as being business m
anagers and 
householdsŠ
more so 
than at other times
.  There™s so much talk about, what are the Fed watchers 
expecting us to do
?  And I think we don™t want to get overly caught up in delivering just to them.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Than
k you.
  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
It does seem to me that there™s a decent 
degree of agreement
, or at least overlap
, about the status and outlook for the economy, and that 
the real question is, what can monetary policy do, 
and
 what should it do going forward?  And 
I™m going to defer that to tomorrow. 
In that spirit
, I propose to deprive the Committee of my 
detailed recitation of intermeeting events and proceed to 
the executive summary part of it
, which 
is, 
really
, that we™ve b
een on a round trip.  We had positive news early in the intermeeting 
period, which 
was a trip to hope and back, and it left me very much in the same place where I 
started
:  I see an economy with a substantial amount of slack that is growing at about 2 
percent
;          
                     
        
       inflation that is bouncing around just below 2 percent on commodity effects, 
but close to target
; and better financial conditions for now.  But as Europe improves, the fiscal cliff begins to 
approach in a serious way, and what I am hearing is that there is little to no hope of action in the 

lame duck.
  Of course, that depends on the arrangement of forces after the election, s
o it™s 
completely unknowable. 
Ultimately and most important
, there is little, if any, reason to expect 
significant improvement in job creation in the coming months. 
My conversations with a group of about 10 diverse industrial companiesŠ
this is not 
auto
s, so it™
s away from one of the real strengths
.  The other parts of the industrial sector, 
let me 
say
, are pretty weak
, and they s
trongly confirm that last point about employment.
  Outside of a 
couple of bright spots like housing and li
ght
 vehicles, it™s soft everywhere, especially in Europe.  
Big customers are postponing orders
; they™re not canceling them.  It™s nothing like from 2008 to 
2009, but the softness that began about six months ago is now the new normal for these 

companies.  The game is about share gain and taking out costs.  It™s 
a low
-growth environment.  
All new projects are on hold, and there is no hiring.  In fact, the 
entire goods
-producing sector of 
the economy lost 16,000 jobs in August.  If you look just at the manufacturing piece of that and 

go back over a quarter, there was a net creation of 15,000 jobs, and two-thirds of that is auto.  I 

want to say that you hear, 
ﬁUncertainty, uncertainty
,ﬂ 
from all 
of 
these people, but they™re really 
talking about two different things.  These are not people who roll over at 4:00 a.m. to check 

Twitter for the latest news from 
Karlsruhe
 on the German decision.  A 
particular compan
y in the 
beverage manufacturing business had a big order from a German OEM for a beverage line, and 

that order has been pushed out at least a quarter.  That™s uncertainty.  It™s about demand.  
As far 

as Europe relates to these companies
Šand 
these are pretty global companies
Šit™s really focused 
on demand.  The fiscal cliff is something different.  There™s a sick feeling in people™s stomachs 
                   
  
     
  
       
              
 that this is really bad, that this is our country not being able to function, and 
it™s like last August 
on steroidsŠnot that there™s anything wrong with steroids.  [Laughter]  They™ve been very 
helpful to me lately. 
Let me say where that leaves me
.  The question that looms isŠ
and I™m going to
, again
, leave aside monetary policy
Šwhen do we break out of this
?  And I really do believe that we 
will.  We always have. 
I can 
remember many of these cycles where you really wonder if this is it 
and we™re never going to get out. I really do feel that
 if you look at our own projections, 
essentially
, all of us project that we™re going to have those 3 
percent, 
4 percent catch
-up years.  
They™re now scheduled for 2014 and ™15, but really, there™s a ton of uncertainty around that.  So 

I™m going to share this highly anecdotal evidence in an effort to end on something of a high note. 
I talked to both private equity investors and hedge fund investors, and it™s always very 
interesting to compare the two of them.
  The hedge fund investors are in a really difficult 
environment.  They™re traders who get marked every quarter, 
and
, in a world that has very few 
ways for them to make money, they™re generally very conservatively positioned, and their 

investor base seems to be fine with that.  
Private equity firms are feeling quite differently about 

things.  They basically think about creat
ing value over a three
-to five
-year period, and many PE 
firms right now, large and small, think that this is a great time to buy. In fact, a str
ing of large 
industrial properties, which would ordinarily have been expected to trade to corporations, 
has 

trade
d to private equity.  T
here are three reasons why the private equity firms are feeling 
aggressive.  First, the
ir natural competitors
, these big companies
, are all frozen on the sideline
s, 
sitting on their cash, ruled by risk-averse public boards, and out of the game.  If anything, 
they™re 

going to wind up being net sellers as the recession goes on.  Second, leveraged 
finance markets, 
as Andreas was discussing this morning, are very attractive
, with low rates and issuer-
favorable 
            
                                    
      
   terms that are just about
 reminiscent of the bubble days, and all 
of 
that provides critical 
flexibility in case deals don™t go well. 
Third
Šand really the one that™s relevant for this policy 
exercise
Šprivate equity firms think about the medium term, and they see the future as bett
er. 
These large private equity firms 
are completely global; 
they 
each own hundreds of companies in 
every major economy and 
in 
every vertical
; and they systematically mine the data that they get 
and they™ve got the talent on board to do that.  This is not the private equity industry of 20 years 
ago.
  So they™re seeing something.  They really are.  It™s pretty consistent, and what™s holding 
back the volume of deals is only supply.  There was quite a similar pattern back in the early 

2000s after the dot-
com c
rash.  In that period, as many will recall, the S&P lost about half of its 
value.  We had a very soft economy in 2001 and 2002, a stri
ng of corporate accounting scandals 
leading to Sarbanes
ŒOxley, and a deflation scare in 2002.  Across the board, 
net sellers of 
businesses were
 on the sidelines, and the private equity firms were extremely aggressive during 
that period.  Those deals turned out to be, 
in many cases
, some of the best investments in the 
history of the industry.  It turned out to be a great time to buy.  I would also add that they were 

net sellers in 
2005 and 2006.  So the question is, 
why take any signal from this, right? I realize it 
doesn™t tell us anything at all about the next few quarters
.  B
ut I will say that it™s a bit of a sign
al to me because this is a group of investors with very successful and, in 
some cases
, long track 
records that were looking ahead to strong growth in the medium term, 
and they were willing to 

put more than just an opinion on the line in that belief.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Could I ask the Governor a question?  Geographically, 
do they express any preferences about where they want to have the business? 
MR. POWELL.  Yes.  T
he hedge funds are, as 
a staff mem
o from Matt and Fabio
 pointed 
out, unanimously not believing a long-run solution in Europe.  They™re just very pessimistic.  
I                  
            
       
          
would say the private equity firms are 
in the same place.  You see very little private equity 
interest in Europe.  There™s great uncertainty 
and
 that kind of thing.  
In t
he United States, you see 
a lot of activity
Šagain, restrained only by a lack of supply.  When there™s a good company 
that™s out there, the bidding is furious, and they™re all saying, 
ﬁThis is the time.
ﬂ  This happened 
10 years ago. 
And Asia
ŠI can™t really give you any call on that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  I see I have two hours now.  
[Laughter] Let me summarize and just make a few comments.
  Participants didn™t see much 
change in the o
utlook, on net, during 
the interme
eting period.  Economic grow
th is still sluggish. 
The near
-term growth outlook is modest, and the recovery is in a holding pattern.  Output and 
employment growth are falling short of levels needed to reduce unemployment.  Headwinds for 

recovery include fiscal policy, deleveraging, tight credit, and international factors, including not 

only Europe, but also slowing in China.  
Some felt that we risk a lost decade, but another view is 

that recovery has been consistent with previous experiences with banking and financial crises, à 

la Reinhart and Rogoff. 
Recent labor market reports have been weak, although unemployment has fallen in the 
past year.  Some decline in unemployment is due to reduced participation, and employment-
to-population ratios are at post-trough lows.  H
yste
resis is a risk and a possible rationale for action.  
Retail sales data were a bit better, and households continue to deleverage, but consum
er confidence is soft, and people are unusually pessimistic.  
Real 
estate activity is improving in a 
number of D
istricts.  Sales are up
, permits
 and 
prices are also rising
, inventories are low, and 
delinquencies are falling.  Rising prices may stimulate further sales.  There is some strength also 

in commercial real estate
.         
   
           
  
       
      With regard to measurements of slack, there was, again, discussion of the issue.  Staff 
analysis concludes that slack is high, and it was noted that inflationary pressures remain low.  
Some argued that measurements of slack should distinguish the long
er-run normal rate and the 
current equilibrium rate
, or natural rate, which varies over time.
  Discussion of the structure 
of 
the labor market noted that routine jobs are disappearing, but 
declining dynamism may be more 
chronic than cyclical, and the long-
term unemployed are not completely shut out of the labor 
market. 
Uncertainty remains an important issue for businesses, holding back investment and 
hiring.  Job growth is particularly weak.  Small businesses are concerned about taxes and 

regulation.  The fis
cal cliff is a particular risk, as is electoral uncertainty. Some research 
suggests that higher uncertainty acts like an aggregate demand shock.  Policy uncertainty is a 

headwind, but not the only one, as the Bloom index suggests.  
In agriculture
, the dro
ught will 
impede GDP growth over the next several quarters.  However, farm income has been supported 

by high prices and crop insurance.  Energy activity is expanding.  Manufacturing reports are 

mixed.  Auto sales are up.  Firms are focused on gaining market share, but among financial 

firms
, private equity is more optimistic and aggressive. 
In the financial sector, long-
term interest rates are very low
, with negative real yields, but 
it was noted that the equilibrium real yield in the economy may also be neg
ative.  Financial stress 

ind
exes are not particularly worrisome, and financial froth has not been reported.  
Firm balance 
sheets are strong
, and credit supply is available when loan demand strengthens.  The ECB™s 
actions have again helped calm Europe, but further progress requires action by governments.  

Risks remain serious, 
and economic 
growth on the Continent should remain weak. 
                    
  
   
   
          
         
              
  
 With respect to inflation, the outlook has not changed much.  Inflation seems likely to 
remain near or below 2 
percent in the m
edium term. Low inflation is also predicted by DSGE 
models.  Businesses are not particularly concerned about their costs.  Inflation expectations are 
stable, and there™s little evidence of disinflation. 
There was a good bit of premature discussion of mone
tary policy
, which covered, among 
other things, the effectiveness of possible actions, the risks and benefits of actions and inaction, 

and issues of communication. 
Any questions or comments? [No response] 
I come after Governor Powell
, so I have an 
even 
more difficult task. I™ll try to respond a little bit to some of the comments that were made 
today.  The basic outlook is, as everyone has pointed out, that we have an economy 
that 
is 
growing very slowly, at or below trend, and, by the usual Okun™s l
aw re
lationships, we™re not 
seeing very much progress in the labor market. 
Unemployment is about the same 
as in 
January, 
and I note that aggregate hours 
are 
also only about ½ percent higher than 
they 
were
 in January.  
President Bullard noted that there was a p
eriod of improvement in the unemployment rate around 
the turn of the year.  One interpretation of that is that it was a one-
time payback for the rapid 
drop in jobs during 
the recession. 
In any case, 
economic 
growth, if anything, is slowing relative to earl
ier in the recovery. 
Now, how do we explain, understand, and interpret the very slow growth we™ve been seeing? 

That was also 
discussed in the go-round.  One possibility is that there™s been a once-
and
-for
-all 
level shift, that we™ve dropped down to a lower level and 
are 
continuing a
t trend at about the 
earlier pace.  So the suggestion there is that we are close to potential and output 
growth going 
forward will remain trend
-like.
  This interpretation does not look implausible if you eyeball 
graphs for GDP or consumption growth.  It is consistent with some 
earlier episodes of financial 
      
               
        
           
     crisis, and
, among others, the IMF has given this perspective a little bit of support.  
The 
alternative interpretation held by others around the table is that we remain well b
elow potential.  
I think it™s perfectly possible to rationalize that.  First, there have been ongoing headwinds, both 
endogenous and exogenous.  The endogenous ones include 
financial balance sheet, financial 
accelerator type
s of 
effects 
and the exogenous ones include Europe, fiscal, and the like.  So 
there 
have been continuing headwinds, and, of course, 
sticky prices
Šas was pointed outŠ
are part of 
overlapping price-setting coordination issues and the like.  I think both of these interpretations 

are conceivable, and they probably both have some truth in them.  
As President Bullard 
mentioned, I don™t think it™s very likely that we™ll return to the pre-
crisis trend. 
Now, on the permanent drop in the level, I™m a 
little bit bemused by the appeal to 
Reinhart
ŒRogoff because the
irs is a strictly reduced
-form observation, 
it has no structural 
interpretation, and it could involve any number of reasons, including uncontrolled factors 
such as 
poor policymaking.  So I don™t take that as a very convincing answer unless I understand better 

what the rationale is that is explaining the slower growth.
  The second story does provide a 
rationale, does provide an explanation.  Notably, labor utilization does appear to be exception
ally 

low, and I won™t repeat Governor Tarullo™s comments, but Eddie Laz
ear, who I don™t think is 
necessarily inclined to find 
a cyclical source of unemployment
, is just the latest of the majority 
of studies in this area 
to find a significant cyclical compo
nent.  It™s true that the short-
term 
equilibrium unemployment rate can vary.  There™s no question about that.  S
taff 
members have 
tried to include some of that in their analysis.  B
ut we need 
a story.  It™s possible, based on that 
kind of analysis, 
that the equilibrium unemployment rate is 
above the long
er-term natural rate at 
this point.  We don™t know.  I want to emphasize that on all of these thingsŠon the economy, on 

the effects of policy
Šwe™re incredibly uncertain, and we have to make decisions under 
                 
   
            
      
    
       
   uncertainty.  We can™t let waiting for certainty be the condition for taking any action.  We have 
to make the best choices we can, given a very uncertain situation.  
So, in that kind of world, of 
course, there are 
type 
I and t
ype 
II errors.  This is similar
 to what 
the Vice Chairman was saying. 
We are close to our inflation objective.  We™re quite far from our unemployment objective, at 

least the long
er-run unemployment objective.  Arguments 
have been made that staying far away 
from the long
er-run unemployment level for a protracted period has its own costs 
besides the 
temporary costs of the cyclical unemployment. 
In terms of our policy tools, I do agree with President Plosser that having a good grip on 
the costs and the risks of those tools is very importan
t, and that™s one reason why we have been
, in some ways, not as quick to use the tools as we might have been if we were using short-
term 
interest rates as our policy tool.
  But I feel that I™d like to thank the staff for the work that™s been 
done over the last couple of interme
eting periods. I think the work on market functioning, the 
work on financial stabilityŠ
all 
of 
those things have made me more comfortable, 
at least
, that we 
can manage the costs of these 
unconventional policy tools. 
Now, I might as 
well take the advantage to talk a little bit about the policy tools and some 
of the issues that have been brought up.  I have great admiration for Michael Woodford.  I hired 

him, I coauthored with him, I was his colleague for many years, and I think he™s a 
terrific 
economist.  And I think a lot of what he said in his paper at Jackson Hole was very useful.  I do 

think that he understates the consensus in the literature about the impact of unconventional tools, 

particularly asset purchases, on the economy.  I won™t go through an extended discussion, but I™ll 

make just a couple of observations on the empirical side.  
He focused primarily on the event-
study evidence.  He came to that with a M
odigliani
ŒMiller type of financial markets perspective, 
which has a lot of theoretical appeal but obviously is not empirically very successful.  It doesn™t 
                  
    
    
                 
     explain a lot of premiums
, a lot of volatility
, in actual financial markets.  So
, using that 
perspective, he was inclined to dis
miss the results from the event
-study research. 
But this 
research does tend to find, 
almost uniformly
, that asset purchases do have effects on financial 
conditions, notwithstanding the fact that it™s very difficult to measure the surprise component of 
a change in asset purchase policy. I was very
 much involved in the literature on measuring the 
effects of surprises in the federal funds rate, and there at least you have a futures market that can 

tell you what was expected.  Obviously, 
that™s very difficult in the case of asset purchases, and 

theref
ore you w
ould expect the event
-study literature
, if anything
, to bias down the findings, the 
impact of asset purchases on financial conditions.  But beyond that, in looking at only the event 

studies, Woodford™s paper ignores two other major literatures.  O
ne is a substantial literature on 
the effects of relative supplies of 
Treasuries on term premiums.  I would cite, for example, 
Kutt
ner
 (2006) and Greenwood and V
aya
nos (2010), and this appears also in work by Ga
gnon, Hamilton and Wu, and others.  
And a sec
ond line of research is based on no-
arbitrage term 
structure models, such as the 
Li and Wei
 paper that has been used a lot here at the Board.  So 
there have been 
a number of different approaches, and again, I do think that the bulk of the 
evidence is that 
these tools do have effects on financial conditions.  Obviously, 
there are issues 
about the transmission to the real economy, and I take some of the points that have been made, 

but there are factors there working in both directions.  For example, to the ex
tent that credit 
markets are becoming less tight
Šstandards and terms are becoming less restrictiveŠl
ower 
interest rates will have more effect rather than less effect. 
The central message of Woodford™s paper, though, which I do agree with very much, is 
that expectations management is really critical to managing monetary policy at the zero bound. 

And I agree with Governor Stein that the language is very important.  How we present what 
         
    
              
         
      
   
           
  
    we™re doing is going to be very important.  I
n particular, 
and 
we™ll talk about this tomorrow, 
trying to signal that the Fed, rather than being pessimistic, is determined 
and 
that the Fed will be 
supporting the economy.  We™ll be there.  We™ll be a backstop.  We™ll provide confide
nce. I 
think that™s a very important part of what our communication should be about.  P
ersonally
, I™ve 
learned something from both Woodford™s discussion and th
at discussion around the table about 
how we should be talking to markets and to the public.  And a very small thing, but in my press 
conference statement tomorrow
, I™m going to try to talk a little bit more to the average person 
than I have been, and try to explain what we™re doing and why it™s helpful more broadly.  So I do 

expect the expectations c
hannel to be very important, but I think I disagree that by itself it™s 

sufficient
. The main problem is that we™ve already said that we™d keep rates low for three years. 
How much further out can we go? 
For example, 
Woodford argues that a nominal GDP targ
et, 
if 
adopted, would allow us essentially to make commitments many years in advance.  I™d like to 

actually raise the question once again to the group because we looked very carefully at nominal 

GDP targets more than a year ago now
, I think, and there was 
really no support at that time
.  The 
basic argument is that
, in order to work, people have to be persuaded that you™ll stick to this 
target for a very extended period, many years, even though a nominal GDP target may involve a 

period of inflation well above your normal range of inflation.  Moreover, of course, there™s also 

the risk that, if that happens, then inflation expectations will become unanchored.  So I think that 

was the case against nominal GDP targeting. A few people have talked about it. 
If I™
m missing 
something and you want me to hedge more when I™m asked about it tomorrow, which I™m sure I 

will be, I™d like to hear that tomorrow because, again, the take of this group a year ago was th
at nominal GDP targeting, price-
level targeting, and so on, 
while useful, are limited in 
that they 
             
                 
         
       
     
     require credibility very far in the future. 
And that™s why I think one of the benefits of asset 
purchases is that they can be used as a concrete action, as a commitment device
, to help 
strengthen the expectations ef
fect of announcements and communication so that they really are 
complementary
Šmore than we have given them credit 
for 
and more than I really said in my 
remarks at Jackson Hole. 
So there 
are
 a lot of interesting issues here.  I think what I™d like to end on 
is just to come 
back to the point that I know we™re all in debating mode.  We want to persuade our colleagues, 

and that™s certainly laudable, but the fact is that nobody really knows precisely what is holding 

back the economy, what the correct responses a
re, 
or 
how our tools will work.  A
nd I believe we 
all have to try to think hard about, 
in a Bayesian context
, using information that we have and 
thinking about both the risks of action and the risks of inaction, what the best choices are, 

acknowledging and
 understanding that whatever we do, it™s going to be a shot in the proverbial 
dark.  I think, 
really
, it™s going to be very important for us to pull together, 
in a sense
, to support 
whatever efforts that we make.
  Any questions or comments?  President 
Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thanks for those remarks.  I 
found them very useful in my own thinking.  I, too, thought the staff™s work on LSAPs over the 

last couple of inter
meet
ing periods has been really helpful, but even mor
e broadly, I certainly 
came to the question of the efficacy of the LSAPs from the same M
odiglianiŒ
Miller framework 
that Mike sketched, and I found the empirical work on the asset pricing side very informative.  It 

certainly shaped my thinking moving away from the Mo
digliani
ŒMiller framework. 
Our statements, 
alternative A and 
alternative B
, make reference to continuing to study the efficacy of 
the LSAPs.  Part of that will have to be ongoing work and ongoing study of that linkage between 
                               
        what™s going on in the financial markets and how that™s getting through to the real economy.  
At least for me
, that™s a major source of uncertainty still. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me make one comment on that, which is, 
you 
sometimes hear the following kind of statement:  
ﬁTight monetary policy is not causing the 
problem
; therefore, easing monetary policy won™t help.
ﬂ  That™s a non sequitur.  If, say, tight 
fiscal policy is the problem, if that™s the reason the economy is growing slowly, it doesn™t mean 

that 
monetary policy can
™t mitigate that.  So I think that kind of argument needs to be looked at 
very carefully.
  We are doing a lot.  We are absolutely doing a lot.  There™s no question about it.  
Nobody can blame the Federal Reserve fairly, in my opinion, for being tightfisted and stingy and 

not willing to take risks to try to support the economy.  
But the fact that it™s not our fault that the 
recovery is slow doesn™t mean that we can™t try to help if we think, in fact, that the benefitŒ
cost 

ratio is appropriate. 
What I™d like to do is let Bill English do his introductory remarks for tomorrow.  I™m in 
your hands.  The reception starts at 5:30.  Would people like to continue with the policy round, 

or should we just have Bill and then start fresh at 8:30? 
PARTICIPANT. 
Break
. PARTICIPANTS
.  Fresh. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fresh.  Okay. 

MR. 
FISHER
.  Governor Powell needs to take a nap. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  He™s not the only one.  [Laughter] 
All right.  We™ll ask Bill 
to make his opening presentation and take any questions, and then we™ll recess for reception and 

dinner.  
Bill. 
         
    
  
    
          
   
  
     
          
                                                                         MR. ENGLISH.
7  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think the policy 
alternatives are being handed around right now.  They are the same as the ones we 

distributed earlier this week. I guess I™ll wait just a mome
nt until everybody has 
them. 
The first page of the handout illustrates the effects of three different policy paths.  
The black
 solid lines in the charts depict the experimental consensus forecast, which 
is conditioned on unchanged policy.  The 
red
 dashed lines show the results of a more 
accommodative policy, one 
that™s 
consistent with an a
lternative B that shifts back the 
date in the forward guidance to mid-2015 and, in addition to $30 billion of MBS 

purchases a month and completion of the MEP this year, involves buying longer-
term 
securities at a rate of $75 billion a month through the middle of next year.  The 

balance sheet implications of this alternative are shown at the top right.  So long as 

the public correctly anticipates that the Committee will follow this policy, the result is 

a more rapid economic recovery that takes the unemployment rate to 
6.3 percent by 
the end of 2015, about ½ percentage point lower than in the consensus baseline; the 

inflation rate (shown at the bottom right) is a bit
 higher but remains near your 

2 percent longer
-run objective. 
The 
blue dotted lines show the results of an even more accommodative policy; 
this corresponds to alternative A and includes a new $1.25 trillion LSAP and a shift in 

the date in the forward guida
nce to mid
-2015.  
In this case, the unemployment rate 
falls to 
about 6.1 percent by the end of 2015, and inflation runs a little higher than 
under the other policies. 
If, in reviewing the outlook under 
the 
unchanged policy, the Committee views the 
likely outcomes for employment and inflation as inconsistent with its mandate, it 

might choose to ease policy by strengthening the forward guidance in the statement 

and engaging in additional asset purchases.  Alternative B
, on page 5, 
may offer the 
Committee an attractive approach to moving strongly in that direction at this meeting, 

but without committing now to a large, discrete purchase program.  Alternative B 

completes the MEP and starts buying additional MBS, with an explicit proviso that 

the Committee will c
losely monitor developments ﬁin coming monthsﬂ in deciding 
whether to continue the purchases and scale them up. 
The first paragraph of 
alternative B updates the description of the economy to 
reflect the mixed incoming information over the period.  The second paragraph 

differs from past statements by expressing the medium
-term outlook as a conditional 

forecast, noting that the Committee is concerned that ﬁwithout further policy 

accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained 

improvement in labor market conditions.ﬂ  Then the third paragraph announces that 

the Committee will complete the MEP as planned and will commence purchasing 

MBS each month.  The options you™re offered here are rates of $30 billion or 

$40 billion a month.  The higher rate of purchases would have the advantage of 

providing more impetus to growth, but some policymakers may prefer the lower rate, 
7 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
      
                          
             
      
      
    
              perhaps to allow for some future ramping-up in reaction to shocks, such as a full 

encounter with the fiscal cliff or
 a worsening of the problems in Europe.  Staff work 
suggests that purchases even 
at the higher pace would be unlikely to cause problems 
with market functioning. 
The fourth paragraph signals another decision point coming in the future.  It says 
that if, ﬁin
 coming months,ﬂ the ﬁoutlook for the labor market does not improve 
substantially,ﬂ the Committee will continue its MBS purchases 
and undertake 
additional asset purchases ﬁas appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a 

context of price stability.ﬂ
 The paragraph offers an option to include the possibility 
of employing other policy tools as well.  Participants may find that additional 

reference attractive if they think that changes in forward guidance, new lending 

programs, or a reduction in the inte
rest rate paid on reserves might also be appropriate 
in the future.  The paragraph concludes by noting that, as always, the likely efficacy 

and costs of asset purchases will be taken into account as the Comm
ittee calibrates its 
purchases. 
In paragraphs 5 and 5
, the statement offers two options for restating the forward 
guidance.  Both versions begin by putting the Committee™s decision with respect to 

the forward guidance in a more positive light and in the context of making progress 

toward its objectives by indicating that
, ﬁto support continued progress toward 

maximum employment and price stability, the Committee expects that exceptionally 

low levels of the federal funds rate will remain appropriate for a considerable time 

after the economic recovery stren
gthens.ﬂ  Paragraph 5 then continues by shifting 
the 
date of the expected commencement of policy firming out to mid-2015.  By contrast, 

paragraph 5
 replaces the calendar date with new conditional language that ties the 
timing of liftoff to the path of the
 unemployment rate, subject to constraints on 
inflation and inflation expectations.  Some participants may see this conditional 

language as preferable to offering a specific date because it will allow market 

participants to adjust their expectations for li
ftoff flexibly as information bearing on 

the economic outlook is received. 
The immediate market reaction to 
alternative B is hard to predict, in light of the 
policy expectations currently in the market and the decision point that would be 

highlighted in paragraph 4.  Primary dealers appear to place high odds on a new 

program of securities purchasesŠ
generally expected to increase Federal Reserve 
holdings by around $500 
billion 
to $600 billion by the end of 2013Š
and some see it 
as likely to be described in flow terms.  But it is not clear how they would gauge the 

likely scale of purchases under 
alternative B. An 
al
ternative B in which the 
Committee decided over coming months to purchase $75 billion in securities per 

month during the first half of next year would be roughly equivalent to the 

$500 billion 
to $600 billion now expected.  With most outside forecasts anti
cipating 
only slow improvement in labor market conditions over coming quarters, the market 

may come to expect the purchases to exceed this amount.  With regard to the forward 

guidance, ﬁmid
-2015ﬂ is in line with expectations, but the language in paragraph 5
 might be seen as pointing to even more accommodation.  On balance, a
lternative B 
might prompt a modest decline in longer-term interest rates, higher equity prices, and 
                          
              
                     
  
          
    
        a depreciation of the dollar.  However, the magnitude and persistence of the effects 

will depend importantly on what investors see as the implications of the statement for 

the ultimate size of the SOMA portfolio, as well as which version of the forward 

guidance the Committee chooses. 
Alternative A
, on page 3, 
may appeal to members who see 
the Committee as 
having persistently missed its dual objectives in the same direction and believe that, 

with the fiscal cliff looming and uncertainty about Europe unresolved, the downside 

risks to economic growth are very large.  They may believe that the 
Committee needs 
to send a clear signal that it is willing to substantially increase its holdings of 

securities and extend the forward guidance.  They may be concerned that the 

effectiveness of 
alternative B would be undermined by investor uncertainty about 
both the Committee™s decision to extend purchases beyond the next few months and 

the ul
timate size of such purchases. 
The first and second paragraphs of a
lternative A are close to those of 
alternative 
B.  The third paragraph of alternative A announces a new lump-
sum LSAP 
program, comprising $750 billion of longer-term Treasuries and $500 billion of MBS, 

at a combined pace of about $75 billion per month through early 2014.  The fourth 

paragraph clarifies that the new program replac
es the MEP and that the Committee™s 

reinvestment policy will continue.  The fifth paragraph, as in a
lternative 
B, extends 
the forward guidance to mid-2015.  Alternative A also provides possible language for 

a 10
 basis point reduction in the IOER rate. 
Beca
use $1.25 trillion lies well outside the range of most market forecasts 
for a 
new LSAP program, alternative A would likely lead to a notable drop in longer-
term 
interest rates, as well as higher equity prices and a lower foreign exchange value of 

the dolla
r.  These effects could be increased somewhat and accompanied by some 
decline in short-
term interest rates if a reduction i
n the IOER rate were included. 
Alternative C, 
on page 7, might appeal to policymakers who see the recent 
economic data as consistent 
with the view that the economic recovery is on a 
sustainable path and proceeding about as well as could be expected given the effects 

of the financial crisis.  They may see the elevated size of the Federal Reserve™s 

portfolio as well as the recent rise in 
oil and other key commodity prices as implying 
some upside risk to inflation.  As a result, they may judge that there is no need to ease 

policy through a change in the forward guidance or a new LSAP program, and they 

may even anticipate that the funds rate 
will need to be raised significantly earlier than 
markets anticipate. Other participants may have views that are shaped less by 

concerns about the outlook, but believe that the costs and risks associated with 

additional asset purchases are likely to exce
ed the benefits in terms of improved 

economic conditions. 
The first paragraph in a
lternative C is somewhat more positive about economic 
developments than in alternatives A and B.  The second paragraph is similar to the 

August statement but projects somewha
t stronger growth and higher inflation.  There 
are two versions of paragraph 3:  The first maintains the ﬁlate 2014ﬂ forward 
                                                    guidance, with an option to change the date to ﬁlate 2103ﬂ
; the second version, 

ate
-dependent forward gui
dance 
with language describing 
the factors the Committee would consider in determining the appropriate time to raise 

the target federal funds rate.  The fourth paragraph is similar to the August statement, 

except that it provides a more balanced outlook for policy. 
The markets would be greatly surprised by a statement along the lines of 
alternative C, especially if it signaled an earlier rise in the federal funds rate. Interest 
rates would likely jump higher, and stock prices could drop sharply. 
Draft dire
ctives for each of the alternatives are presented on pages 9 through 12 of 
your handout.  
Thank you
, Mr. Chairman.  That 
completes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there any questions for Bill? 
President Fisher. 
MR. FISHE
R.  Mr. Chairman, if I could ask Simon and the D
esk
Šagain, just to have a 
factual grip here
:  What kind of market penetration will we have on mortgage-
backed securities 
under the 
program of 
$30 and $40 billion per month?  You mentioned this earlier.  I apo
logize. 
MR. POTTER. 
That™s the flow rate relative to gross issuance. 
MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir. 
MR. POTTER. 
If we™re about one-third right now, if we added $30 billion, we™d be 
about 60 percent
; at 
$40 billion
, we™re about 70 percent.  
But i
n terms of the stock, I think that 
wouldŠ
what was that
, L
orie
? MS. LOGAN.  I don™t have the exact numbers for the particular scenarios, but the stock 
would be 25 percent under the $30-
billion
-per
-month pace, and it would be slightly higher under 
$40 billion per month
. I 
don™t have that exact number, and it depends on the length, but just for 
a maximum
, under the $2 trillion scenario that we had run, the maximum was 36 percent.  So 

that gives you the very upper bound. 
MR. FISHER.  And if w
e assume that we finish the MEP at 
year
-end, what will be our 
duration? 
       
      
     
    
        
     
                 
    
 MR. POTTER
.  The duration will be eight years, but we™ll own quite large amounts of 
some of the longer-duration securities.  T
hat™s 
in the Treasury part of the portfolio. 
MR. FISHER.  And of some of the particular issu
es, we have significant
Šabove 
70 percent
.  I
s that
 correct now? 
MS. LOGAN. 
We™ve a 70 percent per CUSIP cap.  So we can™t buy any
Š MR. FISHER.  That™s our cap per 
CUSIP? 
MS. LOGAN
.  That™s the c
ap. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 
MS. LOGAN
.  We™ve only hit the ca
p on ten issues, I thinkŠthe number that we™ve hit 
the 
maximum 
70 percent on
.  And most of those were old bonds in 
very small size. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you very much. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chai
rman. Bill, I just wanted to clarify since we have 
a few minutes here.  When we do this on page 1 here, there 
are 
three lines
, and then 
alternative 
B has a couple 
of 
options in it.  Are you saying that this is a rough guide to what 
alternative 
B would del
iver? 
MR. ENGLISH. Ye
s. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Or 
do you feel as though it wouldn™t make too much difference which 
option is chosen within the subgroups that are proposed?  O
r is it just 
that it™d get too cluttered
? MR. ENGLISH. 
What we tried to do here was write
 down something that seemed 
plausibly in line with 
alternative B. Alternative B has a couple of different choices that the 
Committee would have to make.  One is, 
later on
, what do you do in a few months after you™ve 
observed the economy?  Do you continue purchasing into next year? We™ve assumed that you 
                   
                
    continue purchasing for about, I think, seven months in this.  And then the other question is, 
what do you do with the forward guidance? 
We™ve assumed
, basically
, that the forward 
guidance goes out to mid-2015 and is compellingŠe
verybody believes 
it.  It™s possible, as I 
mentioned, that because market participants™ sense 
of 
the outlook is a bit weaker than our sense 

of the outlook, they may read that 6½ percent unemployment rate as pushing the liftoff even 

later
.  If that were picked up, then you™d get a little bit more impetus to the economy out of that, 
but we™ve not modeled that here. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  And the other thingŠI™ve been concerned about the withering 
of 
alternative C here.
  Alternative C isn™t mentioned in the graphs. 
MR. ENGLISH.  Alternative C would be, as long as you left the liftoff date unchanged, 
pretty similar to the consensus forecast.  What I™m taking out of that is the sense in the words in 

alternative C that mig
ht hint that things could move more quickly than that. 
So the straight 
consensus forecast is no change in the forward guidance, no additional purchases beyond the end 

of the year.  That broadly is consistent with a
lternative C but maybe doesn™t quite get 
the sense 
of what the words in a
lternative C could mean to market participants. 
MR. BULLARD.  Well, when you describe it, 
you say, ﬁ
Markets would be surprised
.ﬂ  
I think 
that™s 
accurate
Šthey
™d be very surprised by a statement like thatŠand that you proba
bly 
would have some 
effe
ct.  Plus, if we were going in that direction, which I guess we™re not, you™d 
have the possibility of moving up the date 
of liftoff
. MR. ENGLISH.  Right. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
One important point here
:  The black lineŠ
the consensus 
forecast
Šimplicitly has in it
 a significant disappointment 
for
 the market because they pull back 
      
           
       
     
               their expectations for liftoff to late 2014, and they 
remove 
their expectations of any furt
her 
expansion of the portfolio. 
MR. 
BULLARD
.  I see.  So I should read this as ﬁConsensus forecast/a
lternative C.ﬂ 
MR. ENGLISH.  Roughly. 
MR. BULLARD.  Roughly speaking.  Well, I guess, Mr. Chairman, 
I have a concern 
whether 
we have three options that are live options.  And I think it™s been hard while the 
Committee has been
 trying to think about ways to ease, and when the Committee shifts in the 
other direction, the same thing will happen.  But I think you want to have some things that are a 

little bit tighter, a little bit easier, and might actually have a chance of
Š CHAIRM
AN BERNANKE. 
We circulate this and ask whether it spans the range of 
views
 so, of course, we always welcome suggestions. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Well, it™s up to you.  But if you try to span the range of views, you 
might have to put something on the table that™s not going to be adopted.  But from my point of 

view, I
™d like to see three live things that we could do and things that we might be able to 
maneuver around. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The other way we
™ve used the alternatives
, of course, 
is to 
try out different lan
guage or alternative language. 
And in the past, 
we™ve co
mbined, mixed 
things together. 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  One is for you, Bill.  
I™d like your help 
with 
understanding the second sentence in B(4).  I™m having trouble with it.  I 
don™t think I understand it correctly, particularly the role of price stability.  So let me tell you 
      
   
     
      
    
                                 what I think it says, the way I read it. 
It says, ﬁIf the outlook for the labor m
arket does
 not improve substantiallyﬂ in coming monthsŠ
so, if that happensŠthen we™re going to do X.  So X, 
I think, 
is, as I read this, ﬁundertake additional asset purchases 
. . . as appropriate until 
such 
improvement is achieved in a context of price sta
bility.ﬂ
  As I think about that, if that 
improvement is achieved but it™
s not in a context of price stability, that seems to say to me that 
we™re going to still keep purchasing assets.  Have I got this wrong? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I want to defend Bill because he pointed out this problem. 
MR. LACKER.  I actually pointed it out to him yesterday. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You
 pointed it out to him.  Okay. 
MR. 
ENGLISH
.  You™re not 
the 
first
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
We have poetic license here. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  You 
don™t mean that literally, right? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It means that we
™re looking for improvement in a context of 
price stability. If we see improvement 
without price stability, that
™s not a good thing, and we 
won™t continue purchases. 
MR. LACKER.  But th
is says you
™re going to wait until you get im
provement with price 
stability. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it™s clear what
Š VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It™
s ﬁsubject to
.ﬂ That™s really what it means. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It
™s ﬁsubject to.ﬂ  W
hen we actually clari
fy this, assuming 
we go ahead and do more in January or whatever, we™
ll be a little clear
er in this kind of language 
here. 
                 
  
         
      
  
          
                 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  The second question I haveŠand I probably should have 
asked this during our first agenda item.  I™
ve asked t
his at times in the past
.  On the table is a 
flow of purchases of mortgage-backed securities.  I™
ve asked in the past 
about the thought 
experiment of buying mortgage
-backed securities versus buying an equivalent amount of 
U.S.
 Treasuries.
  What I
™ve asked 
about is, all right, comparing those two options, undoubtedly 
your forecast, as you™ve said, is that 
mortgage
-backed security yields 
will be lower with 
purchases of 
mortgage
-backed securities than 
with 
purchases of 
Treasuries, and that mortgage 
rates will 
be lower. 
Now, my gut instinct is that some other rates will be higher.  And I™
ve asked 
about this in the past, but did you do any work on that this time? 
MR. POTTER.  Which rates? 
MR. LACKER. 
Aren™t other rates going 
to be higher if we buy mortgage-
backeds rather 
than T
reasuries?  Because presumably
, that means 
Treasury rates will be higher than they 
otherwise would be.  Presumably, some other rates are linked to T
reasuries 
and not mortgage-
backed securities, and presumably, they™
re higher. Isn™t there some other rate that
™s going to go 
up if we buy mortgage-
backed
s rather than 
Treasuries? 
MR. ENGLISH. Not 
go up
, but go down by less. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Go down by less. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I think that™s right. 

MR. LACKER.  Oh, okay.  Well, noŠbut, see, I™m asking to compare buying X amount 
of T
reasuries 
with buying 
X amount 
of mortgage-
backed.  So rates 
go downŠ 
MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we are still buying Treasuries under the MEP in this 
program. 
       
           
           
                      
MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know.  But instead of buying $30 billion of mortgages, buy 
$30 billion of 
Treasuries. 
MR. ENGLISH.  I think the answer to your question is in table 1 in the options memo 
that we sent, which had an experiment where you do $500 billion of T
reasury purchases or 
$500 billion of MBSŠjust one or the other.  T
he term premium effects are a little bit smaller if 
you buy the MBS, so T
reasury yields decline by less.  They still decline. It
™s still a purchase of a 
longer-
term security and still taking duration out of the market and still p
utting downward 
pressure on longer-
term rates, but by less.
  The mortgage rate goes down by more if you buy 
MBS than if you buy T
reasuries, because you
™re pushing MBS down more and mortgage rates 
down by more.  And our estimate of the effects on inflation and output are similar in size.  
They
™re a little smaller for the MBS purchase
, based on our modeling and our assumptions, than 
for 
the 
Treasury purchase, but they™
re in the same ballpark. 
MR. LACKER.  So what other rates go down by less or are higher b
ecause you™
ve 
been 
tilting toward 
mortgage
-backeds
? MR. ENGLISH. 
In FRB
/USŠDave Reifschneider 
will tell me if I™m wrong
ŠI think, 
basically
, that 
other long-term rates, corporate rates or whatever, would go down by more if you 
bought Treasuries than if you bought MBS. 
MR. PLOSSER.  So the MBS would provide 
less pass
-through, in some sense, to 
corporates and other things.  Is that the idea? 
MR. ENGLISH
.  Yes. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Depends on what you think the 
degree of substitutability 
is between 
them. 
          
       
       
    
   
             
     MR.
 ENGLISH.  Yes.  And this really is pushing pretty hard on our ability to model this 
stuff, but that™s what our modeling 
says
. MR. LACKER.  So that takes away some stimulus, right? 
MR. ENGLISH. Ye
s, that™s right. 
MR. LACKER. 
And the MBS, on netŠ 
MR. POTT
ER.  Well, not overall, 
necessarily. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Well, it doesn™t take away stimulus relative to doing nothing.  
It takes away stimulus relative to
Š  MR. ENGLISH. 
Buying
 an equivalent amount of T
reasuries
. MR. LACKER. 
Right. 
MR. POTTER.  On thoseŠ 

MR. 
LACKER
.  In that sector. 
MR. POTTER.  Not necessarily for the economy as a whole. 

MR. LACKER. 
Right.  So the rationale for MBSŠ
is it that
, on net, 
real outcomes are 
better?  Or is it more of a sectoral argument? 
MR. ENGLISH.  The argument we gave in the memo was that you want to have a 
balance across the two so that you can ramp up or ramp down.  We know from the capacity 

memo that we sent the Committee before the last meeting that there
™s a maximum amount
, roughly, 
that we 
were comfortable saying 
we could buy over the next couple of years.  That 
maximum amount 
has a ratio of 
Treasuries to MBS, 
and 
we™ve roughly maintained that ratio in 
these purchase programs. 
MR. LACKER.  I understand.  Thank you. 
                              
                   
      MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
That
™s the main argument.  
There
™s a second argument, which 
is not in the model sims we
™ve run, but a lot of people believe that MBS could have effects that 
the model isn™t picking upŠ
say, large
r effects on house prices
, bigger effects on mortgage 
refinancing, 
or 
something like that
. CHA
IRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart has a two-
hander. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Is there a connection or correlation between lowering mortgage-
backed rates and other securitization vehicles such as auto, student loan, credit card? 
MR. ENGLISH.  There might be in practice, but we™re not picking that up in the 
modeling that we
™re doing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just one observation.  Presumably, the reason why you 
also might want to split it is a market functioning issue. 
You can go 
bigger if you split it 
between two markets than if you conce
ntrate all on one market. 
MR. POTTER.  We are still buying in the 
Treasury market. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
That was just a comment, but I have a question.  It 
seems to me 
as though the key money line in B is, ﬁIf the outlook for the labor market does not 

improve substantially, the Committee will continue its 
purchases of agency 
mortgage-backed 
securities and undertake additional asset purchases.
ﬂ  That
™s the key money line.  
Now, I
™d like 
to get st
aff members™ 
views of what they think people are going to interpret that line to mean in 
light of, say, the SEPs that are going to be put out 
and the Chairman™s press conference 
statement.  How do we think people are going to interpret that line?  That™s c
ritical
Šyou have to 
have a view on that to know what you™re really voting for, in some fundamental sense.  I know 

it™s judgment, but I™d love to 
hear your view. 
                  
    
   
  
     
      
          MR. ENGLISH. 
We™re not sure.  
I think we argued in our memos that it might be 
something like a
 ½ percent
age point 
decline in the unemployment rate that
™s sustained. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, I don™t mean the effects on the macroeconomy.  I 
mean, when people write the articles at the end of the day, what are 
they going to think about 
how big this is likely to be? 
MR. POTTER.  I don™t think it will showŠ 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They
™re going to have our SEPs, and they™
re going to 
have this information that shows that this unemployment rate trajectory
Š MR. 
KOCHERLAKO
TA.  You mean the purchase program itself? 
MR. POTTER.  The total amount forŠthey™re going to try 
to work out an expected date. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  And so I guess I™m asking, what kind of expected 
date do we think they can work out? 
MR. POTTER. 
The SEP will give them some information.  I don™t believe that shows a 
substantial improvement in the labor market for quite some time.  So that means that they
™ll probably be looking for sometime in 2013.  That™
s the way we
™ve been modeling this, I think.  
And the assumption you had, Bill, was something like $600 billion of total purchasesŠi
s that 
right? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Including purchases under the MEP, it was $750 
billion
.  But
, as I said 
in my remarks, it could easily be more.  P
eople might see that the e
conomy is expected to be 
weak for quite a while
; they might carry it out further into 2013 and get a bigger amount. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
For me, the obvious question to you, Mr. Chairman, at 
the press conference might be
, given the SEP and your views, wh
at does the SEP forecast imply 

in terms 
of ﬁi
mprove 
substantially
ﬂ?       
                
                              
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  My answer will be that 
we want to see
Šnot what we saw 
last 
Friday
.  We want to see increases in payrolls.  We want to see some progress
Šnot sh
arp 
progress, but some pro
gress
Šin the unemployment rate
.  And we want to have a sense that the 
economy is moving in a 
direction that will help labor markets get better. 
We used the word 
ﬁoutlook.ﬂ  So a pickup in GDP growth would certainly be a factor in the outlook for labor 
markets, for example. I think we have a fail
-safe here
, which is that if it doesn™t have any effect, 
then we have the efficacy clause here as well.
  But the idea would be that we want to see 
something different from the current 
waiting
-in-place kind of situation where there™s no 
progress, 
the 
unemployment rate stays about the same, and monthly payrolls are 100,000 and 

less. 
And I will emphasize that it
™s not a single indicator or a single trigger number; 
we™re 
looking holistically at the labor market indi
cators and, in fact, more broadly because it™
s the 
outlook for the labor market that matters, not just the current number. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you
™d have to see improvement in the labor market 
that you thought would be sustained in the future. 
CHAIRM
AN BERNANKE.  Right. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
For what it™s worth, the B
lue 
Chip forecasts 
for the 
unemployment rate going into the middle of 2013 are very flat
.  Then, in the second half of 2013, 
they™
re expecting to see a more noticeable downtilt in the unemp
loyment rate.  So that™s another 
way of 
looking at it. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So the market would presumably put in nine months 
or 
more
Šthat
 would be a reasonable guesstimate, 
I guess. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Again, it™s
 the outlook and not the actual. 
VICE CH
AIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Yes. 
                         
                    MR. PLOSSER.  I just want some interpretation of the word ﬁsubstantiallyﬂ here because 
the market is going to ask you that as well.  What constitutes substantial progress? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Substantial progress means that we are seei
ng ongoing 
progress in the direction of improved labor market conditions. 
MR. PLOSSER.  So it
™s not something about 
the magnitude of the rate of change. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It
™s not the magnitude, but really a 
movement in that 
direction 
that 
is, I m
ight 
say, persuasive or indicative that there is now progress in the right 
direction
, as opposed to simply remaining static or 
getting 
worse.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  This is on the same point. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  David Wilcox showed us employment in his forecast summary, and 
when they do all of the seasonal adjustment right, it looks as though half of the improvement we 

got in the labor markets this past winter or the winter before, was spurious, seasonal stuff.  

Would what we saw last w
inter suffice? Would we stop after that? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would think so.  It dropped 1 percentage point between 
August and 
April. 
MR. LACKER. I
™d be on board with that.  But his 
analysis suggests that 
that 
would be 
like another seasonal head fake. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we
™d look at a range of variables.  O
f course, there™s 
nothing that says if you stop, you can™t start again. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No
, but l
ast winter, though, it wasn™t really that 
convincing because, remember, payrolls were strong but GDP was weak, and we had this riddle. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We had this riddle.  Yes, that™s right. 
                    
          
     
             
     
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And so you could argue that you wouldn™t necessarily 
stop 
last winter
, because 
you didn™t have the GDP growth to support the 
labor market. 
MR. POTTER.  I don™t think our outlook changed that much.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We basically want to see progress in terms of the key macro 
labor market variables. 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  Well, let me ask Bill Dudley™s question again.  What do you 
want the 
USA 
Today
 headline to be? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
ﬁBernanke, 
the Hero
ﬂ? [Laughter] 
ﬁFederal Reserve 
Says 
It Will Support Economy.ﬂ 
MR. 
FISHER
.  That™s the 
sports section, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. 
PLOSSER
.  ﬁFederal Reserve All In.ﬂ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
ﬁFederal Reserve Will 
Provide Support to Labor M
arket.
ﬂ MR. 
LACKER
.  By buying 
MBS? 
MS. 
DUKE.  And housing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Housing.
  People understand that. 
MR. 
LACKER
.  Okay. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  D
id you have a question, 
President 
Pianalto? 
MS. PIANALTO.  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, you made some comments about the 
6½ percent unemployment trigger in 
alternative B, paragraph 5
. You said that some forecasters 
have slower progress on the unemployment rate, so they may view 
what is in alternative B 
as more accommodation than markets expect.  If you look at your page 1, 
ﬁAlternat
ive Monetary 
Policy 
Scenarios,
ﬂ that 6
½ percent rate, as you mentioned, is about mid-2015.  I know we™
re 
            
      
         
                      trying to get away from the date, but you made those points.  You didn™t say very much about the 
inflation rate, because here it says ﬁ
no more than a half percentage point above the Committee™s 

2 percent objective.ﬂ  When you look at those scenarios, with alternative B, we don™t get 

anywhere close to 2
½.  We™re just slightly above the 2.  At one point, we looked at some 
language that said ﬁclose to the Committee™s 2 
percent objective.ﬂ  And I see that 
alternative 
B, 
and even a
lternative A, is 
close to our objective.  What are some of your thoughts
?  J
ust as you 
had
 some thoughts about the 6½ percent being interpreted by some as being more aggressive, 
would that 2½ percent objective be viewed as, again, more aggressive, and is it necessary given 

the scenarios that you™ve laid out here? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLE
Y.  It™s not an objective, though, right? 
GOVERNOR YELLEN
.  It™s not an objective. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It™s not an objective.  
It™s just a tolerance level.  That™s 
quite different. 
MS. PIANALTO.  But it™s 
a matter of
 perceptions also.  We™
re talking 
about 
communications.  And we™ve made a lot of progress and laid out a 2 
percent objective.  What are 

the advantages? 
Using
 ﬁclose to 2 percentﬂ 
would still 
give
 us the 
flexibility that
™s laid out in 
these scenarios
, but we
™re not communicating to the pub
lic that we
™re throwing out ½ 
percentage 
point.  I
t seems 
as though 
we™re throwing out a number, 
whereas
, ﬁclose toﬂ gives us some of 
that flexibility. 
MR. ENGLISH.  I think the ½ percentage point buffer was intended just for clarity.  If 
you said ﬁclose t
o,ﬂ everybody would ask the Chairman at his press conference, ﬁWhat do you 
mean by 
‚close to
™?
ﬂ and t
ry to extract that information.
  People will be looking at the SEP, and 
the SEP shows inflation below 2 or at 2, roughly, but not going above.  So I don™t think they™d 
                                      
    misread the 
½ percentage point buffer as suggesting an intention to set out to push inflation 
above 2.  It would simply be seen as a buffer.  There could be transitory shocks that would 

change the inflation outlook for a time, and the Committee could look through those and say, 

ﬁOkay.  We™re going to go up as high as maybe 2½ 
for a little while, but after that
, we think 

inflation is going to come back.  In the end, we™re getting to our objective, and that™s okay.ﬂ 
But 
whether you want to say e
xplicitly ﬁ
½ percentage pointﬂ or ﬁclose toﬂ is a question of 
communications.  It™
s a little clearer to say the number and not use ﬁclose to.ﬂ  But this is a 
communications issue for the Committee. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Can I ask one more press conference 
question?  Suppose somebody says, ﬁWe get to the end of 2013, it™s December 2013, and we™
re 
exactly where we are today.
  So 
the 
unemployment rate, job growthŠeverything is pretty much 
exactly where we are today. 
Do you envision that we™
ll still be continuing asset purchases at that 
point?ﬂ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  As we go through time, as the balance sheet grows, as we 
observe the effects on the economy, we™
ll be 
continually reevaluating the efficacy of the program 
and the costs that it is imposing.  And if we feel that we
™ve 
reached that point and the program is 
not being effective, then we w
ill have to stop.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes. I
™ll just add on to what you said, Mr. Chairman.  This 
question is an important one, but I think there 
are 
just 
two ways you could end up being in the 
same place.  It could be that there were a lot of bad shocks and the asset purchases helped you 

stop that, or maybe not.  We™
ll have to make that call at that time. 
                                 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
We have overnight
.  If any genius around the table would 
like to come up with better language, I would be more than happy. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I counsel you against 
offering 
that
.  [L
aughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  Are we all set?  [No response] 
Bill, 
what do you want us to do with these handouts? Do you want us to take them home and bring 
them back? 
MR. ENGLISH.  You have lots of Class 
I informat
ion in your Tealbook, so you 
can 
keep 
them. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right. 

MR. ENGLISH.  But please don™t leave them on the subway.  [L
aughter]. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Don™t leave them on the subway.  So 8:30 tomorrow 
morning.  T
he reception is available at 5
:00 p.m. 
[Meeting recessed] 
        
    
           
     
      
           September 13 Session 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We should have a reasonable 
amount of time.  We need to get the statement in by 11:30 and close the meeting by noon.  But 
first
, to get started
, why don™t we begin our policy go-round
? I have President Williams first on 
the list. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B with the forward 
guidance on the funds rate in paragraph 5
.  The case for further action is clear. In the absence of 
significant additional monetary stimulus, progress toward our policy goals would remain stalled.  

Such an outcome is simply inconsistent with the notion of appropriate monetary policy and, in 

my view
, is unacceptable. 
We must aim for a
 path that brings us measurably closer to our goals 
over the forecast horizon, and we must take concrete actions that get us on that path.  
Open
-ended purchases of MBS represent a substantial step in that direction.  With this action, 

unemployment will fall more quickly and inflation will return toward 
2 percent faster than under 
the status quo. 
The flow-
oriented asset purchases in 
alternative B also provide flexibility that™s 
particularly valuable, given all the uncertainties of the economy, the fiscal cliff, and Europe.  

They serve as a useful automatic stabilizer as market expectations about the ultimate size of the 
program adjust in response to changes in economic conditions 
and
 the outlook.  
If the 
labor 
market shows signs of substantial improvement sooner than expected, the program can be 

curtailed.  In contrast, if the recovery falters, the program can provide additional needed support. 
There would be similar benefits from incorporating such an automatic stabilizer into our 
forward guidance of the future path of the funds rate.  The language in p
aragraph 5
 does just 
that.  Incorporating this language into our statement would allow us to finally get the calendar
-                   
                        
 date monkey off our back and provide better guidance on our policy reaction functionŠ 
importantly, at least, on economic conditionsŠ
for funds rate liftoff that 
is both clear and 
consistent with our dual-mandate objectives.  It™s also flexible enough to handle a variety of 

future paths for the economy and inflation.  Indeed, the beauty of this approach is it provides 

guidance for contingencies where our forecasts go wrong, which they inevitably do. 
Finally, I continue to favor lowering the interest on excess reserve
s rate, the IOER rate, to 
15 basis points.  We should be using all of our tools in the same direction.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
.  Thank you very much.  
President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support 
alternative 
B with the 
$40 billion per month mortgage purchase program and prefer option 5
 which moves us away 
from dates and fo
cuses on the economic outcomes we seek to achieve. 
Inflation is quite low, and 
unemployment is quite high, and most of our forecasts for the past nine months have 

overestimated how quickly we would see improvements in 
either element of our mandate. 
Altern
ative B embraces the sense of doing what it takes to move the economy at an 
acceptable pace toward full employment with stable prices. 
Alternative 
B continues to take out 
duration, provides some direct support to housing, which is just beginning to recover, and 

extends guidance on the funds rate liftoff, which, given our lack of progress toward our mandate, 

seems appropriate. 
I strongly support the $40 billion rather than the $30 billion monthly 
mortgage purchase program. 
I would also prefer to include economic targets rather than date targets in our guidance.  
Thus, I would prefer the conditionality language in 5
. The language has two advantages.  
First, 
the conditions for changing our policy stance are clear and observable to the general public.  

Second, 
date
-conditional language can be subsequently undercut by Committee members™ 
                 
                       
   
 comments that suggest a different date may be appropriate, thus altering the effect of policy 
relative to the intent of the consensus reached 
by the Committee. 
Because 5
 conditions the 
policy on observable outcomes, the public can adjust its expectations automatically to changing 

economic circumstances, and there is less likelihood of perhaps inadvertently diminishing our 

policies™ effectivene
ss due to Committee disagreement. 
There seem to be two arguments against taking action at least as strong as B at this 
meeting
.  F
irst, that it would be ineffective.  Estimates in Boston are that following 
option A 
would reduce unemployment by approximatel
y 0.8 percent by the end of 2015.  This is roughly 
in line with the Board staff memos and the consensus policy submissions from three other banks 

that reported a preferred policy that was close to A.  
If accurate, this implies creating more than 
1 million jobs relative to doing nothing at this meeting. I do not view that as de minimis. 
The second argument against more aggressive action is that it will cause inflation.  Again, 
the consensus forecast exercise is instructive.  Among banks that provided numeric submissions, 

those that assumed further easing assume underlying inflation will remain well anchored.  This 

assumption is consistent with the Boston forecasting model.  Two of the Banks that provided 

numbers and assumed earlier tightening than we do have 
virtually identical unemployment rates 
with and without tightening, but a dramatically higher inflation rate under the baseline policy.  

This is markedly different than the staff forecast, the DSG
E models that we have seen, 
and the 
models used by B
anks as
suming the need for easing.  It would be interesting to discuss the 
theoretical basis and empirical evidence for such an inflationary process, which I presume is tied 

to dislodging of inflation expectations.  However, absent a strong empirical basis for su
ch an 

inflation process and with inflation tracking below our target and roughly consistent with the 

staff forecast in models that assume expectations remain well anchored, I view the risks of 
                      
     
    
           
 inflation as being well contained through 2015, even with a more aggressive policy than in 
alternative 
B.  Thus, I support B but would strongly prefer the forward guidance in the language 
of 5
 and the larger mortgage purchase amount.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the Committee™s outlook 
and overall assessment of the economy, I would say that additional accommodation is 

appropriate.  I think the question then becomes what form that accommodation should take. 
Alternati
ve A and 
alternative 
B offer 
the Committee the opportunity to do large-
scale 
asset purchases.  As you said in your Jackson Hole speech, Mr. Chairman, and 
as the staff 

analysis indicates, the benefits of large-
scale asset purchases are still under study and 
still 
uncertain.
  And the question is, how do we deal with that?  How do we deal with the 
issue that 
we don™t know exactly how much the benefits are, even though we might feel confident about 

the sign?  Governor Yellen and the Vice Chair
man
 said the right things yesterday about this, 
which is to act forcefully 
and
 to enhance the benefits of our large-
scale asset purchases as much 
as possible. 
How do we enhance our purchases as much as possible?  Well, the stimulus from our 
purchases hinges critically on th
e forward guidance.  They work together.  If you buy assets and 
hold them for one day and then sell them the next day, they are providing no stimulus.  If you 

buy assets and hold them for 10 years, they™re providing a lot of stimulus.  T
he stimulus 
that 
the asset purchases are providing the economy depends on the timing of exit.  T
o enhance the benefit 
of our large-
scale asset purchase
s as much as possible, 
we need the best possible forward 
guidance, and I would say that B(5
) as opposed to B(5) provides that forward guidance. 
                 
  
              
       
  
      
         
 I talked yesterday about the ambiguities that come 
by trying to communicate our reaction 
function with a date.  Today I™ll focus only on the economic aspects of B(5
. One, 
it provides 
an automatic stabilizer against macro shocks.
  Two, 
it offers protection against inflation.
  And, 
three, I want to talk about the mechanism through which it™s offering stimulus. 
The automatic stabilizer feature of B(5
 is relatively clear.  We talk a lot about downside 
risks in this room.  We have a bad shockŠ
and there 
are 
many possibilities out there
, I won™t go 
through them all.  If unemployment goes up 
and we have B(5) in place, which is date guidance, 
people 
will
 wonder
:  What is the Fed going to do?  How are they going to respond to that shock? 
With B
(5
 in place, 
if 
unemployment goes up
, it means automatically it™s going to take us longer 
to get back to the 6½ percent.  That means that people know th
at interest rates are going to be 

low for longer, andŠ
this is important because the extra accommo
dation that™s going to be 
provided at this meeting is likely to take the form of asset purchasesŠ
the assets that are being 

bought are being held for longer.  So a bad shock automatically translates into more stimulus 

because of the explicit numerical marke
rs being provided in the guidance. 
I™ve painted this as an ex post story of why B(5
 is preferred, but it actually has an ex 
ante component to it.  Essentially we™re offering insurance to the economy against bad shocks, 

and that means that people have less need for saving 
to deal with those bad shocks, and that 
stimulates spending.
  We™ve talked a lot about uncertainty.  H
aving the Fed have a reaction 
function in place that 
it has 
communicated clearly helps reduce uncertainty because people know 
how the Fed is going to react to those disturbances.  That™s the kind of stabilizer property that™s 

in B(5. Let me talk a little bit about inflation protection.  It™s a part that matters a great deal to 
me.  I™ve been and remain concerned about the possibility tha
t the long
-run natural rate of 
            
     
   
                          unemployment may well exceed our current estimates.  Here™s how I™ve been thinking about this 
issue.
  Suppose we only had one mandateŠprice stability.  How would we go about 
operationalizing that goal?  Well, presumably we would choose monetary policy so as to keep 

the medium-term outlook for inflation close to 2 
percent. 
Now, we have to struggle a little about 
what ﬁclose toﬂ means, and I™ll talk a little bit more about this later, but for me I™m willing to say 

that 50 basis points is close enough.  I would say that if you had a price-
stability mandate, 
then 
promoting price stability means keeping the medium
-term outlook for inflation within 50 basis 

points of target, 50 basis points below or 50 basis points above.  
This is 
only the price-
stability 
mandate, and this is exactly the language about inflation in B.  In other words, the way I read 

alternative 
B(5
) is 
it™s saying that the Committee has the option of raising the fed funds rate if it 
ever perceives that it is not satisfying its price
-stability mandate because inflation exceeds 
2½ percent. 
Now, this is not a trigger, to be clear.  And we should be clear when we talk about this 
that it 
is not a trigger.  It™s a threshold, and it™s a threshold for conversation.  At that point, 
the 

forward
-guidance commitment is no longer operational.  In some sense, we™d be back to business 
as usual in this Committee.  The Committee would have to weigh the cost of violating its price
-stability mandate against whatever performance it™s ac
hieving on the employment mandate and 

decide what to do.  And those conversations would inevitably be interesting ones.  
I actually 
think that B slices through what might appear to be a very challenging problem.  It provides 

valuable accommodation while al
lowing the Committee to be able to protect its price
-stability 
mandate. 
Let me turn now to how it does that.  What™s the magic behind B(5
) that allows it to give 
us this protection against inflation as well as providing the accommodation? It comes from t
he 
                 
    
    
       
    
       
   
      
           fact that a lot of our estimated rules of past behavior, like a Taylor rule, have us raising interest 
rates just because unemployment is too low.  The mechanism behind B(5
 is to say we don™t 
want to raise interest rates just because unemployment is to
o low, w
e want to raise interest rates 
because we™re worried about inflation.  If it turns out that unemployment is low but inflation is 

under control in the sense that our medium-term outlook is within 50 basis points of 2 
percent
, there™s no reason to raise interest rates just because unemployment is too low.  The way B(5
) is 
providing stimulus is by saying 
the 
FOMC will tolerate low unemployment. 
There™s a lot of talk about how we should stimulate the economy by having high 
inflation.  That is not what™s going on in B(5
. What™s going on instead is 
that 
the FOMC is 
going to hold off on raising rates until unemployment is lower, and that provides stimulus 

because people know that we won™t be choking 
off 
the party
, as it were
, before it™s really under 
way.  This willingness to tolerate low unemployment is exactly how the optimal
 control 
exercise 
works in FRB/
US. 
If you look at 
the o
ptimal 
control exercise 
in 
FRB
/US, in the fourth quarter 
of 2015, unemployment is 5¼ 
percent
, the outlook for inflation is 2.3 percentŠthat™s not what™s 
providing the stimulusŠ
and you get liftoff at that time. The Committee in that FRB
/US simulation is holding off on raising rates, and that stimulates a faster return to low 

unemployment, 
to the natural rate. 
For those of you who are suspicious about FRB/
US, it™s 
obviously just one of many models, but you get exactly the same mechanism in a N
ew Keynesian model.  
Iván Werning 
has a great paper along these lines.  High future output after 
you leave the zero lower bound stimulates high output at the 
zero 
lower bound.  
There™s no extra 
inflation at all in 
Werning™s paper because actually prices are fixed. 
It™s all about the 
commitment to deliver on lower unemployment and higher output than you would otherwise 

think. 
               
       
        
                      
  If you™re liste
ning to me about the mechanism, you should be thinking
: If you™ve got 
such great inflation protection and low unemployment provides good stimulus, why not have a 
lower unemployment threshold than 6½?  I would agree with that.  I think we should be willing 

to consider that.  President Pianalto raised a concern that maybe 50 basis points was too large a 

spread.  As I said, I™m willing to go that far out, 50 basis points, but maybe one way of shaping a 

compromise along those lines is to have a lower unemployment threshold.  That™s a good thing
; it provides stimulus.  And then have a tighter inflationŠnot even tighter, j
ust say 
ﬁclose to
ﬂ 2 percent, which actually
 is vague enough 
that
 it could allow for 50 basis points.  But I put that 
on the table as possibly one way to shape a compromise.  I think B(5
 is very valuable in this 
context. 
Alternative 
B(5
 provides an economic stabilizer, it provides inflation protection, and 
it™s a credible mechanism. It™s a way to provide a credible mechanism to say we™re go
ing to be 
willing to tolerate low unemployment. 
Yesterday Governors Raskin and Stein talked about low expectations in the economy, 
that really what we have to be thinking about is ways to bolster expectations.  Communication 

along the lines of B(5
 is goi
ng to be very helpful 
in that regard
.  We often pay a lot of attention 
to the words in this room, and the words are important in what we say, but in something like 

B(5
 the numbers 
appropriately are 
going to be the main focus.  How do we explain these 
numbers to the public?  I certainly have thought about this.  I
t™s very easy to communicate the 
idea that we have a target, 
2 percent, but we need a tolerance around that target.  I think every 
businessperson, 
at least
, will understand you have targets for 
performance, but there™s some 
tolerance that you have around that as well.
  Some people are going to say 50 basis points is too 
large, but we should be able to make a case about why we feel 50 basis points is appropriate, 
                             
   
                   
 given the kinds of shocks that could hit the economy on an ongoing basis, but the idea of having 
a tolerance is a very reasonable one. 
Why 6
½ percent? 
As I™ve suggested, we could go lower, but I think 6½ 
percent says 
we™re trying to minimize the possibility of being in breach of our tole
rance range.  We have a 
tolerance range
Šit doesn™t mean we want to exceed it.  We™re very prudent about minimizing 

the possibility of any breach of that. 
I will wrap up at this point.  We™ll hear, I™m sure, from others that the LSAPs have costs, 
and 
I shar
e some of those concerns about those costs.  I think the response to that is to try to 
make the benefits as big as possible, and the language of B(5
 is the way to go along those lines.  
I offered a suggestion for changing B(5
 yesterday. I™ll offer tha
t up for the Committee™s 
consideration.  I do worry, 
as written in the draft statement that the staff circulated yesterday
, that t
he last sentence is a little confusing.  At least I found it so, but if we feel we could go out 

and explain it to people, I™m happy to live with that; however, I hope people are willing to 

consider my suggested alterations.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
We™re going through at a rapid pace. 
We™
re going to be done within the hour here, I think. 
MR. TARULLO.  Don™t bet on it.  [Laughter] 

MR. BULLARD.  I have just a few comments here on policy, so I just wanted to follow 
up on my comments from yesterday a little bit. I do not think that this is the right juncture to 

unveil a large and aggressive easing program.  I think the road ahead this fall and winter could be 

rocky.  We would be better served to take a more opportune time to take such an action.  
We are 

looking at economic data that 
are 
middli
ng.  We™ve got financial stress, which is relatively low, 
             
               
       
     
        
         
   at least for now.  Our counterparts in Europe, not us, are the ones in recession, and, in my view, 
should be the ones that are easing aggressively.  U.S. equity markets suggest continuing faith in 

U.S. expansion.  Long-
term rates are exceptionally low. 
We may also be playing down the costs around the table here of walking farther into the 
woods than we already have on balance sheet policy.  President Plosser has emphasized those 

costs, and I think rightly so, and he has done a good service to the Committee in emphasizing 

those costs.  One thing that hasn™t been mentioned very much 
is that there is a distinct possibility 

that we would be feeding into commodity price increases, which is part of what happened during 

the QE2 episode and was a bit counterproductive.  We could argue about that.  We haven™t 

talked about it a lot, but I am a little bit concerned about that based on the action that we are 

likely to take today. 
I am not one that buys into the critique that monetary policy has been a long ways off 
target in the 
past five years. It is true that the economy is not performing as well as we would 
like.  There is a clear hypothesis for that based on the fact that we are dealing with a collapsed 

housing bubble and the aftermath of a financial crisis.  
But the Committee, by all accounts, has 

done a lot.  Much of it has been quite innovative, and the call of the Committee and of the 

Chairman has been essentially correct during the 
past several years.  So 
I am not one that thinks 
that we are 90 degrees off from where we should be or could be at this juncture. 
For our action today, as encapsulated in option B, we can cite two things that do make 
some sense and that I am sympathetic with as a rationale.  One is that we do have a global 

slowdown.  I am concerned about it.  I think it is very legitimate to worry that that slowdown is 

going to 
affect the U
nited State more than it has so far, and that that is a compelling argument for 
getting ahead of that and tak
ing aggressive action here.  T
hat is one reasonable rationale. 
And I 
                           
     
                        also think we have some room to maneuver on the inflation front, but only some.  I think 
it is nothing like 2010 when all measures of expected inflation were down a lot and trending down 

further. 
We can cite these factors.  I don™t think we have as good a rationale as I would like to 
see for a move of this magnitude. 
Within alternative
 B, I do think it is a good moment to adopt a meeting-
by-meeting 
approach to balance sheet policy that I have been advocating for a long time.  I hope that this will 

put us more into a mode that is similar to the one we are in under normal interest rate policy 

where we
 can sensibly adjust the policy at each meeting, given the change in the outlook and the 

change in the economic situation.  T
his will likely serve the Committee pretty well going 
forward, and I appreciate that 
alternative B has that feature. I am satisfie
d with the formulation 
in B with respect to that dimension. 
On paragraph 5, I definitely support 5 and not 5
. As many of you know, I have argued 
that explicit mention of an unemployment number is a tactical mistake
 that may not serve the 
Committee very well.
  As Governor Yellen remarked yesterday, hysteresis in unemployment 
cannot be ruled out in the U.S.  And I might remind the Committee again that Europe has not 

seen 6
½ percent unemployment for a couple of decades.  Today it is over 11 percent in Europe, 
despite some major countries undergoing structural labor market reforms. 
I am concerned that 
we are telling the public that we can do more about unemployment than we really can.  It is more 

labor market policy than it is monetary policy, and it could possibly throw monetary policy off 

for a generation to tie explicitly to unemployment and to promise that monetary policy can do a 

lot about unemployment. 
The story in Europe is exactly that there are structural problems that 
developed over time.  Unemploym
ent 
has remained very high for a very long time, and the 
structural reforms have not been undertaken by the various governments across Europe.  It is one 
                 
      
                         
    thing to have bad labor market policy.  It is another thing to have bad monetary policy because 
you ha
ve bad
 labor market policy.  I am concerned about this, and I™d advise against going in 
that direction. 
In addition, I think there are hazards of tying to any particular measure of economic 
performance because all of our metrics have clear deficiencies, and many of them are mentioned 

around the table here.  One of the 
deficiencies 
for unemployment is that unemployment can fall 
for the wrong reasons.  W
e were just citing yesterday that the unemployment rate did fall, but it 
didn™t fall in a way that we thoug
ht was indicative of better labor market performance.  So you 
could have a situation where you feel like unemployment has gone down to 
a relatively low 
level, but you are not very satisfied with labor market outcomes, 
and you still feel like the 

Committee 
should be aggressive in that circumstance.  T
his is a problem that we have with all of 
the economic data that we look atŠ
that each piece of dat
a only tells a part of the story about the 
overall economic performance. 
We would be better off to preserve the 
Committee™s judgment 
on economic performance. 
Outside of the statement it™s fine for various members to say, ﬁI™d really like to see 
unemployment come to here,ﬂ or ﬁI™d like to see labor force participation come to here,ﬂ or 

whatever other metrics 
that you
™d like to see certain types of labor market measures hit certain 
thresholds.  But I™m not sure that you want to tie the Committee™s hands in making a judgment 

about overall economic performance.  So I™d have no problem beefing up the language on labor 

markets, if people feel like we maybe have been insufficiently attentive to this and saying that 

we are going to pay more attention.  That™s fine with me.  But I™m counseling against putting an 

explicit number on this or really any other data, to the extent w
e can avoid it, in the statement. 
         
                     
    
       
                   And, finally, on this paragraph 5
Šand then I have a few more comments
ŠI think 
thresholds or triggers like this draw lines in the sand that we may not want to be drawing.  W
e are all in agreement that if we are inside the 
boundsŠ
say, 2
½ percent and 6
½ percent
Šthat we 
are not going to raise rates.  But if you cross the bound, you are implicitly sending a signal that 
you are going to do something.  I™m not sure the Committee has really decided that we would 

actually do someth
ing in that circumstance.
  Putting on my dovish 
hat for a minute, you are 
creating this thing where you are saying you will act if the triggers are violated. I don™t think we 

have really discussed that or really think that that™s what we would do.  If inf
lation is at target, 
and unemployment comes downŠand President Kocherlakota was at least in part touching on 

this
Šthe Committee may not want to tighten at that juncture.  What if you don™t want to tighten 
at that juncture?  Then why are you giving that 
as the trigger? 
That part to me has not 
been 
formulated
 in a way that I can get my head around. 
Let me comment just for a few minutes on Mike Woodford™s Jackson Hole paper, which 
I do think was a seminal survey of monetary policy at the zero lower bound.  If you haven™t 

looked at itŠand I know many of you haveŠthe paper is divided into 
just 
two parts.  There is 

balance sheet polic
y, and there is policy 
to commit to stay at the zero interest rate for longer. 
If you know Mike, you know that he is very pessi
mistic about balance sheet policy, being an anti
-monetarist kind of guy.  He does not think balance sheet policy is very effective, except to the 

extent that it has a signaling effect and that the Committee is better served by doing something 

rather than j
ust promising to do something. 
I agree with the Chairman™s assessment that Professor Woodford is underestimating the 
effects of balance sheet policy.  I do think QE2 did have a significant influence on the United 

States and especially on expected inflation
 and actual inflation.  The effects to the real economy 
      
           
  
     
         
      
      
           
   are harder to trace out, but those are always hard to trace out.  So I think today™s 
alternative 
B action is a sensible way to manage the balance sheet policy going forward and that policy does 
have s
ome prospect of being effective, so I™m not going to argue against the efficacy of the 
policy. 
Professor Woodford thinks that the only way to provide accommodation, in large part, is 
to commit to stay at the zero lower bound for longer.  I agree also with 
the Chairman that the 

length of time that this Committee may be able to commit to stay at zero gets less and less 

credible as you go farther out in the future.  That is something that is not well captured by the 

model.  If you start going out many years, so many things can happen over that period, in reality, 

that it is not clear that you are communicating anything.
  But the main message I took from the 
paper, and an effective message, was this: 
If you are trying to make this commitment to stay 
lower for l
onger, it is a very subtle matter to get it right.  And he reviews a lot of central banks 
and a lot of central bank actions, some of which he characterized as counterproductive in terms 

of trying to get the right type of commitment from the perspective of 
the model on staying lower 
for longer.  
In fact, 
what 
I took away 
from it 
was
, the main danger is that continuing to commit 
to later and later liftoff could be sending this pessimistic signal
Šif we don™t do it correctlyŠ
that 

the reason we are staying lower
 for longer is not that we are trying to make up for the fact that 
we have been stuck at the zero lower bound, but instead it is that the outlook is deteriorating and 

is continuing to deteriorate in a very negative way.  And 
I think we have to be careful a
bout that, 
and that 
maybe
 we have sent that signal, unwittingly perhaps, in some of our actions. 
I am going to give a suggestion, not a policy suggestion, but a suggestion about the 
proper way to think about this from Professor Woodford™s perspective 
in my interpretation.  T
he 
whole point is you are constrained by the zero lower bound for a period of time.  Then, after you 
               
           
       
                    would otherwise raise interest rates, you stay at the zero lower bound for a time to make up for 
the fact that you were constrained duri
ng the earlier period of time.
  My example about how we 
should think about this is as follows.  Suppose the Committee was committed to a Taylor r
ule the 
way John Taylor likes to use itŠhis is a much more aggressive and 
hawkish 
Taylor 
rule, which 
would even 
call for raising rates today.
  And suppose everyone agreed on that.  This is just 
hypothetical, obviously.  And that rule would call for us to raise rates today, but we would say, 

ﬁWe are not raising rates today.  We are staying at zero today.ﬂ  The reason we are staying at 

zero today is exactly the Woodford reason, which is that we were constrained by the zero bound 

for a couple of years.  T
herefore, we have to stay at zero for a while
.  And it is exactly at that 
point that you gain credibility for the po
licy
.  You are trying to make up for the zero bound 
constraint by st
aying at zero
 even though the data are telling you, according to the standard 
Taylor rule or other Taylor
-type rules
, to be more aggressive at this juncture.  Y
ou are staying at 
zero 
because you need to make up for the fact that you were at the zero lower bound for some 
time. 
I do not agree with Professor Woodford that the nominal GDP targeting approach would 
do this.  My main complaint about nominal GDP targeting is that it ignores th
e possibility of 
what is likely an altered real GDP growth path.  And certainly, if you look at the data, as the 

Chairman was saying yesterday, on levels of real GDP or consumption, it looks like we are on a 

different path than we were. 
So to commit us to
 get back to the previous real GDP trend, which 
is partly driven by 
the 
bubble economy in the mid-2000s, I think would be a mistake. 
However
, for 
price
-level targeting
, I have looked at graphs and tried to get an analysis of 
where we are with respect to th
e price level.  If you look at the price-
level path established 
during the period from 1995 to 2005, which was a relatively successful monetary policy era for 
             
      
    
     
   
       
   
            
the Committee in terms of hitting our inflation target, we are actually very close 
to or right on 
that price
-level path.  And in that sense, that has been a great success of the Fed during this 
episode.  Unlike the U.S. in the 1930s, w
hen policymakers allowed the price
-level path to 
deviate from the previously established path, or Japan in the 1990s, in which, again, they allowed 
the price
-level path to deviate from the one that had been established, we did not do that.  We are 

right on the 1995 to 2005 price-
level path. 
In that sense, policy has been successful, and we have 
not committed the mistakes
 of the past.  That is also one reason why I think we have made 
essentially the right call over the 
past several years. 
I am going to stop there.  Those are my 
thoughts on monetary policy.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes, just a point of clarification.  I view the language of 5
 as a 
threshold, not a trigger.  Threshold language would be, 
ﬁlow rates appropriate, at least as long as 

the unemployment rate exceeds 6
½ percent.ﬂ  A tri
gger would be, ﬁA low rate is appropriate 
only as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6
½ percent.ﬂ  So I think it is written as a 
threshold, not a trigger. 
MR. BULLARD.  Can I respond to that?  I agree that that is the language in there, but I 
think mark
ets will interpret it as a 
trigger.  
Or let me say, as a fair
 way, I think there is a danger 
that markets will interpret that as 
a line in the sand or a t
rigger
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it™s pretty easy for the Chairman in the press 
conference
Šif we
 were to go this routeŠto explain what a threshold means.  I don™t think it is 
that complicated. 
MR BULLARD. If it™s not a t
rigger
, why put the number in? Put a lower number in. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s okay, too. 
       
                
           
               
     
   
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President 
Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to support 
alternative 
B. Having said that, I have some reservations about going down the path of a new LSAP, 
particularly the whole-hog approach that™s in a
lternative A. I am reticent on two
 counts. 
First, I remain unconvinced about the likely efficacy of expanding our asset purchases.  
As I said in the economy round, I think the conditions that made the first two LSAP programs 

successful
Ša lack of liquidity in MBS markets in the case of LSAP1 and elevated concerns 
about outright deflation in the case of LSAP2Šare not present in the current environment.  
This 

time around, it seems to me that we face a more conventional problem of inadequate demand, 

and I am not convinced that lowering general 
market rates will stimulate much credit expansion 
and spending.  
Furthermore, it is not clear to me that credit conditions in mortgage markets have 

eased quite enough to the point that more MBS purchases w
ill have a significant impact. 
Second, I have learn
ed to be humble as regards outlook certainty.  I have not completely 
abandoned the hypothesis that the willingness of businesses to hire and businesses and 

consumers to spend will improve on the other side of the election and fiscal cliff negotiations.  

As I commented yesterday, I believe there is some upside risk.  Though the European situation is 
not rapidly converging to a truly comprehensive resolution, I see some hope that the process of 

incremental steps may cumulatively lead to a large leap in overall confidence. 
I don™t have a 
whole lot of conviction that these optimistic outcome
s will be realized, so I accept the case for 
some policy response to current circumstances 
in the Committee™s outlook. That said, I will 
support 
alternative 
B™s modest pace 
of 
$30 billion per month.  That would be my preference 
for 
expansion of our MBS portfolio. 
      
     
                        
   
          
   
   With respect to the choice between paragraph 5 and 5
, I am sympathetic to the idea of 
replacing calendar dates with economic conditionality.  I have said that in e
arlier meetings. But I 
am not in favor of the formulation in 5
, at least today. 
I have views 
similar to 
President 
Bullard
™s.  The unemployment rate is a partial and potentially misleading indicator of labor 
market performance.  The pace of employment gr
owth needed to attain a given unemployment 
rate can be very sensitive to changes in the participation rate. For example, at current 
participation rates, it will take just over 200,000 jobs a month to get to a 7 percent 

unemployment rate by the end of next year.  I would consider 200,000 jobs a month over the 

next 16 months to be consistent with sustained significant improvement in the labor market. 
But the Board staff, and many on the Committee, have noted that labor force participation 
rates appear to be 
well below the levels that can be explained by demographic trends.  My own 
staff estimates that only 40 percent of the drop in participation rates since the beginning of the 

recession is due to labor force aging.  
If the participation rate were to revert t
o the level it was 
just last September, job gains of 200,000 per month would, everything else being equal, yield an 

unemployment rate that would be barely below 8 percent by the end of 2013.  And I would not 

be willing to say that such an outcome would con
stitute a lack of progress in meeting our 

employment mandate. 
Paragraph 5
, as it is written, contains no reference to broader labor market conditions.  I 
believe there was a reference in an earlier version, but it is has been removed.  I think that this i
s a significant omission, particularly with an unemployment threshold as ambitious as 6
½ percent
.  I™m not comfortable with a number that low, combined with a lack of any reference at all to our 

broader employment objectives.  T
here are enough facets of the 6
½ percent decision to consider 
that it feels a little rushed to me at this meeting. 
      
          
    
      
      
    
             
 As regards paragraph 4, I would include the reference to other policy tools. I think the 
meaning of this paragraph should be that if conditions don™t improve, the Commi
ttee will 
continue the MBS purchase program and may undertake additional asset purchases, 
employ 
other policy tools, or both.  If I misunderstand the meaning of that paragraph, then I would ask 
for a little bit more work on this paragraph and further clarification this morning.  
Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart, in 5
, the very last sentence does 
reference labor market conditions.  Did you note that? 
MR. LOCKHART.  Let me look at that.  I stand corrected.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Resource slack is large, labor market 
conditions lack momentum toward improvement, and the inflation profile in our projections is 

slightly below our long
er-run objective for the most 
part. 
I support strong and meaningful policy 
actions today to address these deficiencies. I accept that 
alternative 
B delivers on these 
requirements.  I think that the $40 billion of MBS and 5
 are very helpful in delivering 
that. I 
will simply note th
at the formulation of forward guidance in 5
 is not quite as strong as I have 
preferred in the past, but I do think that it is a good, careful approach that will in fact boost 

monetary policy accommodation, and I can certainly support that, if it is adopted. 
I think that the wording paragraph 2 is extremely important. It states the monetary policy 
concern 
as follows:  ﬁ
The Committee is concerned that
, without further policy accommodation, 
economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained improvement in labor market 

conditions.ﬂ  That is very important.  It follows through on the minutes from our July meeting, as 

well as your grave concerns
 and 
remarks expressed at Jackson Ho
le, so I favor that. 
                         
         
  
       
    I favor this combination of essentially open-
ended asset purchases, which are flexible 
when you put paragraphs 3 and 4 together, plus the enhanced 
state
-contingent 
forward guidance 
in paragraph 4.  
President Bullard went through this rationale a little bit. Let me just summarize 
and say I put a lot of weight on the research literature that Mike Woodford described.  I thought 

he did a terrific job.  In Woodford™s formulation, clear expectations of forward guidance are 

important and effe
ctive for delivering policy accommodation. 
In fact, I held my breath when I 
read the page where he described when I had talked about the 7
/3 thresholds, and I thought that 
Mike was kind and gentle in criticizing but saying that that type of forward guidan
ce did deliver 
more accommodation than what his best choice was.  In that sense, the language in 5
 would 
indeed be helpful.  The evidence for LSAPs that you mentioned yesterday, 
Mr. 
Chairman
, was 
very important.  The two reinforce each other very well. 
In paragraph 3, as I mentioned, I favor the stronger pace of MBS at $40 billion.  I think 
that paragraph 4 makes this essentially open-ended by conditioning further LSAPs on substantial 

improvement in labor conditions, joint with price stability, and 
with
 policy effectiveness, as you 
mentioned yesterday.  So there are important safeguards there.  It can be flexible and can turn 

around if in fact it is not working as best we would hope. 
In terms of labor market improvement, it would be unambiguously an improve
ment if we 
got something on the order of payroll employment increasing 200,000 per month for several 

months.  If the unemployment rate declined either with momentum or continuous improvement, 

and, indeed, we got 
GDP growth above trend, those would be all of the markers that we would 
expect for a strong recovery that would be associated with an 
improving labor market.  We may 
well not be lucky enough to see all three of those at the same time, so we will have to pay 

attention t
o that. 
       
   
                 
   
             
   
        
      
      
As you mentioned, the l
ast sen
tence
 in 
paragraph 
5 gets at this larger characterization of 
labor market improvement beyond just the unemployment rate, but the unemployment rate is a 
very important marker.  I think that 
the 
paragraph 5
 forward guidance is explicit
ly state 
contingent, and it allows us to remove the calendar date.  I
t is very easy for us to be against 
calendar dates.  I think that most of us are uncomfortable with this formulation, that policy can 

remain low until late 2014 or beyond.  But we are uncomfortable because of the ambiguous 

nature. Is it a forecast?  Is it commitment? It is easy to be against that, but you have to be in 

favor of something in order to actually take it out.  The state contingency in 5
 is very useful.  So 
the 6
½ unemployment rate marker, 
with the 2 plus ½ percentage point on inflation, is a useful 
safeguard.
  Presidents Williams, Rosengren, and Kocherlakota spoke well about how this works, 
and that it is critical to describe our attitudes about inflation above our goal of 2.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by saying something positive 
about alternative B.  [Laughter] I very much like the idea in paragraph 5
of replacing our 
problematic calendar
-based guidan
ce with language that is conditional on future economic 
conditions.  I think this is much needed change.  It focuses our communication, our forward 

guidance, on a reaction function, and reduces the danger that Michael Woodford very eloquently 

laid out that our forward guidance is actually just making people gloomier about the economic 

fundamentals. It™s a very real danger, and I think there is a very real possibility that that is 
the 
effect our forward guidance has been having over the course of the last y
ear. 
Okay.  That was my positive remark.  I would like to move on now to some improvement 
opportunities I see.  [Laughter] I think in 5
 that it would be better if we avoided using a specific 
numerical value for the unemployment rate as a threshold or tri
gger, whatever we are going to 
         
     
            
              
           
   
    do. I took a step back.  T
his is a large change in our statement.  This is a fairly dramatic change 
in the set of language we use 
to characterize our forward guidance. It™s an ambitious statement. 
In view of our experience with the forward guidance earlier this year, where we got 
boxed in for something that in hindsight we could have anticipated, I tried to think of ways in 
which this language could unexpectedly box us in or tie our hands in ways that we don™t 

anticipate now.  I think this numerical unemployment rate is one of them. 
President Lockhart 
was very eloquent about this.  This makes us hostage to labor force participation rates.  W
e would be vulnerable to a scenarioŠhe sketched it outŠin which employment picks up, and that 

starts drawing people into the labor force.  This is not an unfamiliar phenomenon historically, in 

which labor force growth that 
tails off 
and turns negative when the unemployment rate goes up, 
then picks up when employment growth starts rising.  Given the behavior of the labor force over 
the 
past several years, I don™t think we should have a lot of confidence in our ability to project 

how the unemployment rate would behave in a scenario in which employment growth picked up 

a lot.  I think this is a really serious risk.  I
t would be better to write the statement in terms of the 
qualitative language used earlier that President Lockhart was referring to. For example, we 

could say, 
ﬁThis exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least 
until the Committee has seen substantial ongoing improvement in labor market conditions.ﬂ 
I think that formulation would be preferable to the language that uses a specific numerical target. 
The s
econd opportunity I see has to do with the inflation language in the same statement.  
We used the phrase that 
ﬁthis 
exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate 
will be 
appropriate at least as long as
ﬂ blah, blah, blah, ﬁprovided that inflation at a one-
to two
-year 
horizon is projected to be no more than 
a half
 percentage point above the Committee™s 2 
percent 
objective and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.
ﬂ  So the logic is 
                
  
              
      
          
     clear, to give ourselves an out if the inflation picture deteriorates substantially.  Personally, I 
think the ﬁclose to 2 percentﬂ language would be better.  That™s more consistent with the kind of 

standard we described in our consensus statement.  Proliferating conditionality language can be 

confusing.  But there is a deeper problem with this language.  My sense is that it has been true 

for the 
past 20 years in which we have achieved price stability
ŠI believe it has been true
Šthat 
inflation over the medium term, the next couple of years, was projected to be close to 2 percent 

or below that.  I haven™t gone and checked, but I am virtually sure that™s true.  T
his was a period 
during which we achieved and maintained price stability.  I
t is essential to maintain that 
credibility because it can be co
stly to re
gain, but we started this period by moving preemptively, 
before the forecast of inflation moved away from that low rate.  And in the future, 
it is going to 

be important for us to be able to move preemptively. I
f this condition is violated, it is
 in some 
sense too late. 
It
™s not like we are going to go back to the 1970s right away if this condition is 
violated, but I think this sets too low a bar.  T
here is a way to word this that tightens this. 
We 
can say, instead of ﬁprovided that inflation at a one-
to two
-year horizon,ﬂ we could say, ﬁunless 
inflation, at a one-
to two
-year horizon, would be projected to be more than ½ percentage point 
above the Committee™s 2 percent objective.ﬂ  S
omething lik
e that makes clear that we would 
move to keep this condition true, that we are not going to wait until this condition is violated in 

order to move. 
The t
hird suggestion I have for improvement in B(5) 
concerns the last sentence. I suggest 
we delete it. I think it is quite confusing.  This represents the fifth different statement of 

conditionality on the second page, in two paragraphs. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Are you saying the last sentence in 5
?            
          
                                        MR. 
LACKER. 
Yes, , the last sentence. 
It is not clear if it only applies after we get to 
6½. Does it apply before or after that?  It is tempting to think, well, the second sentence is pretty 
strongŠthat must trump it.  But it™s not obvious.  And then, it
™s expressed in terms of the pace, 
and the rest of the conditionality is about the level of the unemployment rate.  So does this mean 

that if we get to 6
½ percent 
but unemployment is not continuing to fall rapidly enough, we are 
going to keep tightening po
licy
? I don™t think you mean that.  I
t just seems unnecessary and 
confusing to me. 
The f
inal suggestion I will make
 is, 
again, the lack of grammatical accuracy in the way 
inflation is referred to in 4 is unbecoming to 
the Committee.  We take a lot of care
 to 

communicate precisely. In something so critical, it is a little disturbing. It just seems like a limp 

and tepid sort of boilerplate reference to inflation.  ﬁ
In the context of price stability
ﬂ has always 
struck me as a little bit vague. 
Why not say 
ﬁunless doing so would compromise 
price stabilityﬂ? 
We are committed to price stability. It™s in the mandate. I would prefer to see something 
stronger like that. 
Let me take a step back here. 
If you look at this language, it™
s complicated.  The 
conditionality is expressed in four or five different ways in various parts of these two paragraphs.  

Just in terms of complexity, I think it™s going to be hard to boil it down and simplify.  
ﬁUntil 
labor market conditions get better
ﬂ is probably going to be the 
headline, but the nuances are 
going to be hard to parse out for people just reading it.  Your press conference is going to be 

really critical here. 
The broad thrust of the language of this thing is to very significantly intensify our focus 
on unemployment.  We have been moving in that direction for some time, but I view this as 

implicitly weakening our commitment to price stability
.  Taking this statement as a whole
, that™s 
        
              
                  
     how I view this.  I know the worry about price stability seems like a remote and distant concern 
right now.  I know that it looks like it is under control.  It looks like we have things covered, 

looks like we are far from breaking out, looks like we have gotten away with it 
the 
past couple of 
years.  We™ve seen inflation rise up and not have it trigger any erosion of expectations.  But the 

potential, if we lose it, is for far more costly effects on the economy than the incremental impact 

of the 1 
million jobs that the staff 
has shown might be associated with today™s actions.  I think 
that shift in focus represents a broad overconfidence about our models; a broad overfocus on 

point forecasts
, forecast means, mean forecast paths
, and their analytics as well as a lack of 
humilit
y that would be appropriate here. 
As for the deeper issues of the day, I cannot support a new asset purchase program.  W
e are fluctuating around a sluggish growth path, and I don™t think we should react to the downside 

wiggles that are of this magnitude.  F
urther stimulus at this time is unlikely to improve 
economic 
growth much without causing an unwanted increase in inflation.  I have talked about that before.  

This will complicate risks, 
creating 
greater complications in our exit strategy. 
The larger we 
make the balance sheet, the more vulnerable we are to small miscalculations in policy along the 

exit.  It just provides so much scope for expansion in bank lending and deposits that it makes us 

very vulnerable.  And the larger we make it, the more vulnerab
le 
we are
. I strongly oppose purchasing more mortgage-backed securities.  Central banks should not 
choose which economic sectors to support.  Doing so, if it has any effect at all, restricts credit 

access in other sectors. And I don™t see how we can defen
d that.  Such allocational initiatives go 
far beyond our mandate.  They undermine our claim to deserve independence for the conduct of 

monetary policy, and threats to our independence have been growing recently.  I think these are 
                                 
    
     
             just going to heighten th
ose threats. 
Buying MBS is bad policy and bad politics.  The only 
circumstance in which I
™d support it is if there weren™t enough T
reasuries out there to buy.
 One final comment.  T
here was some discussion at the last meeting of the slogan ﬁWe™ll 
do what it takes.ﬂ I think we haven™t given enough thought to the possibility that what it takes is 
patience.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I want to comment on one of your observations, 
President 
Lacker, about the last sentence of 5
. I read it slightly differently than you do, and I 
don™t know how 
other people read it. I read the sentence preceding it 
as saying 
that we currently 
anticipate that th
ese are 
the right metrics, but then the last sent
ence says that that current 
anticipation 
could be modified by what we see over time.
  You are basically saying that you are 
not completely locked into the first thing, regardless of what economic information you see in 

the future.  So I think the sentences 
actually do work together in a reasonable way. 
MR. LACKER
.  So the policy we™re adopting here is that an exceptionally low rate for 
the funds rate is going to be appropriate as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6½ percent, 

inflation is well contained,
 or we decide that some other indicator of labor market conditions 
is more appropriate. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We currently anticipate that this is the right range, but 
our view is going to be modified by future information about a broad range of indicators.  
That is 

how I read it.  T
hat seems to be more intelligent than saying we are locked into this, regardless of 
what happens, regardless of what we see, and we are not allowed to learn about anything as the 

economy evolves.  I
t creates a little nuance, 
which is reasonable in terms of how one would 
expect the Committee to operate. 
                 
    
    
     
    
       
         
        MR. LACKER.  Well, then, why not soften the 6½ and use 
more general 
labor market 
conditions. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Because 
you are trying to give guidance about what the 
Commit
tee
 thinks 
at the time, what we think today that might be modified 
or might not be 
modified by future information.  But clearly it would be unintelligent not to modify your view if 
the information strongly contradicted your prior view.  That™s how I read i
t. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Despite massive monetary policy 
accommodation over the past four years, a stronger recovery has not yet materialized, and last 

week™s labor market report was a frustrating remi
nder of this long slog.  Like others, my forecast 
accounts for any number of risks related to Europe, the U.S. fiscal cliff, and 
the 
regulatory 
environment, and does recognize that policy accommodation may need to remain in place for 

some time in order to 
support the recovery.  I understand the case for taking action in order to 
spur the recovery and bring down unemployment faster.  To that end, the Committee agreed to 

undertake additional balance sheet actions only a few months ago.  Today, we contemplate doing 

more.
  Certainly, the data flow since the last meeting was a bit softer than I had expected, but not 
sufficiently so to warrant a further expansion of our balance sheet.  In that regard, I note that the 

Tealbook had pulled forward the timing of the f
irst rate increase since our last meeting. 
As I weigh the cost of action versus 
the 
status quo, I have appreciated the thoughtful 
analysis of Board staff and a number of my colleagues around this table about the effects of 

another asset purchase.  Unfortun
ately, I find 
that the risk
s associated with further action carry 
less precise measurement, but, to the extent they are possible, pose significant cost if realized.  

Impairing market functioning in certain financial markets, the potential for the Federal R
eserve 
                 
             
               
      to experience financial losses in the future, and risk
s to financial stability 
due to the extended 
low rate environment all strike me as significant when weighed against potential benefits.  A 
larger balance sheet also has the potential to further c
omplicate an exit strategy. 
Another LSAP also may have near-term adverse consequences.  Given the recent rise in 
gasoline prices, additional asset purchases could generate a further rise in oil and gasoline prices, 

which would weigh on middle- and lower-
income households and, thus, partially offset 
estimated benefits. 
I also remain concerned that a balance sheet expansion could at some point raise inflation 
expectations.  Longer-
term measures of inflation expectations
, or breakeven inflation, 
appeared 
to re
spond strongly to past LSAP announcements.  Given that current longer-
term breakeven 
inflation measures are consistent with our stated goal, I am concerned that another LSAP 

program could push longer-term expectations above a level consistent with our obje
ctives. 
If this were to occur, we would face a difficult tradeoff between allowing longer
-term expectations 
to drift higher or reversing course by reducing the size of the balance sheet.  Either option strikes 

me as damaging to both the real economy and o
ur credibility. 
In terms of the forward guidance, I agree with those who note the time-contingent 
guidance has been problematic.  And so conceptually I agree that the state
-contingent guidance is 

preferable as long as we can articulate this guidance in a m
anner that is fully consistent with our 
January 2012 strategy statement, including our assessment of risk to the financial system.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 
         
    
  
                 
   
    
        
          MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I mentioned yesterday when I made very 
short comments about the economy, 
I would interlocutate today at greater length 
[laughter], 
so I 
ask you to bear with me. 
We seem to be mesmerized by the siren call of LSAPs. I can™t sing like Orpheus, and I 
know I will have no success in tying you to the mast or stuffing wax in our crew™s ears.  So what 
I am going to do is simply give my very best advice as a loyal officer on your ship.  I believe we 

are getting further off course. I believe we were misled by our navigati
on equipment.  
We have 
very sophisticated models, and we have a superb crew of analysts but, as you yourself said 

yesterday
Šand I quoteŠﬁnobody really knows what is holding back the economy, and nobody 
really knows what really works.ﬂ 
One thing I learned as a midshipman at the Naval Academy was that great battles at sea 
or on land are fought with modern tools, but they are decided ultimately by judgment.  AndŠ 

always
Šone listens to and respects the elements. I think everybody agrees at t
he table that 
inflation is not an immediate or presently foreseeable threat.
  Our desired port, given our 
mandate, is increased employment. I happen to believe personally we are way off course. I 

believe we are ignoring, at our peril, the elements. I ha
ve reported from my watch station again 

and again that the very people we wish to stoke consumption and follow demand by creating jobs 

and expanding business fixed investment are not influenced by our policy initiativesŠ
that is, by 

our LSAPs. 
Small and med
ium-sized businesses are job creators, and yet the soundings, as mentioned 
yesterday by President George, 
of the 
National 
Federation of Independent Business
™ s
urveys and 
others, tell us that over 90 percent of those businesses are either not interested in borrowing or, 

as I mentioned yesterday, 
have no problem accessing cheap financing.
  Monetary policy is not on 
           
            
  
     
    
   
   
        
      
        
 their radar as a concern, except that it raises fears among some 
of future inflationary 
consequences.  Their principal concern, as President Georg
e mentioned yesterday, is with fiscal 
and regulatory uncertainty. 
With regard to fixed investment and job creating 
cap
-ex, as I said yesterday, the math is 
pretty straightforward.  Big businesses dominate that theater, and again and again I have reported 
to this Committee that with some exception
ŠDisney, for example, being one led by a very 
clever contrarian CEO
Š90 percent or so of those I survey will simply not be motivated by 
further cuts in the cost of capital to invest in job-
creating cap
-ex beyond their maintenance needs.  
And 
this 
is 
due to 
the uncertainty of taxes and final deman
d and federal spending prospects. 
This time, as I mentioned yesterday, I asked my CEO contacts if 
their 
cost of borrowing 
were to decrease by some 25 basis points or more, how 
they would 
react. 
Would this induce 
them
 to spend more on expanding payroll or job-
creating cap
-ex?  And the answer 
from
 9 out of 
10 was, you could cut the cost of borrowing by 1 full percentage point 
and 
we™ll use it to buy 
back stock.  That™s what we™r
e being directed 
to do by our board.  Governor Stein mentioned the 
Duke™s Fuqua School survey yesterday, which is even more comprehensive. 
But one of my CEO contacts, by the way, reminded me of the work I used to do for him 
and the company he then managed 
going back to 1975, and our recommendations for strategic or 
green
 field investments.  We focused on ROI:  As long as you get paid back and as long as you 
earn a profit
, you can justify it to your shareholders.  And presentlyŠ
and perhaps because of 
what we 
have already initiated
Šthe cost of capital, as President Dudley mentioned earlier, 
unlike the conditions of 1975, 
is just not part of the calculation.  And if they are going to be 
buying 
back stock, as they are being directed 
to by their boards, there is, 
to be sure, a wealth 
effect.  But 
based on 
the people I talked to, it just does very little to result in
 job creation sooner 
        
        
  
   
   
                       
      rather than later. I™ll give you a specific example. 
This is inside information and off the record.  
A company that ordinarily h
as cap
-ex expenditures between $15 
billion 
and $20 billion a year 
and has the option presently to either lay cable and facilities that would expand their 4G network 
to 90 percent of the country or buy more stock has been directed by their b
oard of 
director
s to 
buy more stock because of the economics that these low interest rates make possible.  Even 

though it strengthens 
their balance sheet, it defers their 
job-
creation capacity. 
Again, I am suggesting, as one of your loyal crew, respectfully, that the effi
cacy of the 
course you are leading us upon is questionable.  M
y best guess is that we will end up this 
program, if we proceed with B, with excess reserves that exceed $2 trillion and money lying 

fallow, unused, and underutilized toward achieving our goal o
f increased employment. 
When we last talked, it was suggested that perhaps my interlocutors were unsophisticated 
and didn™t see the whole picture.  I note now that some sophisticates have come to question the 

efficacy of this LSAP cruise, among them Mr. Woodford, who has been talked about excessively 

at this meeting [
laughter], and my friend and respected economist Bill White, who has not been 
mentioned whatsoever.  Using monetary policy to overcome bad fiscal and regulatory policy is, 

to my mind, not only faulty but a 
pyrrhic
 strategy. It won™t work, and it may be used against us 
in a backlash and lead us onto the rocks. 
Now, all of that said, Mr. Chairman, you™re the captain of the ship.  It appears that you 
and many of our colleagues wish to now plot a course with coordinates outlined in B.  We have 

decided to proceed, and we have instructed our boiler room, 
as we say in the 
navy
, to pour out 
another $750 billion or so in steam, and the boiler room has replied, ﬁ
Aye
, aye.ﬂ
  This is doable, 
and 
the staff h
as indicated that 
ﬁt
he challenges posed by exit remain manageable
,ﬂ though I do 
sense some timidity in their confidence.  There are warnings in the 
memos on LSAPs that exit 
                
    
  
            
      
  
                 following an even larger pro
gram
 can probably not be accomplished without violating what the 
Committee has heretofore said is our exit strategy principle. 
The engine room has replied, ﬁYes, 
we can do it.ﬂ  But there are murmurs among the crew that their conclusions are subject to
Šand 
I am taking words out of the LSAP 
memos
Šﬁsubstantial uncertainty,ﬂ and they c
ouch their 
responses with qualifying phrases like ﬁcurrently judgesﬂ and ﬁwould likelyﬂ and ﬁseems 
plausible.ﬂ  And as I said, listening to Seth very carefully yesterday, his qualifications or his 

disclaimers sounded very much like an Allegra commercial.  But, again, you™re captain of the 

ship; you™ve decided to proceed on a course.  The course is outlined in B.  Bill tells us that it may 

aggregate to another $750 billion or so depending on how much time we let this run.  
I am a 
member of your loyal officer corps.  And even though I doubt the efficacy of what we wish to 

do, and in fact feel that this is most definitely not the right course, and feel that this course may, 

as President 
Lacker just said, compromise the Fed™s security with regard to its independence, m
y job is to give you the best advice I am capable of rendering.  Your decision is to steer us along a 

course outlined in B.  I would say that the least worse of the options in Tealbook 
B is alternative 

B, 
reg
ular B, the first paragraph 5. 
I sent around a memo earlier in preparation for this meeting, and I argued that one could 
make the case that this could help offset the drag from higher GSE fees, 
lower 

mortgage
Treasury spre
ads, even though they are quite low, and help one of the three positive 
durable goods sectors that is assisting the recovery, the others 
being aircraft and motor vehicles
.  It is still operating below long
-run potential, so there is very little danger, in my view, of 
inducing cyclical mal
-investment. 
In addition, the general effects of inducing more refinancing 
may aid housing and households in ways that we can™t quite quantify. 
          
       
          
    
         
  
            
   
 may be laudable in the minds of some at this table.  We™ve heard good 
arguments for it.  But I agree with President Lockhart, andŠ
I believe
ŠPresident Lacker, that it 
is going too far too fast, that we are rushing it, and I would recommend against it.  I am referring 
specifically to the 6
½ percent unemployment rate 
and 2½ percent inflation cap over the one- to 
two
-year horizon
.  You have the phrase that ﬁlong
er-term inflation expectations 
continue to 
remain well anchored
ﬂ attached to that, but my guess is just ooching the now commonly 
accepted medium
-term or longer
-term t
arget of 2 percent 
by o
ne-half percent
age point would 
raise eyebrows and doubts amongst our skeptics, and some question marks, no matter how we 

state it
, in the marketplace. 
If you wish to proceed on this course, Mr. Chairman, my advice is to go with 
the 
Tealbook™s alternative B, not B
. Specifically, I would go with $30 billion, the lesser number.  
As Bill English said yesterday, it allows some ramping up in case the Committee decides, against 

my adviceŠand others™ 
like me
Što do more.  A $30 billion program, if I understood the Desk 
yesterday, 
on a flow rate basis means we are already taking down 60 percent of supply. 
I would edit paragraph 4 to take out reference to ﬁadditional asset purchases.ﬂ I would 
leave it more vague by simply referring to employi
ng 
ﬁits other policy tools as appropriate.ﬂ 

And after the phrase ﬁin the context of price stability,ﬂ I would add ﬁand well anchored,ﬂ another 

great naval term, ﬁand well anchored inflation expectations.ﬂ We have it in B
. I don™t see why 
we don™t have 
it in B
.  This is enough, in my mind, to bind the hands for some time to come for 
all of those who are with you in the wheelhouse of the ship we™re steering.  It is going to make it 

very hard to raise short-
term rates, as I mentioned yesterday, even if we 
end up with a stronger 
recovery 
than we currently foresee or imagine. 
       
     
       
     
   
         
                    
   
      I would recommend, as I suggested in my memo of last week 
and 
discussed yesterday, 
that in your press conference you emphasize that this is to help along the recovery in housing.  I 
would advise that you say that the majority of the Committee concurs, but emphasize that the 

Committee, as you said yesterday you would, will be constantly scrutinizing the efficacy and 

costs of the program.  In other words, Mr. Chairman, I would take ownership of this issue.  It is 

one of the distinct areas of recovery. It is an area where I believe we have had impact. I did 

support the MBS program when it was originally announced.  I think it is vital for regular 

people, not just for economists. 
The headlin
e you should be seeking in 
USA Today
 should be ﬁBernanke Acts to Support 
Continued Housing Recovery.ﬂ  You mentioned yesterday you plan to speak in different terms 

than usual, making it more simple and directed to what you refer
red to as the ﬁaverage perso
n.ﬂ 
I think that™s good.  You™re a great teacher.  I saw you do that most forcefully and effectively 

when you visited Fort Bliss.  And as I mentioned in our phone conversations last week, your 

objective should not be to communicate to a few dozen sophisti
cated economists 
about 
this 
model or that model.  It should be to convinceŠ
what was referred to in the last meeting
Šthe 
unsophisticated interlocutors who run America™s businesses, and the consumers who buy the 

goods and services produced by those businesses, and the press, particularly 
what
 the consumers 
read as opposed to 
the reference literature. 
So, in summary, Mr. Chairman, I disagree with this course.  I think it is a mistake.  I
t steers us closer to the rocks.  But I have offered you my best advice un
der the circumstances. 
I wish you luck.  I will do my very, very best in my public appearances in the upcoming week to 

support what we are going to announce, even if I have to take Allegra to do it.  [Laughter] 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
         
            
   
        
     
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
  Thank you.  President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There are two policy actions under 
consideration today.  One is additional asset purchases, the other is an effort to extend and 
strengthen our forward guidance.  I would like to make 
a few comments about each of these. 
As I explained in the earlier go
-round, I am not in favor of undertaking a new round of 
asset purchases today.  In my view, the forecast has not changed enough to warrant further 

action.  Indeed, many of the Tealbook™s simple rules on page 2, Tealbook B, including the 

outcome-
based rule, suggest that policy is approximately well calibrated. 
Just like President 
Bullard, I do not see the urg
ency 
for large, aggressive actions at this time.  I™ll remind the 
Committee, we didn™t move earlier this year 
as the economy brightened and the outlook looked 
better
.  We did not take action.  We were patient.  
It t
urned out to be the right decision.  The 
econ
omy then weakened.  But we seem to be anxious to do further accommodation every time 
we see weakness and not do the reverse as the economy strengthens.  The message I take from 

that is that 
we 
need to be patient, that we need to not react to short-
run fluc
tuations. 
The recovery is frustratingly slow.  
The u
nemployment rate is uncomfortably and 
tragically high.  But, again, we have been told and we understand there is reason to expect this, 

given the size and nature of the economic shocks that have hit the economy.  The slow recovery, 

in my mind, is not evidence that our monetary policy stance is inappropriate.  The benefits of 

further asset purchase
s in curing what ails the economy are imprecise and tenuous at best.  
Indeed, the Board staff memo lays out numerous caveats and assumptions necessary in assessing 

the possible benefits of further asset purchases. 
While financial participants may be chomping at the bit for a new program, many 
economists throughout this country have raised doubts about the efficacy of such a policy 
       
                     
         
              strategy.  Despite sizable purchases and zero interest rates for four years, unemployment remains 
elevated.  But rather than question the efficacy of the policies, which would seem natural, our 

strategy seems to be to double down.  Now, th
e further sizable expansion of the balance sheet 

carries costs and will greatly exacerbate the challenges we face when it comes time to exit, as I 

talked about yesterday. 
In my view, embarking on another asset purchase program at this time is 
a highly risky strategy.  The consequences may prove very disruptive to the U.S. economy and 

harmful to the reputation and credibility of this institution for years to come.  We should not 

ignore these risks, even for the 
best
-guess outcomeŠa 50 basis point drop in the unemployment 
rate over two years. 
The proposal in 
alternative 
B is for a flow
-based program.  But to me, this seems to run 
counter to the theory of how such purchases are purported to work in the first place and the logic 

we have used in the past. If we 
believe that the effects of purchases are through a 
portfolio 
balance channel, then the public needs to understand the stock of securities the Fed intends to 

buy.
  The Board staff memo on the flow-
based balance sheet policy says
 that the conclusion of 
the 
simulation exercises
, and I quote, ﬁreflects the strong assumptions that investors, price-
setters, 
and 
wage
-setters all understand the Committee™s goals and its
 stopping rule for the flow 
LSAP
.ﬂ  How do we communicate that when we ourselves don™t even know what that stopping 
rule will be? It is remarkable to me that the Committee has not been able to communicate to the 

public our reaction function for setting the funds rate even in normal times.  And now it seems 

we expect the public to believe and unders
tand what our reaction function will be for LSAPs and 
balance sheet rules
.  LSAPs are not a nimble instrument.  If this program doesn™t produce the 
desired results or the predicted outcomes for 
the 
unemployment rate, what will we do? 
I would 
predict that with a 
flow
-based program, if we don™t get the results, we won™t stop.  We will 
            
                
   
        
     
   
   continue.  How will we know when to stop? W
e seem to have convinced ourselves that such a 
policy is effective and important.  Maybe so.  If it proves not to be, and we don™t g
et the desired 
results, will we just keep on buying assets, reevaluating, and say, ﬁOh, yes, it™s going to work.  
We just have to do some more.ﬂ I am not terribly confident of our ability to manage that 

effectiveness and give us a stopping rule. 
If we get
 the reaction function wrong, and we find ourselves with ever-
more larger 
balance sheets, the Fed may face balance sheet losses, no returns, no flows to the Treasury, or 

unacceptably large losses of some kind or another.  This could undermine our ability to 

implement an appropriate monetary policy in the future, to the detriment of both households and 

businesses.  Now, 
if the purpose of the balance sheet expansion 
is as a commitment 
device to 
keep rates low for longer precisely because it makes it harder to exit, then we need to be 

explaining this.  
We don™t tell this to the public.  We need to be more communicative about what 
we expect our policy to achieve and why 
we are 
doing it, and we™re not doing 
that
.  How do we 
expect the markets to understand this 
when we are reluctant to say so directly
 ourselves? 
This leads me to the issue of forward guidance, the other policy tool under consideration, 
either in conjunction or separately.  The intent of our forward guidance is for the Committee to 

commit to holdin
g interest rates lower longer than it normally would after the economy begins to 
recover.  The idea, as President Kocherlakota said, is 
that 
the commitment to do this is supposed 
to signal to households that the future is going to be brighter.  The future is going to be more 

economic 
growth, higher spending than they otherwise might anticipate.  And this helps 
stimulate less saving and more spending today.  The strategy works well in many of our models.  

Agents are completely forward
-looking.  Many of those 
have expectations that are right. 
But 
implementation, in my view, is very tricky. One needs to get the expectations right. 
                   
  
                   
                      We wouldn™t want the public to believe that we will let inflation run away from us, of 
course.  Michael Woodford has argued that t
here are 
way
s to implement this strategy
.  He has 
given us two examplesŠ
an earlier 
one is 
a price
-level
-targeting strateg
y and, of course, recently 
at Jackson Hole, 
nominal GDP targeting. I see the problem with this strategy in implementation, 
not the conceptual idea.  First, it presumes that households and businesses will correctly inter
pret 
our guidance and what it means, and that it means future growth will be higher.  
But it seems just 

as reasonable to assume, and perhaps so far that has been the react
ion, 
that 
they will read our 
actions as a signal that we believe the economic outlook is going to be a lot worse for longer.  

The public does not have that positive outlook, and if we don™t convey that to them in very 

strong language, the strategy won™t work.  It will not bring spending forward. 
This strategy requires us to manipulate the public™s expectations in a very particular way. 
That
™s the communication challenge with this strategy.  To follow th
e strategy requires placing a 
lot of weight on our abi
lity to communicate. You will recall that this Committee decided not to 
adopt price-level targeting not too long ago and did not adopt nominal GDP targeting when we 

had the opportunity to do so.  And we rejected those for a variety of reasons, one was 

com
munication and, of course, 
with nominal GDP targeting
, one of the major issues was 
defining what the right level of real GDP needed to be.  We found those both either risky or 

diff
icult communication strategies. 
What do we think that we have done now that will overcome those problems? Why do 
we think that the thresholds w
ill overcome those difficulties? We seem to be willing to 
implement the strategy in a half
-hearted way.  I™d note that I have been a strong advocate, and 
continue to be a strong advocate, 
for systematic reaction functions. It is very important to this 

Committee. 
But 5
 is not a reaction function.  

 says nothing about what happens, for 
              
          
      
       
   
        
                example, after we pass one of the thresholds.  And this is very important, 
because the 
public 
doesn™t understand what our reaction function is in normal timesŠor we don™t know what they 
perceive it to be necessarily
Šand we are not telling them what it is going to be afterwards
.  L
et™s 
suppose, for example, that the public believes that after 
we reach the 6
½ percent threshold, and 
we say nothing about what we will do after that, they presume we may go back to the Taylor 

rule.
  Well, if that™s what they expect to happen, it would lead perhaps to a view of 
very fast 
tightening of policy after we get to the 6
½ percent unemployment rate.  That would undo some 
of the positive effects that we are trying to gain by this forward guidance.  If that turned out to be 

the case, then this strategy won™t work.  How do we make that commitment?  The public has to 

believe, beyond just the thresholds, how we are going to conduct policy, and as 
of 
now we 
haven™t explained 
that. 
I don™t think we agree amongst ourselves enough about what our policy 
reaction function is, and as much as I desire a more contingent eco
nomic-
based reaction 
function, I don™t think the thresholds help us very much there.  
The language in 
alternative B
(5

 again, says nothing about 
how we will behave afterwards. 
In the end, I agree with Woodford that LSAPs are perhaps ineffective.  But if 
we are 
going to adopt forward guidance and use that as our powerful tool, we need a much more 

deliberate and extended communication strategy to lay the groundwork to explain how our 

reaction function and how our policy strategy 
are 
going to work, and a com
munication strategy 
that convinces the public that we are serious about it, so that they understand how it works, 
if we 

are to get the outcomes that we want. 
Obviously, I am not in favor of B.  But if I had to choose, at this point I would choose 
5 over 5, not because I don™t like the direction that 5
 is headed, I™m just not sure it is ready for 
prime time yet. 
I™ve never 
been in favor of the calendar date.  It has created many problems for 
      
   
          
           
           
           
   us over the last year, and I am anxious to get rid of it.  But we need to get rid of it not by a one-
time change in a statement. 
It is going to take more preparation and more analysis. 
Thank you, 
Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Unlike some of my colleagues, my policy 
statements have usually been on the shorter side because I have generally been supportive of the 

version of the policy alternative that the Committee has eventually adopted.  I™m finding today™s 

policy decision much more of a strug
gle.  So I™m going to take a little more time than usual to 

explain my policy position and to share my views on the benefits and risks of additional policy 

action
s. 
With the unemployment rate at 8.1 percent and the August employment report as 
disappointing as it was, I would like to see the expansion proceed at a faster pace.  I know that 

we all would.  So the question on the table is:  Can additional monetary policy accommodation 

spur economic growth and improve labor market conditions?  And if so, which actions would be 

most beneficial and pose the least risk? 
I agree with the staff assessment that large
-scale asset purchases have been effective. 
Our first LSAP program was effective at the early stages of the financial crisis when financial 

markets were i
n severe distress.
  Our second LSAP program was effective when it was launched 
in 2010, a time when financial stress was still significant, the risk of falling back into a recession 

was high, and the risk of an outright deflation was very real.  
Our LSAP p
rograms provided 
strong support to financial markets and helped to appropriately realign inflation expectations.  In 

today™s circumstances, I see the benefits of another LSAP program as being far more limited. 
                    
       
                       The circumstances that prevailed when we init
iated our previous LSAPs are not evident today.  
Financial markets are not in disarray, and deflation is not a serious risk. 
I also worry that another large
-scale asset purchase program carries the risk of 
complicating our ability to withdraw policy 
accommodation smoothly and in a timely manner, as 
well as the risk of exposing us to reputation risk in the event that we incur large financial losses. 
I commend the staff for doing yeoman™s work to develop exit tools, to identify some of 
the potential 
complications of operating with a very large balance sheet, and to simulate our 
balance sheet under various assumptions.  I know that we™ve taken precautions, but it is 

impossible to be fully prepared for the environment that we might actually face three y
ears from 
now.  So after putting together my thoughts about the benefits and risks associated with the 

available tools and considering my economic outlook, I was not in favor of launching another 

large round of asset purchases along the lines of 
alternativ
e B as it was originally proposed in the 
Tealbook.  That option called for the immediate launch of an asset purchase program until labor 

market conditions substantially improved, and the purchase program was committed to run at 

least through mid
-2013.  That option also called for an extension of the forward guidance on the 
fed funds rate through mid-2015. 
I recognize that the strategy behind this policy option is predicated on the theory that 
additional monetary policy accommodation will only reduce the une
mployment rate substantially 
if this Committee actually commits to act aggressively and persistently until that goal is 

achieved.  I understand why the commitment strategy works so well in theory, but we have not 

had much practical experience to learn from
.  I understand the value of commitment, but 
commitment can take many forms. I think there™s value in waiting a little while longer before 

deciding to initiate another large
-scale asset purchase program. 
The Committee™s better choice 
                  
           
      
   
  
    
           at this juncture is 
to find a way to commit through forward guidance about the federal funds rate 
liftoff and not to launch a significant asset purchase program.  
I™m of 
the 
view that easing 
monetary policy through forward guidance has also been a powerful tool for reducing long-
term 
interest rates. 
As I noted, I think that our first two LSAP programs were successful in countering 
financial market stress and deflationary pressure
s. We may yet encounter a crisis
Šeither from 
the fiscal cliff or from Europe
Šthat once again 
cause
s serious financial market distress or 
deflationary pressures.  We would be better served by using asset purchases in response to these 
kinds of threats or the threat of a recession than to try to eke out a little more 
economic 
growth in 
the current circumstance. 
In coming months we may know more about the prospects for fiscal 
policy and for Europe and about the outlook.  It™s valuable to have the option to respond directly 

to these situations
, and launching a full-blown LSAP program today reduces our flex
ibility. 
For all of th
ese reasons I have preferred to wait for the completion of our maturity 
extension program at the end of the year before deciding whether to purchase more long-
term 
assets.  However, it was clear at our last meeting that many other Com
mittee members judge that 
additional policy accommodation might likely be warranted even sooner, and last week™s 

disappointing employment report seems to have been the decisive piece of evidence for some 

members who have been waiting for more proof of the economy™s lethargic condition. 
While I still have reservations about some of the specifics of the proposal, the version of 
alternative 
B that is now under discussion offers the possibility of an acceptable way forward.  
For one thing, even though 
alternati
ve B does call for expanding our holdings of long-
term 
securities in the next several months, it does so through the acquisition of MBS
.  Because some 
research does suggest the MBS purchases can be more impactful than Treasury purchases, I like 
        
     
                     
    
     
           
this aspect 
of 
alternative B.
  But I would also prefer the smaller amount of MBS purchasesŠ
that 
is, the $30 billion per month. 
One option in 
alternative B also allows for the possibility that the Committee might 
deploy tools other than, 
or at least in addition to
, large
-scale asset purchases if in coming months 
we conclude that additional easing steps are warranted. I was going to suggest some changes to 
the second sentence in paragraph 4.  I preferred that we delete the mention of ﬁ
additional asset 
purchases
ﬂ and in
stead state that 
ﬁthe Committee will continue its purchase
s of agency 
mortgage-
backed securities
ﬂ and is prepared to ﬁemploy its other tools as appropriate until such 
improvement is achieved in a 
context of price stability.
ﬂ  But I do like President Lockha
rt™s 
suggestion that we insert ﬁmayﬂ in front of ﬁundertake additional 
asset purchases and employ 
its other policy tools.ﬂ I think this flexibility of phasing in more accommodation in various ways as 

needed could prove to be helpful. 
In addition to beginning MBS purchases, 
alternative
 B eases policy through forward 
guidance. I like, as many others have already indicated, the state
-contingent concept in 

paragraph 5
, but I regard the 6½ unemployment rate and the 2½ inflation rate to be much too 
aggressive and risky.  If 
the natural
 rate of unemployment turns out to be 6 
percent or larger, I 
think that not lifting the fed funds rate until the unemployment rate falls to 6
½ percent risks some 
build-up of unacceptable inflationary pressures.  I know there 
are safeguards built into the 
forward guidance to prevent 
an unacceptable increase in inflation expectations, but we should be 
more humble about our ability to forecast these conditions with much precision.  
Presidents 

Lockhart and Lacker both laid out so
me risk
s to
 using a number for the unemployment rate, and I 
agree with their thoughts.  But if we decide that we have to include a number, a better approach 

is to set the unemployment rate to 
ﬁat least as low as 
7 percent
ﬂ and to keep inflation at ﬁ
close t
o                                   
  
     
    
    2 percent.
ﬂ  T
hese settings give us more flexibility.  Without that extra flexibility, I do not 
support p
aragraph 5
 and instead I support the language in paragraph 5. 
In conclusion, even though my preference is to wait, I can support a
lternative B with 
paragraph 5 today.  Even though some MBS purchases would begin right away, expanding the 
scope of policy accommodation even further is going to require the Committee to vote once 

again in coming months on the size and the structure of the policy change.  This buys us some 

time to determine exactly what the Committee means when we say 
that we want 
ﬁthe outlook for 
labor market conditions to significantly improve.ﬂ It also buys us some time if the outlook does 

not significantly improve to decide whether additional asset purchases would then be the best 

course of action.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B.  My preference is for 
purchases of 
$40 billion MBS a month, and with respect to forward guidance, my preference is 
for 5
. The data we have received since our August meeting provides yet further confirmation 
that 
economic 
growth is proceeding near or slightly below the economy™s potential, and 
downside risks continue to be substantial.  For quite some time, the Committee has been in 

watch
-and
-wait mode.  We™ve patiently monitored the economy to see whether the MEP 
and
 our forward guidance would be sufficient to produce a stronger recovery.  The verdict now seems 

clear.  Absent further policy action, I see little chance that unemployment will decline in the 

foreseeable future.  We should not delay action any further.  Indeed, I hope we will send the 

message loud and clear that we intend to provide additional accommodation through new asset 
            
                                
   purchases until we observe substantial and sustained improvement in labor market conditions, 
and will maintain policy accommodation for an extended period as the recovery strengthens. 
I support the open-
ended 
and conditional nature of the asset purchase program in 
alternative B. I think it™s very helpful to spell out the goal of the program and to articulate the 
economic conditions we™ll need to observe before halting those purchases.  
In particular, we 
should promise to add accommodation through asset purchases until the outlook for labor market 

conditions has improved substantially, and we would stop doing so only if our outlook for 

inflation or assessment of the efficacy and costs of the program change
s sig
nificant
ly.  The 
challenge with such an open
-ended program is that its effectiveness will depend on market 
expectations of the ultimate size of our asset purchases, and we™re offering no clear guidance on 

how long we expect them to continue.  
In addition, 
we™ve included some escape clauses relating 
to efficacy and costs.  I, therefore, think it™s important that our public communications, including 

the Chairman™s press conference, emphasize our commitment to continue the program until we 

have seen ongoing and sustained improvement in labor market conditions. 
Even though the open-
ended nature of the program creates challenges in shaping 
expectations
, it also has the very desirable property that market participants should adjust their 
expectations about the size of the program in response to changing economic conditions.  And 

this means that the program should induce stabilizing movements in financial conditions as 

expectations adjust automatically to incoming data indicating a stronger or weaker economic 

outlook. 
There™s been quite a bit of debate both inside and outside the Fed about the likely 
economic impact of asset purchases, and there is sizable uncertainty about the effects of LSAPs. 

I appreciate ongoing staff e
fforts 
to refine our estimates of these effects.
  Nonetheless, in light of 
       
     
   
  
              
              the evidence that I™ve seen, I™m persuaded that this program can be a 
helpful 
tool 
for achieving 
our objectives.  And while I™m mindful of the implications of further asset purchases for capital 
losses and remittances down t
he road, these concerns pale in comparison to what I view 
as the 
potential economic and human costs of failing to reduce the unemployment rate as aggressively 

as we can. 
I™m hopeful that a determined commitment to continue providing accommodation 
until we
 achieve more rapid and durable progress in attaining our employment goal may bolster 
household and business confidence 
and
 spending.  Any stimulus provided through this channel 
will boost its 
effe
ct relative to the staff™s estimates. 
I think it makes sense to direct our new purchases to MBS to provide additional support 
to the housing market, and I support purchases at the higher rate of $40 billion per month, which 

is a rate that in the 
Desk™s assessment could be sustained for the next year or two.  Consi
stent 
with the open-ended approach, I™d be prepared to scale the flow of these purchases up or down as 

the economic outlook evolves.  If this flow of purchases is maintained through the middle of next 

year, our holdings of longer-
term securities would incr
ease by about 
$800 billion, which I think 
is large enough to have a substantial economic effect. 
Paragraph 4 of the statement spell
s out the conditions under which we will provide 
additional accommodation through asset purchases.  Paragraph 5, in contrast, 
concerns the 

conditions under which we will maintain the level of accommodation that™s reached when our 

asset purchases end. 
If we end up adopting 5 
rather than 5
, I consider it critical to make clear 
that an extension of the expected calendar date to m
id-2015 is intended as a policy shift to 
improve the economic outlook, and that it does not convey a downgrading 
of our outlook in the 
face of disappointing new data.  Whereas our previous language tied exceptionally low levels of 
               
    
   
      
          
    
 the funds rate to economic weakness, the new language incorporated into the beginning of B(5) 
is much more positive, and I think it™s a very significant improvement. 
As between the alternative versions of 
paragraph B
(5), while I can support B(5) today, 
I strongly 
prefer 
version 5
. We contemplated a formulation along these lines when we introduced 
calendar
-date guidance in August of last year, and we have discussed this formulation 
extensively for many months now.  President Evans, 
in his speeches
, and Presidents 
Kocherlakota, 
Williams
, and Rosengren have explained in detail and very persuasively why a 
formulation like this makes sense.  I don™t want to go over the arguments again that they have set 

before the Committee. I simply think that clarifying the economic conditionalit
y of the funds 
rate path is useful for precisely the same reasons that it™s useful to tie our asset purchases to 

economic conditions.  
And I also think
Ša point that President Kocherlakota emphasizedŠ
that 

the language has the possibility of bolstering household and business expectations about their 

future incomes, and this would be a very important mechanism potentially for supporting 

additional spending. 
In summary, I support the provision of additional monetary accommodation.  I anticipate 
that continuing our additional purchases w
ill be warranted
 well into 2013.  I also support 5
 today 
and hope that if we end up going with 5, 
we will make further progress in future meetings on 

refining our forward guidance. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I prefer 
alternative B.  As I™ve been saying for 
some time now, I believe it™s important for us to take stock of our remaining tools and make sure 

that they™re used to maximum effect.  I do not view reducing the IOER or any sort of discount 
         
    
   
     
           
        window program to promote lending to be viable options.  So for me, 
that leave
s us at asset 
purchases and future guidance about the fed funds rate. 
I find the idea 
that the MEP has just as much efficacy as the LSAPs to be plausible, an
d I 
supported both the original program as well as its extension through the end of this year as an 
accommodation move.  If the MEP does the job on long-
term rates
, without increasing the size of 
our balance sheet or drawing the same criticism as LSAP
s, so much the better.  But in not 
drawing criticism, the MEP might also be less visible and thus less likely to engender a 

confidence effect.  So it™s important to not only use the tool, but to be quite vocal about our 

estimates of its potency. 
In addition to continuing the MEP, I™m in favor of adding purchases of MBS.  There have 
been many discussions in this building about how LSAPs work and the extent to which long-

term rates affect equity prices.  I™m not, frankly, quite sure about the equity effect, but I™
m 100 percent certain that interest rates have a direct effect on real estate prices, and house prices 

are important components of household wealth.  They 
affect the 
number of households 
underwater on their mortgage, 
and, most important, rising prices help
 instill the confidence to 
buy a house either to live in or as an investment. 
Reductions in the yield on mortgage-
backed securities have not necessarily translated to a 
one-
for
-one reduction in home mortgage rates, 
as the primary
Œsecondary rate spread rema
ins 
unusually wide.  So our purchases of MBS could very well translate into additional profit to 

lenders rather than cost reductions to homeowners, but ultimately, 
that addition
al profit should 
entice additional capacity and competition into the market tha
t will reduce the cost and increase 
the availability of mortgage credit.
  And while much has been made of the benefit to the 
economy as homeowners refinance into lower payments and free up cash flow for spending, that 
          
   
          
             
   
       
       
   
 reduced payment for the homeowner translates into reduced income for an investor, and it takes 
some pretty heroic assumptions about the differences in propensity to spend for that channel to 

make a big impact on consumer spending.  Still, I think the confidence 
and wealth effects
, along 
with t
he incentive for increasing capacity
, make this a step worth taking.  I confess that I might 
have been on the fence with this if the employment numbers had been better, but given their 

weakness, it™s hard to argue that we™ve been watching closely and still haven™t seen any reason 

to take action. 
For m
y policy preference, 
I start with the desire to finish out the MEP rather than throw it 
overboard and replace it with something else.  Although it™s something of a coincidence that the 

MEP runs out as we approach the fiscal cliff, it™s also something of an advantage.  It gives us a 

logical point to take stock of 
the consequences of reaching the cliff and its resolution.
  To be 
clear, I don™t view it as a potential stopping point.  On the contrary, I think it hig
hly likely that it 
will need to be a point of escalation, 
and I want to make sure that we have some additional fire 

power left
.  I know this goes against the grain for those of you who believe we should launch 
everything we have as early as possible in ord
er to strengthen the economy enough so 
it can 
withstand potential shocks, but those who subscribe to that idea are probably a lot more 

convinced than I am about the actual power of our tools.  I, frankly, don™t believe these tools are 

powerful enough by themselves to strengthen the economy enough so that it will withstand those 

shocks, but I do believe that, 
in announcing their use, there™s a confidence effect that can change 

expectations and halt or slow a downward slide. 
I a
m willing to entertain the possibility that we are approaching the point where we 
resemble the wizard behind the curtain.  [L
aughter] 
If so, I want us to continue to appear great 
and powerful in the face of economic weakness for as long as possible.  
That
 is, I believe that our 
        
                   
   
     
               
 actions still have the potential to inspire confidence over and above any other possible channel 
through which they can work.  But if confidence is the most potent channel, 
the when
 and how of 
new announcements becomes a tool in its
elf. 
The Chairman was telling us at dinner last night that he had the opportunity to go and 
visit the Washington Nationals
™ batting practice and meet the players, and one of the players 
came up and
, upon finding that he was the Chairman of the Fed, said, ﬁHey, how about that QE3, 
man?ﬂ  [Laughter] 
I think this is evidence that there™s a whole world of people out there who 
have no idea what QE3 actually means or what monetary policy is.  They don™t know the Taylor 

rule, and they haven™t spent much time thinking about the Woodford paper.  [Laughter]  They 

won™t read the whole statement or tune into the press conference, but they will likely know that 

the Fed did something and that that something should help the economy. 
In the spirit of conserving some fire p
ower for what I view as a potential two
-step action, 
I prefer to add only $30 billion per month in MBS purchases.  It establishes the 60Œ
40 split that 

was assumed in the capacity memos and leaves room to escalate the amount of MBS, add 

Treasury purchases, 
or commit to a $1 trillion program as levers to be pulled if conditions 
deteriorate, as I fear they might in coming months. 
My own judgment is that a commitment to a 
large program will prove to be a stronger action, but that we can always change from open
-ended 
to a stock commitment.  It would be much tougher to try to go in the other direction. 
In paragraph 4, I prefer to exclude the mention of other policy tools, as those other policy 
tools could be interpreted as an intent to use the IOER or a lending p
rogram, 
neither of which I 
support. 
I prefer 
paragraph 5 over 5
, especially at this meeting.
  The action of adding MBS 
purchases to the MEP is already going to be a little complicated to communicate.  Have we or 
         
     
     
      
                  
  have we not launched QE3?  So our communication focus should certainly be on that action in 
this meeting. 
Use of a date 
in the forward guidance is familiar and it™s expected.  While I™m sure 
there™s going to be an ongoing discussion, I would still continue to use the date, but over time, 

explain t
hat it represents a departure from our standard policy rules and our own historic reaction 
function.  I found the memos about delaying liftoff until there was a greater certainty about the 

likelihood of return to the zero bound to be very reasonable and explainable, and it would be 

helpful to convey that we are also anxious to get back into a more normal environment. 
I have real concerns about expressing our policy in terms of specific triggers.  We worked 
hard on the statement that put the 2 
percent target out there, and I™d hate to create an impression 

that we™re now raising it. I™m especially reluctant to specify the unemployment rate 
as the single 
employment data point guiding our actions.  First, there™s always the risk that it™s perceiv
ed as 
too high or too low, and one has only to look at the most recent employment report that clearly 

showed weakness, even though the unemployment rate dropped 
two
-tenths, 
to get a little nervous 
about tying fed funds expectations to that single number.  
Indeed, last year as we saw a full 
percentage point decline in the unemployment rate, we were only kind of pleased about it, 

because it didn™t happen in the way we expected. 
Someone commented yesterday that we should begin to focus on how the general publi
c receives our messages, and this is a really important point.  I question whether the public will use 

this guidance formulation to adjust their expectations about policy.  I think they™ll hear these 

numbers as our targets.  But if the consensus is to move to conditioning on economic outcomes, 

we should, 
at a minimum
, take some time to set the table for its introduction. In addition, we 

should agree to leave this set-up task to the Chairman, and the rest of us should refrain from 

taking our own disagreements on the finer points public.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
                 
   
    
   
         
   
                  
  
   
      
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and I™d like to point out 
that 
the 
player™s 
financial portfolio is probably bigger than anybody at this table.  
[Laughter]
  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My reaction when you told me about the 
player in question was he has an awfully good financial advisor.  [Laughter] L
et me begin by 
saying that some people have basically asked the question, why act now? For my own 
perspective, I don™t think there is a particularly compelling reason to act at this moment, but that 

is only because I would have thought that action at any of the p
ast several meetings would have 

been equally appropriate.
  Charlie, in response to your questions, why wasn™t I or why weren™t 
others inclined to act earlier in the year when there was a trio of pretty good employment 

numbers? 
The answer 
is that
 they didn™t seem sustainable, 
just as the little bursts in the last 
couple of years hadn™t 
seemed sustainable. 
If they had been sustainable, that would have called 
for some action.  But here I think we are all seeing that the basic diagnosis of a bogged-
down 
economy over the p
ast few years has become a pretty persuasive one. 
The second thing I would say is I don™t think it is reasonable to oppose further action on 
the grounds that action taken in the past has not produced the complete, 
fast recovery that 

everyone would like to see.  T
he real question is the counterfactual one
: In the absence o
f action, 
in the absence of the LSAPs, what would be the situation now?  And there I think, 

notwithstanding 
the efforts of some to deny that there has been any effect
ŠI am not talking 
about people in this roomŠ
while one can debate reasonably and at length 
the actual amount of 
effect of the last couple of LSAP exercises, it is really hard not to see that there has been an 

effect
, and the 
disagreement seems to be 
over how much. 
Of course, we would all be happier if there had been a more aggressive set of poli
cies to 
deal with underwater mortgages and housing a couple of years ago.  I think in retrospect, as 
         
          
      
   
              
  
           people write the history of the Great Recession following the financial crisis, the failure to 
move 
more aggressively on housing is going to be seen as the biggest of the policy mistakes, even 
bigger than maybe not going for a larger stimulus package.  
But
 it is not up to us to determine 
what everybody else does.  We have to take the world as it is presented to us, and then balance 

the costs and benefits of the actions we can take in light of the good and bad decisions that other 

parts of the government and consumers and firms are themselves taking. 
As Jeremy was suggesting yesterday, there is in any set of LSAP proposals an anticipated 
combination of what he 
termed the ﬁhydraulic
ﬂ effects and some confidence or quasi
-commitment effect. 
I think it is hard to disentangle the two, even as we look retrospectively at 
the first couple of LSAPs.  T
here is some case to be made, as some of the skeptics have 
suggested
, that the conditions 
that obtained at the times of the LSAPs made what I have termed a 
confidence or quasi-
commitment effect particularly salient at those moments.  And th
at may not 
be quite as powerful right now. 
But, again, in the face of all of this uncertainty, which the Chairman alluded to yesterday, 
we do have to make a choice.  And it does seem to me that the costs suggested to date, while 

nontrivial, don™t seem overwhelming.  That is, they are a little bit more speculative than they are 

concrete. 
People are saying
, ﬁwe worry that there may be some effect on market functioning
,ﬂ without specifying exactly what that effect would be, or 
ﬁwe worry that there may at some point 
be some effect on inflation or on our exit capacities,ﬂ 
without telling a somewhat more filled
-out 
story as to what they think those might be.  While I would be shocked if there are not some 

unintended consequences, even of the LSAPs we™ve done to date, that is part of policymaking.  

There are always going to be some unanticipated 
consequences, and the best you can do is try to 
dig in as deeply as possible to spin out as many plausible outcomes as possible, and then make 
         
   
                
      
            
   
  
           that balance. 
Obviously, from what I™ve said here, that balance is in favor of taking further 
action
, as it has been before
.  And so I support 
alternative B.  But I just want to make clear to 
those who have questionsŠSandy and Dennis and othersŠthat I share a lot of the uncertainty, 
and I don™t have enormous conviction that anything we do now is going to be, as Eric put it, a 

game
-changer. 
It is going to be something 
that
 helps, not something 
that
 resolves all problems. 
On the 5 versus 5
 issue, Narayana laid out the two key considerations extremely well.  
First, that the use of the more-
specified forward guidance could maximize the effect of LSAPs. 
That is a very important consideration.  Second, and this was an extremely important point, he 

pointed out that 2½ 
could easily be consistent with a price
-stability
-only mandate just because of 
having toleranc
e around any goal that one is ever trying to achieve.
  To me, that might have 
suggested that perhaps, 
because we do have a dual mandate, there might be a different set of 

targets that would be adopted.  But it seems to me, 
at the very least
, Narayana™s rea
soning 
suggests why 
2½ shouldn™t be problematic. 
I don™t find the potential h
yste
resis argument or the potential rise in labor 
force 
participation to be dispositive here.  I don™t think Janet actually disagreed with me yesterday 

when I said that I had been
 surprised that we haven™t seen h
yster
esis.  And given that we haven™t, 
it™s probably less likely than we all thought.  But even if you thought it was, how would it 

manifest itself? Presumably, it would manifest itself in tightness in the labor market and rising 

wages, which are going to pass through into our inflation projections.  At that point, you™d say, 

ﬁOkay.  We are now seeing that the trigger or threshold has been breached.ﬂ 
There is something to what Charlie Plosser said about the market™s anticip
ation of what 
happens as we approach the thresholds.  When Charlie Evans was talking about this publicly, a 

very acute market observer commented offhandedly to me that he was somewhat sympathetic to 
              
                  
            this approach, but his concern was that there may be some expectation of pent-up and rapid 
increases, which markets would think would be coming depending on 
the circumstances as we 

approached
ŠI think, 
at that time
, Charlie™s numbers w
ere
 7 and 3.  I don™t think that is 
something to disregard.  It is probably something to take into account. 
These are all good arguments piled onto the ﬁwhy we all hate the dateﬂ argument for 
trying to develop something like what is in 5
. Having said that, I would remind all of you of the 
fact that I was initially
Šlate last year an
d early this past year
Šhesitant to move in that direction 
for a couple of reasons.  One, the communications issues, which severalŠ
most recently Betsy
Š have alluded to, are significant here.  But I thought they were significant last spring, even in the 

absence of an LSAP initiative
, which is going to take a little nimbleness to explain. 
The 
confusion with the policy statementŠ
what do these numbers actually mean
Šis a real 
consideration.  T
hough I should say
, at the time, I had some hopes that a revised S
EP could fill a 
good bit of the role of these thresholds or targets.  Those hopes have subsequently been dashed.  

[Laughter] I now see the costŒbenefit calculus somewhat differently, which is to say that the 

available alternative may not be as much of a s
ubstitute as I had hoped.  I would say that, 
notwithstanding my strong 
sense that 
this 
is 
the right direction for us to goŠfor the reasons 
Narayana stated
Šand that optimally we would have been prepared to go that way right now, 
I don™t really think the groundwork has been laid.  C
ertainly not externally
ŠI do think some 
underestimate the communications challenge that will exist. 
Second, I™m not totally positive that we have laid the groundwork internally
.  Maybe we 
did eight months ago, but all of those memos and things are in the archives instead of right in the 

front of our computer screens.  It would be a tougher case for me if everybody had converged 

around 6½ and 2½ 
because in those circumstances I might be inclined to say, ﬁAll right. 
         
       
    
         
           
          Communications ch
allenge
ŠMichelle is going to have a tough week, but let™s take the 6½, 2½, 
which is probably, in the end, right, but that™s not where we are.  I would say that not taking an 

employment number means that you are not actually communicating very effectively a
t all 
because otherwise it is just qualitative verbiage. 
You don™t really achieve what you are trying to 
achieve. 
In addition, 
saying a little bit over 2 is going to create even more communication 
problems because everybody is going to 
ask
,  ﬁWell, how much over?ﬂ I
t doesn™t really solve 
much, if anything at all. 
There is not agreement on these propositions right now.  
It is clear that we don™t have a 
consensus even among those who are going to vote in favor of a
lternative 
B on the numbers 
themselves
, so we are probably not prepared to move in that direction.  But I don™t think that 
should dissuade us from doing a lot of memo writing and communicating over the course of the 

next couple of meetings to see if we can move in that direction together.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Incoming data have been consistent with my 
expectations, reinforcing my view that additional policy stimulus is needed.  The inflation 

outlook is subdued, and the employment outlook is unsatisfactory, so a balanced approach 

requires the providing of significant additional stimulus. 
My comments will, again, focus on the communication channel.  First, I think that some 
marginal monetary stimulus could be 
delivered
, without incurring the costs associated with an 
LSAP
, through the use of forward guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook.  
While I 
appreciate the fact that an asset purchase program and forward guidance are not perfect 

substitutes, I 
like 5
 because it is close to a costless way of providing some accommodation. 
          
      
                    
   But even if we were not in agreement that more accommodation is necessary, I see little 
downside in shedding our adherence to a calendar date.  The calendar date, as we have heard, is 
working against us.  It is communicating that we are continuously downgrading our assessment 

of the future.  Why not, instead, show households, businesses, and markets what we are looking 

for in terms of particular economic outcomes?  Why not offer 
a sneak preview of what we need 
to see before we begin contracting?
  With such a preview and credible delivery, households and 
businesses and markets figure out how we are going to react.  Providing that window, and 

keeping the panes of that window clean, 
reduces volatility and pessimism about our commitment 
to support a recovery.  I
n mitigating this volatility and pessimism, as argued by President 
Kocherlakota and others, we maximize the effectiveness of the oth
er actions being contemplated. 
But we have be
en down this road before, so we ask, why now?  Why move to forward 
guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later? We should 

consider forward guidance 
that is 
dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later 
because 
there could be costs to putting this off.  The primary cost is the permanent downward 

shift in expectations that becomes more probable the longer we wait.  The longer we put off 

these contentious decisions, the greater the probability that we let stand the 
perception that there 
is a new
, lower, slower trajectory of economic growth that we are comfortable with; the greater 
the probability we let stand the perception that the FOMC doesn™t adhere to the statutory 

directive of a dual mandate; the greater the pr
obability we let stand the perception that we act 
forcefully when we are off the price
-stability mandate but not when we are off the 
maximum
-employment 
mandate; and the greater the probability we let stand the perception that 2 percent is 

a ceiling. 
      
           
                               Forwar
d guidance that is dependent on an economic outlook counters these otherwise 
pervasive and erroneous interpretations and perceptions.  The longer we postpone correcting 
such interpretations and perceptions, the more pervasive, credible, and intractable the
y become. 
In short, we want to oxygenate the forward guidance before households and businesses 

permanently harden their expectations about both the future path of the economy and our future 

reaction to it.  All of this argues for moving away from a calend
ar date sooner rather than later. 
We still may not know what the right numbers are for insertion into a formulation like 5
, but we have all seen that in optimal control simulations under commitment in the FRB
/US model, the unemployment rate is around 6 pe
rcent at the time of liftoff, and inflation never rises 
above 2½ percent.  We have seen justification for these particular thresholds.  Moreover, 

6½ percent is still above the Committee™s view of the long
-run rate of unemployment.  The 
forward guidance in 5
 has come a long way since we discussed it in August of 2011.  It now 
contains a firm, definitive, non-vague inflation proviso.  A problem 
we 
debated in the August 
2011 meeting was the risk that moving the forward guidance from a calendar date to one bas
ed on economic conditions would dislodge inflationary expectations.  In the current version of 5
, that possibility seems extremely unlikely. Instead, if inflation at a one
-to two
-year horizon were 
above the small 
½ percentage point threshold of 2 percent, the Committee would be required to 
reengage on the federal funds rate debate, even if unemployment still exceeds 6
½ percent. 
It is, 
to use President Kocherlakota™s phrase, a threshold for conversation.  These are hardly putting in 

place conditions by which inflation can brew silently, unchecked, and unaddressed. 
At the end of this round, there are still some who say that the egg hasn™t been cooked 
long enough.  I might have to disagree, noting that I am not sure what we are waiting for.  


 could be in a form close enough to convince the public that the FOMC is following 
                
       
     
      
      
  
    
  
       
 a different strategy; one that tries to achieve its employment mandate more forcefully than the 
public has perceived thus far; one that more credibly delivers accommodation and, at the right 

time, contraction, than the markets have understood thus far; one that has none, if any, of the 

costs associated with an LSAP; and one that may be necessary now to make the MBS purchases 

in 
alternative 
B more effective. 
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B. I will just comment on 
a few of the specifics.  First of all, in terms of the flow rate of purchases of MBS, I would go 

with 
$40 billion per month, though I can™t say I have a particularly strong view on this. 
With respect to the trigger
- or threshold-
base
d policy described in paragraph 5
, I am 
quite sympathetic to the strategy. 
It has the potential to be of significant help.  I appreciate and 
find quite compelling the arguments that President Kocherlakota and a number of others have 

made. 
There is really quite an appealing intellectual case to be made. 
Now, having said this, I find myself in very close agreement with Governor Tarullo in 
terms 
of whether now is the right time to move forward.  As he pointed out, there 
are
 two issues.  
There is the internal issue.  We have to get this right internally.  We have to really agree on the 

design and on the parameters.  T
he numbers really matter here. 
If we don™t coalesce around a 
reasonably strong version, one in which we make it clear that we have, as President 

Kocherlakota suggested, an ambitious unemployment threshold and some tolerance for a 

symmetric loss function on inflation, the intellectual c
ase for it in some sense starts to disappear.  
That™s one issueŠwe have to get that right. 
Second, the external issue is also challenging, and the communication here is crucial. 
To 
give one example, something that is not clear in
 my own mind is, how would we respond to the 
                       
     
            
     following question?  Have we really deviated from our previous forward guidance in the sense 
that now we are making more of what is really a commitment
, in the spirit of optimal control
, to 

do something that we would stick with, even if 
it™s, in a sense, time inconsistent?  Or
, is it just a 
statement, well, that we™ve introspected, we have thought about our reaction function, and we 

have discovered in our souls that we have a different reaction function than we previously knew 

ourselves to have? 
These are challenging things to explain, and it™s absolutely important to get it right. 
The 
concern, then, would be that if we throw something this consequential and tricky into what is 

already a hard
-to-parse statement in other areas,
 it could end up being somewhat 
counterproductive.  Again, I very much have sympathy for the underlying idea and the 

principles, and I would hope that we could further develop and do more work on it.  My own 

preference would be not to push it out the door in the next hour or two. 
With respect to paragraph 4, this is the part I had in mind when I said it was already a 
little bit hard to parse. 
You get a flavor of this in some of the comments that have already gone 
around.  In other words, it seems like it is really open to different interpretations.  Some of you 

have, as I hear it, read paragraph 4 as a quite strong and open-ended commitment to continue 

doing asset purchases as long as it takes until the labor market improves.  
At the other extreme, 
the way I heard Pres
ident Bullard reading the paragraph was, ﬁWell, it doesn™t really say much 
more than that we will do this for several months and then reassess where we are.ﬂ  Y
ou can 
certainly point to various forms of wiggle room in the phrasing.  I suppose the truth is sort of in 

between and a little b
it in the eye of the beholder. 
For my part, I would align myself quite closely with President Pianalto.  I appreciate the 
commitment arguments. I like the idea of having wiggle room, and that is 
because of
 my own 
        
         
        
    
                    understanding of the costs and the benefits, and that in spite of the fact that I do believe the 
benefits of past programs have been significant, I sense that we are verging into diminishing 

returns territory. 
Moreover, flexibility may be particularly warranted with MBS because there is 
a particular kind of market feedback that we might get reasonably quickly, which is to sayŠand 

Governor Duke mentioned thisŠthere is this issue about the pass-through from MBS spreads to 

primary mortgage rates. 
We will see
, presumably in a few months, whether that pass-through i
s weak or strong
, and one might want to update one™s policy based on that. 
In any event, as we talked about yesterday, given the language in paragraph 4, this makes 
the press conference important.  F
or what it™s worth, Mr. Chairman, I thought that the trial 
balloon answers that you were floating yesterday struck a good balance here, so I was certainly 

comfortable in that dimension. 
Given these two 
earlier
 points, one being that I think it is worth giving serious further 
thought to 5
, and the second being that there is some virtue to not getting overly locked in on 
asset purchases, I also
Švery similar to President Lockhart and to President Pianalto
Šwas 
thinking about whether 
there 
is 
an alternative fra
ming that would work here?  And my thought 
was maybe we can lean just as far forward, or even a little bit further, on the general principle of 

giving accommodation if the economy doesn™t strengthen but be more open as to whether that 

accommodation would t
ake the form of asset purchases or a change in our guidance. 
This could be done, in principle, either by rewording paragraph 4 of the statement or 
simply by
 the way the press conference is handled.  In the former case, if it™s done via the 
statement, you c
ould rewrite the two key sentencesŠ
it™s just a suggestion
Šas follows: 
ﬁIf the 
outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue to add 

further accommodation as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a 
context of price 
               
      
                       
   stability. In determining the nature of such accommodation, the Committee will, as always, take 
appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of the tools at its disposal.ﬂ I
t is less precise
, and I take that to be in the spirit 
of what you 
all 
were thinking as well.
  The intent is not to back 
away from being supportive but to be a little bit more flexible in the tools that are used to 

provide that support.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will vote in favor of 
alternative 
B.  My 
support for 
alternative
 B leans heavily on the language in paragraph 4 requiring us to consider 
the likely efficacy and cost of further actions when and if they are proposed and considered, and 

I join strongly Governor Stein and Presidents Pianalto and Lockhart in an editing of paragraph 4 

that moves very much in the direction that Governor Stein just read. 
I am a supporter of paragraph 5.  I think that the arguments that have already been 
raised 
and vetted about 5
 are dispositive at this time.  I will say that the two things that need to be 
doneŠthe good news is there are only two things.  The bad news is those two things are, first, 

the Committee has got to reach agreement on the desirab
ility of moving to a state
-contingent 
forward guidance. I™m very open to the intellectual appeal of that, but going around the table, 

it™s quite obvious that we don™t fully have that, particularly around the levels in the language and 

the conditionality. 
The second is clearly the public communication aspect.  There™s nothing about it in the 
Jackson Hole speech.  There really hasn™t been any supportive discussion of it by the Chairman 

lately that I™ve seen. 
We could get ourselves to a place where this could be announced.  I
t would 
be the work of some months both internally and externally, in particular explaining how it does 
          
         
     
   
   
  
                   
 fit in with the principles that we adopted in January
.  I
t™s 
not something that 
can happen in the 
next 45 minutes. 
I will also vote in
 favor of extending the guidance to mid-2015 as proposed.  My own 
view of this is that the market moves the estimate of the liftoff date every day, and our proposed 
guidance doesn™t contain any surprise element. 
The idea that the date can contain a negati
ve, 
contractionary aspect is certainly
 plausible in a different setting, but not on the facts we face 
today. 
Let me say a couple of comments
 about LSAPs.  As I look back on the use of LSAPs so 
far, I too believe that the evidence supports the view that the 
effects of any LSAP are highly 
dependent not only on some mechanics, but also on the setting in which it is launched.  The main 

driver of real effects is probably that of enhancing confidence, confidence that bad outcomes will 

be avoided, and that there is reason to hope for good outcomes. 
In this view, it is really our credibility, the design of the program, 
and the setting that 
make it work.  For me, an argument in favor of 
alternative 
B is that it is limited to MBS at a time 
when the housing market is consistently surprising on the upside.  This alternative can be well 

explained and understood by the public as welcome support for housing as well as for the 

broader economy.  
So presented, it stands a decent chance 
to actually be noticed and appreciated 
by people who are neither Fed watchers nor professional market participants nor economics 
bloggers.  I encourage an emphasis on support for housing in our public communications around 

this action. 
My view is that alternative 
B can have positive effects on the 
economy but 
that these 
effects are likely to be quite modest, and I do come to that view without a great deal of certainty.  

It does seem clear to me that LSAPs have affected asset prices, and to deny that does call for
Šas          
                   
                 
   was done in a certain well
-ment
ioned Jackson Hole paperŠ
that most hackneyed of all economist 
jokes that while it may be observed in reality, it will simply never work in theory.  [Laughter] 
But of course, affecting MBS and Treasury prices is just the beginning.  We need translation to 

rates that actually matter for private economic activity and then translation to the real economy. 
Looking at the channels through which we believe our policies operate and 
the caveats, 
confidence intervals, headwinds, 
and multiple uncertainties that surround the estimates so well 

addressed in yesterday™s meeting, my strong sense is that the 
real effects will be quite modest, 
and it is all too easy these days to find credible private forecasts that agree. 
The last two 
forecasts that I™ve seen both from well known, credible sources who happened to be broadly 

supportive of accommodation, point to estimates of unemployment effects of around 20 or 

30 basis points for a program the size of QE2Šuse that as a rough proxy for this.  That would be 

300,000 to 450,000 jobs under those forecasts.  That might be equivalent to bringing the 

recovery forward by a couple of months. 
As far as the costs, I certainly agree that they appear manageable in the near term. 
There™s enough risk and uncertainty about the medium and long term that if the view of the 

likely benefits is right, one 
would have to believe further that the likely costs are close to nil to 
want to proceed with a large LSAP.  I also agree with President Bullard™s point earl
ier in the 
meeting that the problem has not been the lack of aggressive monetary policy.  As a separate 

matter, taking the Chairman™s points from yesterday, I do not feel that additional aggressive 

monetary policy is likely to provide much of a solution. 
I know that every member of the Committee struggles to balance these highly uncertain 
costs and benefits.  I™m supporting 
alternative 
B with a certain lack of enthusiasm, and I am 
somewhat uncomfortable with the road that we are on.  As others have mentioned, this is not 
      
            
          
       
        
  
   
   
          2008, 2009, or 
2010.  We™re now using LSAPs as a straightforward jobs program.  There is no 
credible threat of deflation, recession
, or financial crisis
, any of which could present a 
compelling case for action and the use of all of our tools, including LSAPs if appropriate.  Again, 

these are concerns about the medium and the long term, not the next six months.  My concern is 

that for very modest benefits, we are piling up risks for the future and that it could become habit-

forming. 
Thank you
, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  My preference would be to act forcefully at 
this meeting.  I™d favor a
lternative B, 
paragraph 4 as written, p
aragraph 5
, and $40 billion per 
month of agency 
MBS.  Let me just talk about each of these a little bit. 
With respect to the thresholds, what I hear around the table is that there™s really a strong 
sentiment that thresholds can trump date guidance, and the thresholds that we even have today in 

5 in my 
mind
, trump date guidance. But I do accept the view that maybe we can even do better, 
and so in my mind the tradeoff is really between is it better to do something today to have a 

bigger package or is it better to keep working on 5
 to try to improve the communication and 
have it come later
? I would prefer to do it all today as a pack
age
 because if you do it as a package, it™s going 
to have more force in terms of its impact, but I accept the fact that the Committee is not really 

quite there yet.  I would 
hope that at least that the Committee would commit that we™re going to 

bring 5
 home in the next one or two meetings.  It would be very disappointing if we didn™t do 
that because I think most people around the table view the date as really quite problemati
c. The thresholds, 
as President
s Williams and Kocherlakota pointed out, 
are 
more powerful 
than a date.  The date creates a lot of uncertainty. When are we going to move it?  Why are we 
                     
                             
           
going to move it? When we move it, why did we move it?  Thresholds provide more 
information.  The date implicitly rests on some unobserved variables, and so people essentially 

have to look at the date and then infer what the things 
are 
that lie behind the date.  Why not just 
tell them what those variables are? 
Some of the problem 
with
 the thresholds 
is the limits of the statement.  The statement can 
only carry so much water, and we can™t specify all the parameters that would go into our 

decisionmaking as the economy actually evolves.  W
e have to recognize we™re not going to 
get 
to a perfect 5
 because the statement just can™t carry that water. 
We need to do the best we can 
and see what we can come up with.
  Then lastly, the dynamic nature of the thresholds far trumps 
the date guidance.  The market will adjust automatically, 
and as people have said, that™s an 
automatic stabilizer.
  So I™m reluctant to abandon 5
 at this meeting because it would make the 
action more forceful, but I do accept the pretty strong sense that a lot of people who don™t want 

to do it this meeting would
 actually be pretty inclined to do it subsequently once the work on the 
communication was complete and once they were convinced that they got the best 5
 version that 
they could possibly get.  I think we should keep going on that. 
With respect to the rest of the statement, I would not want to alter 
paragraph 4 because 
it™s critical to 
ensure the paragraph is forward leaning and implies the 
commencement of a new 
LSAP program should the economic situation not improve in a meaningful way. 
As I see it, we need 
to decide now what we will do if the economy continues to 
disappoint.  We™ll do more and how we™ll do more, and communicate this decision now because 

that will reduce uncertainty and support confidence, and that will support the recovery.  In my 

view, if we postpone those decisions about what we™ll do in the future if the economy 

disappoints, we just create more uncertainty about what our future policy actions are going to be, 
                  
   
         
       
            
   
   
   
  and that really undercuts the efficacy of the policy choices.  Deciding today so that people know 
that there™s more coming will actually create greater confidence about the Fed™s willingness to 

support the economy.  That reduces the downside risk and actually means, at the end of the day, 

the prospect i
s that 
we™ll
 have to do less rather than more because we™ll be acting today and 
supporting confidence today by communicating what our future actions will be. 
All that said, I am very sympathetic with a number of people™s remarks that don™t put a 
very high weight on the power of additional LSAPs.  I think L
SAPs have modest effects o
n the 
level of long-term rates, and the drop in long-term rates does feed through partially to the equity 

market and the foreign exchange market but not one-
for
-one as in the staff projections because 
that would contradict the whole portfolio balance framework, which is the basis for LSAPs. 
In assessing the 
effe
ct of past LSAPs, I™m not particularly a big fan of event studies.  I 
think the event studies are too focused on the reaction on 
particular days
.  T
he expe
ctation of 
LSAPs evolves more slowly, and it™s very hard to disentangle all the factors that affect financial 

asset prices.
  When we say that we™re going to do an LSAP, that not only affects people™s views 
of what™s going to happen in terms of financial 
markets,
 but also signals a view about our view 
of the economy, and both 
of 
those things affect financial asset prices.  So trying to disentangle 
what the effect 
is 
of the LSAP from what the effect is of our judgment that we need an LSAP is 
very difficult to determine. 
I also agree with Governor Stein and others that probably one of the more powerful 
aspects of LSAPs is the confidence channel and the signal that we™re willing to do as much as it 

takes.  During the heat of the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009 when we were rolling out all of 

these special liquidity facilities, I was very impressed by how much our policy actions supported 

confidence in market function just because we were showing up, just because the fire trucks were 
       
        
                 
  
    
            
    rolling.
  People, as I think Governor Duke noted, don™t necessarily understand exactly why we™re 
doing what we™re doing, but they feel more confident when they know that we™re acting. 
Some around the table have argued that our tools are not very effective and the core 
problems lie el
sewhere
Šin fiscal, the household balance sheet, housing problemsŠand so we 
shouldn™t act because by acting we™re somehow removing responsibility from others where the 

responsibility more rightly sits, and I think there is some truth to 
that argument. 
In an ideal 
world, other things that are outside our purview would happen that would help the economy.  But 

I don™t think that argument carries the day for arguing against action for two reasons. 
First, nothing in our mandate says that if our tools aren™t powerful, don™t use them; defer 
to others.  There™s nothing in our mandate that says that.  It just says this is your mandate.  Use 

your tools to try to achieve your mandate the best you can.  And second, if we don™t act, it™s not 

as if
 that somehow is going to cause others to act. I really don™t accept the premise that 
somehow our inaction would spur action by others.  If you really believe that, then maybe you 

could actually advance this argument.  But I don™t think many people around the table believe 

that our inaction will somehow spur action by others that will improve the economic outlook. 
On the agency MBS, I strongly favor the $40 billion per month over the $30 billion.  
Being more forceful makes sense. 
At the end of the day the staff has concluded that we have the 
room to do $40 billion rather than $30 billion without i
mpairing market function
, so I don™t 
really see the reason for holding back.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you, and thank you all very much, as always, 
for your good advice. 
Let me make a couple
 of comments.  I think that action is needed.  I don™t think we™re 
being precipitous.  We extended the guidance in January.  In June, we extended the MEP.  Both 
       
                     
     
              
    of those things were viewed essentially as temporizing moves and were discussed in that way 
around 
this table.
  The evidence is that while we are not necessarily facing recession or crisis, it™s 
also true that we seem to have stalled
, and that very serious problems with unemployment are not 
improving.  Given our mandate, I think that requires at least a consideration of action. 
The action that
 is proposed here, and it should be very clear, is a cautious action.  
Governor Duke was very helpful in helping me think about this.  What this a
lternative B actually 
does is make a down payment of X per month of MBS for the rest of the year, and then three or 

four job market reports from now we will consider at that point what the job market outlook 

looks like, and then respond appropriately.  
So it is
, in that respect, emphasizing the 
conditionality of the progra
m and the fact that we will be looking
Šin a way that wasn™t 
conveyed adequately by our fixed-
size LSAP programs
Šat what™s happening in the data and 
what™s happening in the economy.  But I do think there is a basis for expressing our support for 

the economy at this point, to help support confidence and to help give the economy a bit more 

strength in case we do face shocks from Europe or from the fiscal cliff. 
So, again, obviously I propose a
lternative B. I™ll come back to the body of it in a 
moment.
  On 5 v
ersus 5
, there was a pretty clear consensus around the table that there™s a lot of 
hunger for moving away from the date toward some kind of state-contingent guidance.  I think 

one of the lessons of the paper whose author™s name will not be mentioned was t
hat clarity about 
future rate policy is a very powerful tool and one that we should make use of.  I would advocate 

that we continue to work on this because the other part of the consensus today was that we™re not 

quite ready for prime time on this issue. 
So I would propose for now that we retain paragraph 5, 
but with a very strong injunction to the staff and to colleagues that we work to figure out how we 

can put language like 5
 in soon. 
        
              
       
              
              In paragraph 3, I™d like to make the following proposal.  I™d like to propose that we do 
$40 billion a month, but I™d like to add the words ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ 
where it says 
$85 billion a month three lines from the bottom.  T
he 
$85 billion, which is the MEP plus the 
$40 billion
Šof course the MEP runs out at the end of the year, and that™s about the time we™ll be 
looking at how we™re going to proceed from here. The advantage of doing $40 
billion
 is, 
first of 
all, that 
$30 billion 
feels a little underwhelming to me in terms of what we announce today, but 
also it s
eems to me that one of the options we might have in January, 
if we are looking at it
, would be just to continue the $40 
billion
.  To me, $40 
billion 
seems like a more plausible number 
there.
  And we have talked about it with the D
esk
, and the
ir view is that it™s consistent with both 
our operational capacity and with market functioning even if extended for a long period, longer 
than I expect 
that
 we would actually do it. 
In paragraph 4, I would proposeŠand there were views on different sid
es here
Šwe use 
the 
second language, ﬁundertake additional asset purchases and employ its other policy tools.ﬂ 

Governor Duke spoke against this because she mentioned IOER and discount window lending.  

Of course, those are Board tools, but the other tools 
that the FOMC has 
are the statement 
language and the guidance, and certainly that could be part of additional steps that we take in 

January or whenever it is that we begin to review the situation.  If no one has too strong an 

objection, I™d like to use that second phrase 
with
 the understanding, which I will make clear if 
asked, that what we mean by that is communicationŠwhich is the other topic I talked about in 

Jackson Hole.  I don™t want to make any other changes.  We do have the phrase ﬁas appropriate.ﬂ 

That already convey
s the notion of conditionality, the fact that we may or may not take action.  It 
depends on what the economic outlook is, and I think that™s very important. 
           
                
          
         I forgot to say, by the way, on 5Ša point that Governor Raskin madeŠ
that I think the 
reason that there has been in the SEP, as well as in th
e guidance, a fairly sharp movement into 
the future of the expected takeoff date is not really because there™s been a massive deterioration 
in the outlook, but 
that 
the Committee has come to the view that a somewhat 
more extended 
period of low ratesŠfor reasons articulated by the artist formerly known as Michael Woodford 

[l
aughter]
Šcan be helpful in a zero lower bound situation, and I will try to make that point also 
in the press conference. 
To summarize
Šand I look 
around the table, if there are any voters who are extremely 
bothered, please let me knowŠI would propose to choose $40 billion and $85 billion from the 

third line from the bottom, propose to insert the phrase ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ after ﬁeach 

month,ﬂ and then in paragraph 4, I propose to take the second option, ﬁunder
take additional asset 
purchases, 
and employ its other policy tools as appropriate.ﬂ 
Are there any comments? 
President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  May I just ask a question? When we say ﬁin a 
context of price stability,
ﬂ we also mean well
-anchored inflation expectations
, is that correct? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We do.  That™s the phrase.  I recognize it™s not completely 
grammatical as President Lacker pointed out, but the implication is that, of course, at all times 

we™ll maintain that conditionality as we undertake our policy. 
MR. FISHER.  And you will work that into your press conference if it™s appropriate. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, yes.  Absolutely. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  P
resident Lockhart. 
                      
   
                          
         MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
In paragraph 4, just a thought to throw 
on the table, and that is take the last sentence of 5
, inject it after the word
s ﬁprice stability,ﬂ so 
that the effect of the last two sentences would be t
o frame this whole question of continuing 
accommodation
Šin effect, framing the way we™re going to deliberate over this over the next few 
weeks. 
It seems to me comprehensive.  It refers to improvement in labor market conditions 
generally, and also of cours
e, efficacy and cost and all of that.  I can see combining those two 
sentences.  Each begins, for what it™s worth, with ﬁIn determining, –
ﬂ and that might make that 
paragraph a good set-up. I
™ll
 also point out that in all likelihood, the 
minutes 
are going
 to portray 
that we have given some consideration to threshold thinking, and so this would serve to frame 

that for the market reaction over the next few weeks.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Because 
it refers to the time horizon, wouldn™t th
at kind of 
language be more appropriate as we look toward the language of 
5?  In other words, I thought for 
a moment you were suggesting taking that and putting it at the end of 5. 
MR. LOCKHART. I™m actually thinking it might fit in 
4.  I put this on the 
table a little 
bit off the top of my head.  T
he Committee will continue its purchases, undertake additional asset 
purchases
, and employ its other tools until such improvement is achieved in the context of price 
stability.  In determining how long we™re going to do that, we™d take into account the pace of 

labor market conditions and so forth.  In determining the size, pace, and composition, as always, 

we™d 
take into account efficacy and cost.  I just saw that as a boxing of all of the things we would 
take in
to consideration if we go to essentially an open-ended kind of approach. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
In my press conference I™m going to be very clear that 
obviously this is not a numeric objective, and we™ll be looking at a range of employment and 

output indicato
rs, which all bear on the outlook for sustained improvement in labor market 
       
         
  
           
     
     
        conditions and declining unemployment, and I™d rather convey that breadth verbally.  I™m afraid 
we™re getting a little complicated. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Fair enough. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Ye
s, I had the same reaction that you had. I didn™t see 
how it would fit in 4 because you hadn™t really explained the forward guidance yet.  One could 

take the last sentence 
of 
4 and the last sentence
 of 5
 and make a new 
paragraph 6 and sum up.  
Then you™d have the statement about asset purchases, the statement about forward guidance, and 

a summary paragraph that said
, ﬁin determining both these things.ﬂ  That would be more logical. 
MR. LACKER.  A paragraph full of escape clauses, in other words. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Essentially. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I was going to ask a question about something else. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead. 

MR. LACKER. 
In the forward
-guidance lan
guage, we deleted the economic conditions 
clause there.  We™ve had a lot of discussion of Professor Woodford™s paper.  We™ve talked  a lot 

about that in the context of 5
 and that language, but I™m thinking that what you had in mind by 
deleting the economi
c conditions clause was in part motivated by his critique as well, the idea 
that by saying it™s conditions that are pushing the time horizon out, we were focusing on how bad 

things 
are
.  The intention, as I read you, is for us to be communicating more about our reaction 
function. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s right. 
      
    
      
          
         
        
    
     MR. LACKER.  I want to re-
ask a question I asked earlier this year.  When
 we adopted 
this 
language
, we never really got clear on whether it™s a commitment or not.  W
e wrestled with 
different versio
ns of what that meant.  Is this signaling that we™re going to pursue an action that 
later on we would not want to pursue then? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it™s still conditional because it obviously depends on 
the timing of the recovery and so on. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  So it™s contingent. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I mentioned the SEP changes and so on
.  I think we 
around this table have moved to the view that communicating low rates for longer 
in a way that 
may require some credibility is an approach to dealing with the zero lower bound, not in an 

extreme way, but I think there is some of that now in the statement. 
MR. LACKER. 
We have a statement
, and we can walk away from this and each interpret 
it in our own way, 
or we can have a Committee sense of what 
we™re doing. Is policy in the 
future to be conditioned on this?  In other words, as Woodford suggests, is policy going to be 

history-dependent? 
Is t
he fact that we said 
this going to alter future policy
? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In my Jackson Hole remarks, 
I talked about the guidance.  I 
said it was conditional, dependent on the state of the economy.  B
ut in explaining the time, I said 
we look at rules and optimal control and those sorts of things, but we also take into account some 
other factors such as downs
ide risks, the effects of the 
zero lower bound, and implicitly I said the 
possibility that the equilibrium real rate of interest is lower than normal
Šthat is,
 headwinds.  So 
I am conveying, I think, some sense that in order to achieve more stimulus today, 
there™s a bit of 

a commitment element there
ŠI don™t think we™ve gone too far out on a limb on this. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 
              
   
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
                      
                                                              CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Can we go ahead? 
MS. DANKER.  This vote is on alternative B, as amended by the Chairman, and the 
associated 
directive. 
Chairman Bernanke 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
Governor Duke 
Yes 
President Lacker 
No President Lockhart 
Yes 
President Pianalto 
Yes 
Governor Powell 
Yes 
Governor Raskin 
Yes 
Governor Stein 
Yes 
Governor Tarullo 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
Governor Yellen 
Yes 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
We have a few other items
.  We™re going to 
hear a little bit about the implementation
, we™re going to do very quickly the forecast, but if 
everybody is okay, why don™t we just go ahead and tak
e a 15 minute coffee break? 
[Coffee 
break] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don™t we 
recommence
? Let me turn the floor 
over to L
orie 
Logan, who will talk a bit about the operational aspect. 
MS. LOGAN.
8  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I will offer a brief descrip
tion of how 
the Desk plans to implement the Committee™s decision regarding the 
SOMA 
portfolio.  
Consistent with recent practices, the Desk intends to release a statement 
with operational details on this initiative at the same time as the release of the FOM
C statement.  A draft of the Desk statement is provided in the handout for your 

reference, with the exception that we will add the clause ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ 

into the second sentence of the second paragraph. 
Based on the directive, the Desk inten
ds to expand the SOMA™s holdings of 
agency MBS by 
$40 billion per month and maintain the existing policy for 

reinvesting agency principal payments.  Our current projections indicate that through 

the end of the year, paydowns on the agency debt and MBS port
folios will result in 
average monthly reinvestment purchases of roughly $30 billion.  Thus, combined 
8 The materials used by Ms. 
Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 8). 
                                   
  
       
    
        purchases will initially total around 
$70 billion per month and constitute about three-
fourths of monthly TBA gross issuance. 
Should the purchases extend for 10 months, as was considered in Tealbook B, we 
anticipate that the SOMA™s ownership share of the outstanding fixed-
rate agency 
MBS market would grow from about 18 percent to 27 percent, and that™s over a 

10-month horizon. 
In line with the current practice for reinvestment operations, the Desk plans to 
conduct the additional purchases 
in the newly issued securities in the to
-be-announced market, or TBA market.  These securities represent the most liquid sector 

of the MBS market, allowing purchases to be made in large size and are most closely 

tied with the primary mortgage rate. 
The Desk may purchase other agency MBS if 
market conditions warrant. 
The Desk intends to conduct these additional purchases internally as we™ve been 
doing for some time rather than relying on an investment manager to conduct the 

trades on our behalf.  We expect to be active almost every day
, and purchase 
operations will continue to be conducted in a competitive auction format with the 

primary dealers.
  Further, the Desk will continue the practice established at the end of 
last year of margining the unsettled MBS transactions with the primary dealers. 
Given the substantial portion of issuance being purchased and the uncertainty 
associated with MBS supply, the Desk will continue to conduct dollar roll 

transactions when necessary to facilitate the settlement of our purchases. 
Dollar rolls 
can be used to postpone or accelerate the delivery of purchases based on indications 

of the availability of agency MBS for settlement. 
In the reinvestment operations to 
date, the size of dollar rolls needed to postpone settlement have been fairly small, at 

about 5 percent of purchases, though this amount is likely to increase with the 

additional asset purchases. 
We will al
so use coupon swaps, 
if needed
, to facilitate settlement, as was the case 
in 2010.  A coupon swap would allow the Desk to exchange unsettled purchases in a 

given agency MBS coupon for other coupons more readily available for settlement.  

However, we do not envision needing to conduct such transactions, except in very 

rare cases where persistent supply problems suggest that settlement of purchases
, even over several months, is unlikely. 
The purchases of agency MBS securities under this new asset purchase pro
gram 
will begin tomorrow.  We plan to have two separate announcements for MBS 

operations going forward, one for the new purchases and one for the continued 

reinvestments.  The Desk will publish the monthly asset purchase amounts along with 

the announcement of the Treasury MEP operations around the last business day of 

each month.  Given there are only 17 calendar days remaining in September, we will 

purchase a pro rata share of the monthly pace in September of about $23 billion. 
           
   
                    
      
          In addition, we will continue to publish around the eighth business day of each 
month the planned amount of reinvestment purchases for the next month.  Thus, there 

will also be a new reinvestment purchase amount target posted today at the same time 

as the Desk™s operating statement is released.
  That concludes my comments.  Thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
Any questions?  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. 
Help us interpret financial market data going forward.  What do you 
expect?  Because
 our purchases don™t include TIPS, should we factor something in about TIPS 

yields?
  Are they in the habitat, out of the habitat? 
MS. LOGAN.  In our MEP purchases, we purchase TIPS today. 

MR. LACKER.  You do? 

MS. LOGAN.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  O
kay. 
MR. POTTER.  The MEP is still ongoing. 

MR. LACKER.  But we weren™t proposing to do it in the overall asset purchase program, 
were we? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Sorry? 
MR. LACKER.  Include TIPS. 

MS. LOGAN. If we 
had added purchases under a new asset purchase 
program for 
Treasuries, we would have done so. 
MR. LACKER. 
Okay.  You would.  Sorry.  I misread something then.  I apologize.  
Let 
me ask another question.  How linked is the private-
label MBS market to agency MBS yields? 
Do you anticipate this pushing that spread apart? 
MS. LOGAN.  I think 
the way we™ve been estimating these effects is that the MBS 
purchases would affect the Treasury term premium, and to the extent that the 
pass
-through from 
the lowering of interest rates moves other asset markets, equities
, or the private-
label market
Š                
      
   
                  
  we t
alked about what that pass-through is.  There™s some uncertainty, but we would expect the 
channel to be through that form.  I guess there could be some other form because it is MBS, and 
private label is a little bit more closely connected than maybe from T
reasuries to private label, 
but overall we have been expecting the pass
-through to happen through lowering interest rates 
more broadly. 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  R
elative to buying Treasuries, we™re tilting credit from the 
private-
label market to the agency market.  Thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  I™d just like to say something about the private label 
because there has been 
almost no issuance of private label in a number of years because there™s just not much supply out 

there.  There is 
a little bit of jumbo issuance.
  Again, in the spirit of things that are cooking out 
there, the Federal Home 
Loan Banks, particularly I think the H
ome 
Loan Bank of Chicago 
is 
now looking at consolidating jumbo securities from banks across the country, not 
just that are in 
the Chicago 
district
, and feeding them through Redwood to try to generate some more broader 
private-
label issuance
, for
 jumbo and more broadly. 
I would expect that to the extent that that 
happens, it certainly wouldn™t be unhelpful.  It 
might be helpful. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, but what they™re saying is that compared 
with 
buying Treasuries 
only, this is reducing agency MBS yields by moreŠTreasury yields will fall, but not as much as 

what they would fall if we bought Treasuries only.  T
hey™re 
tilting the playing field away from 
everything priced on Treasuries toward agency MBS. 
MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we™re still buying $45 billion of long-
term Treasuries 
in the MEP right now. 
                                                                                                     MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, I know that, but the apples-
to-apples thing 
is 
$40 billion agency 
MBS versus 
$40 billion Treasuries in this setting, and comparing those two, private-
label MBS 
yields are going to be higher, given that we™re buying agency MBS, than they would be if we 
were buying Treasuries only. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDL
EY.  They™re not going to be higher.  They™re not going to 
drop as much, presumably. 
MR. LACKER.  Exactly.  They™re going to be higher than they would in the alternative. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In that respect we don™t care because they™re not being 
created. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, they would be even less created now. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I don™t actually think we know very much about what would happen to 
private-
label MBS yields because there™s so little issuance; there™s so little pricing information. 
It™s conceivable 
that pushing down agency MBS would also push down private-
label MBS 
yields, but I don™t think we know because there hasn™t been much issuance there and we don™t 

have information. 
MR. POTTER.  The stronger the housing market is, the more it should support t
he 
private-
label market coming back and having more capacity. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
9 Let™s go on to the consensus forecast.  This, of course, is 
still an exercise.  We™re still working to figure out what we™re going to do. 
You have in front of 
you the consensus forecast.  If you turn to page 3, and we look at the forecast inclusive of the 

policy action today, that would be best approximated, I guess, by the line 
that 
says, ﬁPlus 
$750 billion LSAP program.ﬂ  That™s the post-
action
 policy forecast, and note th
at it includes the 
jointly determined federal funds rate at the bottom.  What I™d like to do is ask each person to say 
9 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 
6).       
   
                           
            one of three things.  Either you broadly agree with the forecast as given or you agree with 
reservations
Šlet me go back a second.
  As part of our exercise 
the staff, I believe, is intending to 
write up our discussion as if it were a quarterly monetary policy report, and what they will do is 

if you agree but with reservations, they will write up your reservations in minutes 
style 
descri
bing without attribution what the concerns were that people raised about the forecast.  
The 
other possibility is if you just disagree with the forecast, you should say so and explain why, and 

then they™ll write up the monetary policy report with attributio
nŠthat™s the plan
Šand say, 
again, what it is that you disagree about.  Y
es, President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  I don™t understand.  Are these two different plans or are these two 
different options for us? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Two different options. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
  You have three choices.  When I go around the table, you 
have three choices. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  We 
can disagree anonymously or 
with attribution? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree modestly and anonymously. 

MR. LACKER. 
Mod
estly and anonymously. 
CHAIR
MAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree violently and for attribution.  [Laughter] 
MR. 
LACKER
.  And there™s a threshold.  
[Laughter] 
Or is it a 
trigger? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Can I bring up just one more thing? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  For those people who strongly disagree, we™re also asking 
them to submit in the next few daysŠby MondayŠa paragraph or so explaining why, and we 

will eventually put this into a document and then circulate it back to the Committee. 
                           
  
      
  
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is everybody o
kay? 
MS. DUKE.  Can I just ask one question about agreeing with reservation?  I
f we™re 
comparing it with 
the 
$750 billion 
LSAP program
, and in voting for alternative B, I didn™t 
assume that the purchases went past the
 end of the year, w
ould that be a reser
vation? 
I just want 
to know how to characterize 
it.  What does ﬁwith reservationﬂ mean? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
I think you assume
 that you should take the Tealbook 
assumption here, the $750 billion, and say:  Would the economic path shown here be a 
reasonabl
e approximation of what you would anticipate, given the policy action taken?  And if 
not, why not? 
MS. DUKE.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay?
  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Am I agreeing that this is a consensus forecast or am I agreeing that 
this is ac
tually my forecast?  Because I submitted my forecast
. And you can see point for point, 
you know, where they™re different and where they™re not. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We™re trying to determine if it is a consensus, and therefore, 
we™re asking if you yourself find itŠ 
MR. EVANS
.  Is it close enough? 
MR. BULLARD.  I think it™s a good consensus.  It™s not as accurate asŠ 

MR. 
FISHER
.  I™m trying to remember my specific numbers.  All I remember is that 
I was in the central tendency. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So why don™t 
you just report what you reported and say if 
you think it™s broadly consistent with this or not? 
            
            
             
     MR. WILCOX.  This is an effort to ascertain the extent to which participants can affiliate 
themselves with the consensus forecast. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Preside
nt Fisher. 
MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry. 

MR. TARULLO.  I think it™s not unlike what we do with policy statements, which is to 
say everybody would have written it somewhat differently, but in the end can you kind of go 

along with 
it? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Ye
s, that™s what it is.  That™s right. 
MR. FISHER.  You said there were three questions.  Do we agree with the forecast?  Do 
we have reservations?  If so, what are they?
  What™s the third? 
MS. 
DUKE.  Do you disagree? 
MS. YELLEN. Do 
you have a fundamentally different view? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you fundamentally disagree with the forecast?  And 
remember it™s not about whether you agree with the policy action or not.  This is conditional on 

the policy action.  Conditional on the policy action, do you agree more or less with the forecast 

that™s been presented? 
MR. FISHER.  And if we have reservations, we should submit them.  Is that what you 
were saying earlier? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, Janet, would you like to 
comment? 

MS. YELLEN. I
f you broadly agree but have some reservationŠyou™re slightly more 
optimistic about the forecast
, you have a different view on oil prices, but aside from that you 

basically agree this is a reasonable forecast contingent on the policy path
Šthen say you agre
e                  
                   
         with reservations.  And 
the write
-up, as in the minutes, 
will say 
people have expressed some 
reservations, but nevertheless associate themselves overall with the view. 
The staff will write up 
the discussion of what the reservations were.  But those who 
just have a basically different view 
of the forecast should say so, and then there will be a few paragraphs they™ll submit, 
and that will 

be included in the document 
with attribution
.  This would be a portion of a monetary policy 
report where there would be a discussion of the diversity of views.  Think of this as a diversity of 

views and say 10 people supported the forecast without reservation.  Several people had 

reservations of the following sort, and four had essentially different views.  Here are the 

submissions.  In your paragraph, 
you™d describe 
and 
explain why your views are essentially 
different. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Let me just make sure I understand.  We™re assuming the 
policy path, this policy action? 
MS. YELLEN. Yes. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes, tha
t™s what we are doing today. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  So we™re not having individual ﬁappropriate 
monetary policy.ﬂ 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
No.  It™s just given what we passed today, is this a reasonable 
forecast
? MR. LACKER.  Wait.  That™s different than a policy path. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I™m going to suggest something slightly different from what 
Chairman Bernanke said, which is:  Given the policy decision today, if you look at the numbers 

that go along with that 
$750 billion LSAP programŠforget about whet
her the 
$750 billion is 
correct or not because you may think it will end up being $500 b
illion or 
some 
other numberŠ 
                              
     
    
              
 do you think that™s a reasonable forecast? I
s it close enough for talking purposes?  But if you 
think this is the wrong model of the world, the economy is just going to look a lot different, so 
much so that you want to, in effect, dissent, then you™re in the third category.  The middle 

category is a little tougher, but I think the two ends are very clear. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Everybody, this is a trial run.  [Laughter]  W
e™re trying to 
find out what works and what doesn™t work.  We may have already found out what doesn™t work. 

President Fisher, did you have a comment or question or you™re okay? 
MR. FISHER.  I™m fine. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You™re 
fine.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
My question was would it be better to try to have a little 
bit better understanding about what ﬁclose toﬂ is or would 
it be everyone™s personal view of what 

ﬁclose toﬂ is? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It™s your judgment of whether you 
sufficiently disagree that 
you want to have your name 
identified. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it does matter if people disagree
 or have different 
parameters in terms of how close is ﬁclose to.ﬂ  
We can do it either way, but you could argue th
at 
if you think the standard error is more than X, then you should disagree, or you could be a 

perfectionist and you disagree for very minute changes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So all of this is about reporting.  We™re trying to report the 
sense of the Committee
, and so how you would 
like the sense of the Committee reported 
is 
basically the question. 
MS. YELLEN. 
Right.  I
f we were really doing this
, the Chairman would be 
wal
king out 
into a press conference
 with these numbers, explaining the policy action, and pu
tting these 
      
     
                        
             
   
      numbers out to the public and saying, ﬁThis gives you a description of how we envision the 
economy unfolding with the policy decisions.
ﬂ  And the question is:  Would you be comfortable 

with these numbers as what he walks out into a press confer
ence 
with
? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I understand all of that, but let™s imagine that there™s half 
the people on the Committee who disagree for very small tolerances and
 half the people 
have 
very large tolerances. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Then no.  It should be 
meaningful tolerances. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It would be better if we had a more common metric 
about what 
the tolerances are. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, put it this way
:  Are you willing to write two paragraphs for Dave 
Reifschneider?  [Laughter]  That™s it, right? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, no, that™s different.  That™s 
a fundamental 
dis
agreement. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
The way I would put it is this.  I
f the consensus forecast came 
out like this
, and you were the sort of person who 
in a speech 
would say, ﬁI want to make an 
important point that my 
personal 
unemployment rate forecast at the end of 2015 would be one-
tenth lower,ﬂ then you should say you have reservations.  [Laughter]  But if you perhaps feel 

uncomfortable about making a big distinction abou
t one-tenth or so, thenŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There™s a standard error
, though, 
implicit in that. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I think there 
are
 two things.  One, there™s obviously a huge 
confidence interval around this, and so one way to look at 
it is 
that 
many 
differences just blur. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course. 
There will 
always b
e fan 
charts
.          
   
      
             
             
   
  MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  But does it make it a material difference f
or monetary policy, 
and the question might be if it™s 
one-tenth or so off on inflation or unemployment, you would say 
probably not. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s a good way of phrasing it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans, did you have a comment? 

MR. EVANS.  I was just thinking we should probably start [l
aughter]
, and then we™ll 
figure outŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNAN
KE.  Excellent suggestion.  All right.  Who would like to go 
first?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART. I endorse it.
  [Laughter and applause] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Very good.
  Anyone? President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Is it a good consensus?  I do think it™s a good consensus.  T
here are 
issues here about the mix between the forecast and the policy assumptions.  The way I did it was 

I had more inflation coming in the out years, and then I applied the outcome-based policy rule, 

which would then have the funds rate moving in a different way from here, and so the policy 

assumption then starts to also look different.  So I™m not quite sure what to make of this exercise.  

It™s fine as a statement of where the Committee is, and I would endorse it in that sense
.  As a general rule on this whole process, I don™t think 
that it
™s a good thing to get into 
the 
business of 

trying to dissent on a forecast because there are
 zillions of points here and a lot of subtleties here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
This is why we™re having a tr
ial run. 
MR. BULLARD.  Mildly different, I guess. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Broadly endorse. 
       
   
          
    
  
           
      
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Conditional on the policy path, I broadly endorse. 

CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Duk
e. 
MS. DUKE.  I actually normally would endorse, except that the reservation I would 
express at this point is that I think 2013 will be significantly lower because of the fiscal cliff. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MS. DUKE. 
That would be a reservation. 
CHAIR
MAN BERNANKE.  That™s a good example of a reservation.  Very good.  
Anyone else?  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Broadly endorse, but I have a weaker outlook.  So that™s my only 
reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor 
Yellen
. MS. YELLEN.  Broadly endorse. 

CHAIRMAN BE
RNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I see what I would term modestly more inflationary pressures 
than what are in this forecast, maybe one-tenth or two-tenths or three-
tenths more in inflation. 
With that said
, it comes 
back to what the Vice Chairman
 was talking about, that the choices of 
the Committee seem to be averse to those kinds of upticks in inflation.  For my own view, I think 

I would say I see modestly more inflationary pressures than what are in this. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fine.
  Governor Stein. 
MR. STEIN.  
I broadly endorse the baseline.  I™m not sure if I would be a weak deviator 
on the conditional effect of policy in the sense that I think that the incremental effect of the 
          
   
           
               LSAP is going to be roughly half of what it™s projected to be.  I™m not quite sure where that puts 
me. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  You sound like a ﬁ
two
ﬂ to me. 
MR. STEIN.  That feels like a 
ﬁtwo
ﬂ to you? 
PARTICIPANT
.  Do you want to write two paragraphs? 
MR. 
STEIN
.  No, I don™t want to write 
any para
graphs.  I want to hide in the weeds.  
[Laughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren said he broadly endorses.  President 
Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  I modestly endorse it.  It might scare people in terms of my forecasting.  I 
was within the central tendency.  They might want to change their forecast based on where I 

would be, with the exception of the funds rate, and I™d have to think about that.  But generally, 
I endorse.  
I will say this, Mr. Chairman
: Fiscal cliff, no fiscal cliff, et cetera
Šand I said this in 
my write
-upŠgoing beyond the first part of 2013 is largely pure guesswork. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In some positive sense, that™s true.  In a normative sense, 
we do need to find some kind of plan. 
MR. FISHER.  I understand that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We h
ave to have some kind of projection to base our 
thinking on. 
MR. FISHER.  With that caveat, it™s a wonderful exercise. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Obviously, yes.  O
ne of the benefits of this exercise
, I hope, 
is that we will be able to show fan charts that will g
ive some sense of the uncertainty. 
President 
Pianalto. 
        
             
  
       
   
  
               
   MS. PIANALTO.  I broadly endorse the forecast, although my forecast is slightly weaker 
for 
GDP growth and unemployment in the later years 
partly because
, like Governor Stein, 
the 
effectiveness of poli
cy is just a little weaker in my forecast. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good.  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  I broadly endorse, but two things about the process as opposed to th
e substance
.  One, the issue that arose at the outset that Betsy mentioned is somethin
g that people 
are going to have to think about, which is, what if we emerge from a meeting with a policy 

action that really isn™t any of the ones that are listed there?
  And, secondly, this 
category 
two
ŠI have a feeling
Šis going to be problematic in the fo
llowing respect. I have heard several people 
already who might have fit themselves into 
category 
two, a
nd if you end up saying, ﬁWe™ve got a 
consensus forecast
Š14 of the 17 members of the FOMC had qualifications on it,ﬂ I™m not sure 
how powerful 
it becomes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, the interesting question is whether or not a number of 
them had the same qualification. If they™re all nitpicks, 
that™s one thing, but if everybody said, 
ﬁThis doesn™t take enough account of the fiscal cliff,ﬂ then that would be something that should 

be communicated I think. 
MR. TARULLO.  Fair enough.  T
here may be some utility in thinking about moving to a 
binary 
system 
as we do with the statement.  You are either endorsing or you are not, but giving 
people a chance 
to comment, so if they say something like Betsy said a minute ago, it could be 

included in the explanation of the consensus. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s fine. 

MR. TARULLO.  But that™s just something to think about. 
                 
    
     
                  
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  Thank you.  We are looking for suggestions.  Anyone 
else?  Vice Chairman
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I agree with Governor Tarullo.  You don™t have to frame 
it as a reservation.  You can just frame it as where people would prefer to tilt the forecast.  I™m 
with Betsy on the f
iscal restraint. I am assuming that 
we will get some fiscal restraint 
next year
, and it will be more problematic to the outlook, so we have somewhat weaker growth in 2013.  

That said, I think this is a pretty good forecast.  T
hat is why I was getting at t
he point of, how 
much do you disagree? I am pretty confident that the economy will be weaker in 2013 than this 

forecast, but if I take this whole thing in its entirety, I wouldn™t really quibble about it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I 
have a tiny reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, the question is, would you object to my 
hypothetically taking this, putting this on the screen, and saying, ﬁThis is the Committee™s 

consensus forecast of what the economy is going to look likeﬂ? 
VICE CH
AIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it would also be good, though, to say, ﬁA few people 
thought that 2013 could be a little weaker becauseﬂ blah, blah, blah.  But I would do it in 

Governor Tarullo™s two-
bucket camp
 rather than three-
bucket camp. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agr
ee. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thanks.  Anyone else? 

MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 
               
  
    
             
       
               
     MR. PLOSSER.  I would say my forecast differs from this, obviously, and I think it is 
likely to show up 
in the assumption about current policy.  We are going to see more inflationary 
pressures and less positive outlooks on output and employment. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 
MR. LACKER.  I still don™t have a clear, coherent sense of what policy I am supposed to 
be conditioning on.  Am I foreca
sting the Committee?  I think I am.  So on that basis, I might 
provide a good test case here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MR. LACKER.  First of all, coming into this, on appropriate policy, I was weaker in 
2013 by a couple of tenths.  And I saw inflation a couple of tenths stronger, closer to 2 
percent 

over the next 
year 
or two, getting to 2 
percent 
next year. 
So I would have put policy to 
rais
e rates earlier. 
Modifying that in terms of making it a forecast of the Committee™s action, I would 
mark up inflation in 2014. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sounds right.  Anyone else? 

MR. FISHER.  Can I ask a question on that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Forgive me.  I™m slower than everybody else at the table.  In releasing 
this, we would be releasing the funds path? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Releasing what? 

MR. FISHER.  The funds path, 
the fed funds rate forecast as well
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes
. MR. BULLARD. If you are a year earlier, is that a significant reservation?  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I™m sor
ry. 
                       
  
                
   
         MR. BULLARD.  A year earlier on the funds rate, is that a significant reservation? 
MS. DUKE.  But is that a difference in the policy path?  Because the policy path assumes 
2015 liftoff. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
  You could have 
a different reaction functio
n. MR. 
BULLARD
.  But then you™ve got to do your presumably out
come
-based
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
Based on the original line of comments where we asked you to 
condition on the forecast, and you submitted something 
that
 had higher inflation, I would have 
said t
hat you were a 
ﬁthree
ﬂ because you showed that, conditioned on sticking with the August 
statement
-type policy, you had much higher inflation than this forecast, and that should be 
exaggerated more based on the policy.  So I would have said that you™re a 
three. 
MR. BULLARD.  But I don™t think I am outside of these confidence bands. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I don™t think that is relevant.  It goes back to the question of, 
do you think that your forecast, from a policy perspective, would be materially different? 
MR. BULLARD. 
Again, I just don™t think getting into dissenting on a forecast is a 
sensible thing to do.  Has the Chairman done a good job of characterizing the center of the 

Committee?  Yes. I think yes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Lockhart. 

MR. 
LOCKHART.  I want to make sure I understand.  The next step is to write up a 
mock quarterly monetary policy report or something like that? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  I™m sorry.  Just a description of this discussion. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Right.  But we see how 
it is going to be communicated, how it is 
going to be implemented, is that right? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  That™s 
the purpose. 
                        
      
            MR. WILCOX.  Just the diversity of views portion. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  Okay. 

MS. DUKE.  For the mock exercise, in addition to my own fiscal cliff reservation, can I 
sign up to Sandy and Jeremy™s reservation about the effectiveness? 
MR. 
REIFSCHNEIDER
.  Oh, sure. 
MS. DUKE.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else?  [No response]  All right.  Yes? 

MR. POWELL.  I™m on that line b
etween the one and the two for exactly the same 
reason
.  I went with the one, but of course I do have the same reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
A question to be thinking about here is
:  What would 
Governor Powell do if he thought that the policy action is 
weaker than we anticipate, but the 
underlying economy is stronger, so that the outlook looks okay for him? 
MR. POWELL.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Because we are not showing a comparison, right?  We are 
just showing the ex post. 
MR.
STEIN
.  Oh, you™re just showing the ex post. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that™s the question.  T
hat™s what we™re discussing 
here.  We haven™t asked the question whether or not you think the baseline is adequate. 
MR. FISHER.  You might 
have to prepare for your press conference. 
CHAI
RMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Do you have a question or a comment? 
MR. FISHER.  Well, the plan is, once we get this nailed down, that you would then refer 
to it in your press conference. Is that correct? 
                             
   
     
            CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And then, we are hoping at some point t
o have a monetary 
policy report. 
MR. FISHER.  Which you would still refer to the consensus forecast in. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nothing is nailed down.  One possibility, which Governor 
Tarullo alluded to, is that we can™t do this in a timely way because we don™t know what the 

policy action is going to be soon enough, in which case it might be something that only appears 

in publication with the minutes, for example, three weeks later. 
MR. FISHER.  I agree with Governor Tarullo, by the way.  H
e makes an excellent
 point.  
My next question would be:  Could you summarize what we just discussed as though we were at 

a press conference? It probably would be difficult at this juncture. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would say that this is the forecast 
of the Committee.
 A few 
people disagreed, thinking that these policies would lead to higher inflation.  Most people 
agreed with the broad contours, except they pointed out a few issues related to the fiscal cliff and 

the efficacy of policy.  
President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. I™m a lit
tle confused.  Someone used the phrase ﬁa diversity section.ﬂ 
But you, at the beginning, describedŠI think you did in this contextŠ
a minutes
-like document, 
and in the minutes, of course, when they discuss participants™ views, the different views are sort 

of woven into the main narrative.  I wasn™t quite clear on what you guysŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I just learned about this five minutes ago myself. 

MR. LACKER.  Okay. Great. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I think the plan is to have a document that describes the 
consensus forecast, gives its main feature, 
and shows 
it in 
a minutes
-type discussion: ﬁ
The 
Committee discussed it. Most agreed with it
 but raised the following points anonymously.  
            
          
 President Lacker thought that it was
 a bunch of garbage.ﬂ  [Laughter]  And that would be the 
content. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay
, we will just have to start. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I hope this was helpful to you 
all
.  [Laughter]  Just 
so you have something to look forward to, our current plan is to talk about this exercise in 
October, so be sure and make your plane reservations now.  [Laughter] 
The next meeting is 
TuesdayŒWednesday, October 23Œ24.  
The press conference 
is 
at 2:15.  There will be a 
TV in 
the Special Library
, and lunch is available if you would like to stay.  No presentations are 
planned.  Thank you very much. 
END OF MEETING 
             
                                                
  Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
 on September
 12Œ13, 2012 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, September 12, 

2012, at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Thursday, September 13, 2012, at 8:30 a.m.  Those present 

were the following: 
Ben Bernanke, Chairman 

William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 

Elizabeth Duke 

Jeffrey M. Lacker 

Dennis P. Lockhart 

Sandra Pianalto 

Jerome H. Powell 

Sarah B
loom Raskin 
Jeremy C. Stein 

Daniel K. Tarullo 

John C. Williams 

Janet L. Yellen 
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, and Eric 
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Ko
cherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively 

William B. English, Secretary and Economist 
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary 

Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 

David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 

Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, Wil
liam Nelson, David 
Reifschneider, Glenn D. Rudebusch, William Wascher, and John A. Weinberg, Associate 
Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Govern
ors 
                                                                                                              Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; 
Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, 

Board of Governors 
Andreas Lehnert,
1 Deputy Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, 
Board of Governors 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Di
rector, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
Brian
 J. Gross,
2 Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 

Eric M. Engen, Michael G. Palumbo, and Wayne Passmore, Associate Directors, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Fabio M. Natalucci, Deputy 
Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Edward Nelson, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
Kelly J. Dubber
t, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, respectively 
Cletus C. Coughlin, Troy Davig, 
Mark E. Schweitzer, and Kei
-Mu Yi, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Cleveland, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 
1 Attended Wednesday™s session only. 
2 Attended Thursday™s session only. 
                                                               Lorie K. Logan, Jonathan P. McCarthy, Giovanni Olivei, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,
3 Vice 
Presidents, Federal R
eserve Banks of New York, New York, Boston, and New York, 
respectively 
Michelle Ezer,
4 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
3 Attended after the discussion o
n potential effects of a large
-scale asset purchase program. 
4 Attended the discussion on potential effects of a large
-scale asset purchase program. 
                           
                   
            
                                                          Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
September 12
Œ13, 2012 September 12 Session 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  Our first item is 
a staff report 
on the potential effects of large-
scale asset purchases.  Seth Carpenter will lead, but Vice 
Chairman 
Dudley would like to introduce the other presenter. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would like to introduce Michelle Ezer from the 
Markets Group.  Michelle and I actually had the interesting experience of writing a paper on the 
case for TIPS
, right in the heart of 
the financial crisis, along with Jennifer Roush
. I am not really 
sure how I managed to do that during that period, but, obviously, Jennifer and Michelle did most 

of the work.  So she is a coauthor. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay
, thank you.  Seth. 
MR. 
CARPENTER.
1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the 
material that™s 
labeled ﬁPotential Effects of a Large
-Scale Asset Purchase Program
.ﬂ  The Committee received three memos from the staff discussing various aspects of 
potential new large
-scal
e asset purchase (LSAP) programs.  I will discuss some 
considerations about how LSAP programs might be structured, and Michelle will 

discuss the balance sheet and income implications, along with the associated exit 

issues. 
When considering the financial and economic effects of LSAPs, the staff analysis 
starts from 
a term 
structure 
model that embeds Treasury and MBS supply factors as 
determinants of 
the yield 
curve.  
These effects depend on market participants™ beliefs 
about the entire trajectory of the SOMA
 portfolio™s holdings of securities and the 
types of those securities.  The FRB/US model assumes that declines in the 
10-year 
Treasury yield pass through roughly one-
for
-one to 
other market rates. 
In addition, 
the lower Treasury rate reduces the discount 
factor in pricing equities, boosting stock 
prices.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar falls as well.  For LSAPs that 

include purchases of MBS, there is an additional assumed reduction in MBS and 

mortgage rates.  Finally, the changes in these market 
variables are 
used to simulate 
the macroeconomic effects of these 
purchases using the FRB/US model. 
Of course, the results depend critically on the models used and a wide set of 
assumptions, any of which could be challenged.  First, in the staff models, the one-
1 The materials used by Mr. Carpenter and Ms. Ezer are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 
                   
             
                    
  
                     
      for
-one pass
-through from the 10-
year Treasury yield to other market rates could 
misstate the connection 
among 
these rates
.  For example, frictions like 
capacity 
restrictions 
for originations may prevent mortgage rates from fully adjusting
, at least 
in the short run.  Another source of uncertainty concerns the embedded effects on 

equity prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar.  Some event studies of 

previous unconventional balance sheet actions point to smaller effects than 

incorporated in
to staff analysis.  Finally, the macroeconomic effects of the changes in 

asset prices are calculated using the FRB/US model, and other models would 
of 

course 
yield results that could be larger or smaller. In short, while the projections 
represent the staff™s best assessment, the effects are clearly subject to considerable 

uncertainty. 
Buying either longer
-term Treasury securities or MBS should, in principle, put 
downward pressure on longer-
term interest rates and
, so, stimulate the economy. 
Although staff models suggest that purchases of MBS have 
a somewhat smaller effect 
than Treasury purchases on most longer-
term interest rates, they have somewhat 
larger effects on mortgage rates, and when translated into estimated macroeconomic 

outcomes, the differences 
are fairly small, especially relative to the substantial 
uncertainty that surrounds such estimates.  As a result, the staff memos did not 

provide clear guidance regarding the allocation of LSAPs between purchases of 

longer-
term Treasury securities and purchases of MBS. 
Looking at your first exhibit, to illustrate the macroeconomic effects that are 
implied by the staff models, we compare a projection in which the MEP, the Maturity 

Extension Program, is continued as plannedŠ
the solid
, dark blue lineŠ
to a 
projection that assumes 
that 
the Committee instead ends the MEP and purchases $600 
billion in Treasury securities and $400 
billion in MBS by late next year
.  That™s 
labeled 
option 1 
as in the staff memo
 and it™s the dotted blue line.  In addition to 
lowering term premiums from LSAPs, this option is also assumed to put downward 

pressure on longer-
term rates by pushing off the first increase in the federal funds rate 
by about six months.  This LSAP program is projected to boost real GDP, 
lower the 

unemployment rate, and increase the inflation rate somewhat.  As a consequence, 

more rapid progress toward both of the Committee™s goals is made.  The staff 

memorandum provided prior to your last meeting concluded that the purchases under 

such a 
program would not likely lead to a deterioration in market functioning.  

Michelle will 
later 
discuss some of 
the anticipated effects of the program on the 
Federal Reserve™s balance sheet and income. 
As I noted 
before
, the estimated interest rate effect of 
an LSAP depends on the 
public™s understanding of the FOMC™s intended plans for purchases and exit.  This 

consideration is particularly important for a flow
-based
 or open-
ended program that 
continues until a certain economic outcome is achieved.  If the public understands the 

FOMC™s stopping rule and has the same forecast for the economy as the Committee, 

and the economy evolves according to those projections, then our models would 

suggest that the flow-
based LSAP is 
roughly equivalent to a stock-
based LSAP 
of the 
same ultimate size.  Of course, the economy would likely not proceed exactly in line 

with expectations, so under a flow-
based LSAP, the anticipated total amount of asset 
             
      
        
         
          
                                 purchases would 
likely 
be more state dependent and evolve as the economy evolves.  
Option 4 in the memo entitled ﬁOptions for an Additional LSAP ProgramﬂŠ 

presented here 
as the dashed red lineŠwas intended to correspond roughly to such a 
program when the economy faces an adverse shock, and, as a result, purchases end up 

at a level tha
t is higher than originally assumed. If the ultimate size of purchases in 

this case is $2 trillion, our models suggest that the net effect would be somewhat 

smaller than if, from the beginning, a $2 trillion LSAP had been implemented.  

However, a flow-
bas
ed approach, if communicated clearly to the public, also could 
boost business and consumer confidence by reducing the odds of adverse tail 

outcomes and limiting the expected variance of economic outcomes.  This confidence 

effect is not captured in the staf
f projections but could be important
.  Alternatively, if 
the 
stopping rule is not clear, and the public believed that the Committee might stop 

purchases somewhat earlier than the Committee actually intended, then the interest 

rate effect 
could be reduced relative to what our models suggest.  
However, a
s the 
public came to understand the Committee™s stopping rule, the expected size of the 

SOMA portfolio would revise up, and the interest rate effects would become larger.  

Michelle is now going to discuss the 
balance sheet projections and some of the issues 
related to the exit. 
MS. EZER. 
Thanks, Seth.  As Seth mentioned, I will be discussing the balance 
sheet and income projections described in the LSAP options memo and associated 

exit issues.
  I plan to focus on the same two LSAP options Seth discussed, though the 
memo presented several options.  Turning to the top-left panel of exhibit 2, you can 

see the path of the portfolio under a baseline scenario in which MEP is completed and 

options 1 and 4 from the memo.  Under the latter two options, the portfolio grows 

significantly as a result of the asset purchases. 
Consistent with the exit principles, we 
assume that 
6 months prior to the first increase in the target federal funds rate, 
securities are allowed to ma
ture without reinvestment, and 6 
months after that first 

increase, sales of agency securities begin. These actions normalize the size of the 

portfolio through time.  The addition of a new LSAP program extends the period of 

time between the start of asset sales and when the portfolio normalizes in size. 
For 
example, under option 1 it takes 41 months for the portfolio size to normalize after 

the initiation of MBS sales.
  This is 6 months longer compared 
with 
the MEP 
scenario. 
In terms of Federal Reserve income, cumulative remittances to the Treasury over 
the projection period are lower than in a scenario with no additional LSAP.  
The 

lower remittances reflect higher inte
rest expense and the larger capital losses from 
MBS sales. 
Looking at the top-right panel, until 2016, remittances are higher under 
the LSAP scenarios, because of the higher interest income from the larger portfolio 

and minim
al additional interest expense
.  Thereafter, income is lower as a result of 
higher interest expense and larger capital losses. 
Under option 
1, annual remittances 
are projected to bottom out near zero.  By contrast, under option 
4, remittances fall to 

zero for more than 5 years, and a 
deferred asset is created. 
Of course, income and balance sheet projections can be sensitive to interest rate 
projections, and those projections are subject to uncertainty.  
One gauge of the 
               
          
       
   
              
       
    
  
           
              interest rate risk in the portfolio is presented in the middle
-left panel. Here, we 
present the projections of Federal Reserve remittances under an assumption that 

1 year after federal funds liftoff, the federal funds rate and 10
-year Treasury yield are 
100 basis points above the baseline levels, and these higher levels 
persist for the 
remainder of the projection period.  Under all of the LSAP options shown, the higher 

interest rate paths result in a period of no remittances to the Treasury and the creation 

of a deferred asset, as shown in the middle-right panel.  Under option 4, 
remittances 

to the Treasury would cease for a considerable number of years, and a substantial 

deferred asset would be created. 
The portfolio projections highlight two implications that an LSAP may have on 
the exit strategy.
 First, as shown in the bottom panel, the level of reserves would be 
higher at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate.
 Second, in order to 
remain consistent with the existing exit principles, MBS sales would need to take 

place over a shorter period than 5 
yea
rsŠthe period currently assumed in the 
projections.  
Absent a shorter MBS sales period, or other changes to the exit strategy, 

the size of the portfolio would not normalize within 2 to 3 years of the initiation of 

asset sales as anticipated by the exit strategy principles. 
Starting with the first point, under option 
1, reserve balances will be about 
$2.3 trillion at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate
Šabout $1 
trillion 
larger than expected under the current policy
, and also $1 trillion
 larger than assumed 
in June 2011.  
While increasing the IOER rate will raise short
-term market rates by 
itself, reserve
-draining tools can help to ensure a closer connection between the rates, 

and greater use of these tools may be needed
, given the increased quantity of reserves.  
The memo entitled ﬁThe 
Effect of an 
Additional $1 Trillion LSAP on the E
xit 
Strategyﬂ discussed the status of each of the different draining tools.  However, it is 

too early to provide specific details of a drain
ing plan
, because such a plan will 
depend on how markets evolve and the lessons learned once these tools are used in 

large scale. 
Turning to the second point, the exit strategy principles themselves will not have 
to change as a result of a new LSAP. The e
xpectation
, however, 
that the size of the 
balance sheet would be normalized within 2 to 3 years of assets sales might not hold, 

depending on the size of the 
asset purchase
 program.  Under option 1, by reducing the 
period of asset sales to 
3½ years from the
 5 years assumed in making the projections, 
the portfolio size would normalize within the assumed 2 to 3 
years. 
The s
taff 
currently believes that the faster average pace of MBS sales would likely be 

manageable from a market
-functioning perspective.  
That said, reducing the sales 
period would concentrate capital losses and result in Federal Reserve remittances 

declining to zero for a few years and create a deferred asset. 
In contrast, assumptions 
associated with the exit strategy principles would need to b
e altered under a $2 trillion 
LSAP like that under option 4.  Agency sales alone would not be enough to normalize 

the size of the balance sheet within 
2 to 3 
years of the initiati
on of asset sales in this 
case. 
Moreover, sales of securities in the volume envisioned under option 4 over a 
three
-year perio
d may cause market disruptions. 
          
                       
                  
In any event, the Committee may wish to review its exit principles periodically, 
particularly if the Committee implemented a flow
-based LSAP program, where the 
ultimate size o
f purchases would be unknown.  Adjustments to the principles could 
include more heavily relying on asset sales as a tool to drain reserves, for example, by 

expanding it to include a moderate pace of Treasury security sales. Asset sales could 

also occur so
oner.  
On balance, although the current exit strategy principles remain 
valid, additional analysis will be useful to determine 
whether alternate strategies 
might prove more helpful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Seth and I will be happy to 

answer any question
s. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Of course, this is just a summary of 
a lot of work that the staff has 
been doing on all aspects of asset purchases. You have received a 
number of memos.  Also, let me just mention that a little bit later this morning we will talk about 
the consensus forecast, which gives, in more detail, the staff projections of the effect
s of 
programs of different sizes on the economy.  
Let me now open the floor in case there are any 
questions 
for staff.  President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  I appreciate all of the 
work that went into this.  It has been quite helpful to me in thinking about what is going on.  Seth 

has made 
a good summary of the uncertainties and the range and assumptions that are needed to 

get the po
int estimates. 
I want to focus on two things. 
One has to do with the assumptions about market segmentation and 
pass
-through.  In 
some sense, the FRB
/US assumes
Šas you mentioned, SethŠ
that the 
pass
-through from the 
reduction of Treasuries to corporate and mortgage-
backed securities is one
-for
-one, which 
suggests, as you alluded to, that there is more segmentation across duration than there is across 

asset classes
, in the case of the models.  So one question I have would be, suppose that actually 
there was more segmentation across asset classes than across the term structure?  In other w
ords, 
if 
5-year 
Treasuries
 were a better substitute for 10-
year 
Treasuries
 than mortgage-
backed 
securities or corporate bonds are for 10
-year securities
Šwhich is the way it is kind of structured 
in the modelŠhow would that change your analysis of these e
ffects?  That is one question. 
                           
   
       
      
          
             
  
 And the second question is, you talked about the assumptions that are made and 
the 
uncertainties, and yet what we really got
, at the end of the day, w
ere 
some point estimates. 
So if 
I had to push you and I wanted to think about standard errors on these point estimates, how big 
do you think they are truly likely to be
?  Can we tell the difference, given the uncertainties 
among these different strategies
?  W
hat 
is 
your assessment of 
that? 
So those are the two 
questions I have. 
MR. CARPENTER.  Okay. 
The first question, what if there were more segmentation 
across asset types than across 
maturit
ies
? I think pretty clearly what you would see in that case 
is that we might have an effect on Treasury yields if we are buying 
Treasurie
s, and that would 
tend to push down 
Treasury 
yields and widen the spread relative to other asset types.  And to the 
extent that it™s other interest rates that have a direct effect on economic activity, you would get a 

smaller effect.
  So I think, in principle, that™s the way it would go. 
The hard part there
, I think, 
is there has clearly got to be a little bit of that going on.  And 
the previous memo about market functioning that we sent around said we might get to the point 

where you are buying so much that you are dislocating the 
Treasury 
curve from the rest of 
market interest rates. I think we are very sensitive to that possibility, and I think the staff 

conclusion so far is that we haven™t gotten to that point.  And I think some of the other studies of 

LSAPs and how they work also point to pretty substantial spillovers to other asset classesŠ
some 

Fed studies and some academic studies.
  So I think that™s a reasonable hypothesis to maintainŠ
I think 
it™s something that we will want to worry a lot about, esp
ecially if the purchases were so 
large that they were to somehow disrupt market functioning.  But my reading so far is that we are 

not there yet
, for some of those reasons. 
             
               
      
      
             
    
   Another reason isŠespecially if you go back to some of the previous LSAPsŠ
as the 
Desk has made clear what segment of the market we are buying
, there ha
ve been some pretty 
clear adjustments in interest rates at different points along the curve
.  This
 suggests 
that the 
maintained hypothesis that we have
, that the maturity matters a lot
, is coming through in some of 
the event studies.  W
hen the Desk helped the market understand exactly what the maturity 
distribution of purchases 
was 
going to be, we saw some movements of yields at the long end 
relative to the belly of the curve that suggest t
hat people see this sort of segmentation across 
maturities.  In addition, I think some of the reaction 
to the MEP caused us to feel 
a little bit better 
about that assumption.  The movement in the short rate relative to the long rate, once you control 
for e
xpectations, seemed 
to conform reasonably well with some of the inte
rest rate models that 
we have. 
So I think the short answer is you would get a widening of spreads, and to the extent that 
Treasuries are
n™t 
the thing that matter
s for economic activity, you would get less of an effect.  
On the other hand, if you were to do mortgage-
backed securities purchases, and the same 
hypothesis came up, then presumably you™d get a bigger effect just on the MBS rate, and 

presumably mortgages a
s well.
  And so the scenario you bring up might be an argument for 
having both asset classes
Šan argument
 that we didn™t cover in the memo.  I
f there is 
this 
segmentation across asset types, then buying both 
Treasuries
 and MBS may be a good thing to 
do, because then you will be able to affect both of those 
rates
, instead of relying on the purchases 
of 
Treasuries
 to also push down mortgage and MBS yields along with it. 
MR. PLOSSER.  To interrupt just a second on that point, though, that begs the question 
about 
buying MBS
Šlet™s say, 
even if it might help the mortgage market
.  You don™t have any 
evidence on whether that pass
-through 
to corporate and other asset classes is either differential or 
            
      
      
                 
the same or less than it would be with 
Treasuries
? Are you assuming 
that other asset classes 
would follow the same amount then, in that kind of story? 
MR. CARPENTER.  Right.  So I was trying to go into the counterfactual world where we 
are assuming this asset segmentation
.  And so there, 
there are 
lots of other hypotheses.  O
ur 
models sort ofŠ
and they are empirical models, where we get the results based on actual data
Š suggest that the purchases of MBS do have the same general effect on longer-
term interest rates 
by pulling out the longer-term assets and pushing things down.  I
f we had a different model, we 
would have to confront all of those same questions that you asked, including
, if there is a 
segmentation, what sort of 
pass
-through would there be?  But the models that we have, and the 
estimation that we have done, sugge
st that we are getting more or less the same effect on longer
-term rates of MBS and Treasuries
.  I was just saying, in the alternate version of the world, 
where 
there is a segmentation, 
it might be an argument for buying two different types of assets that 
we 
didn™t discuss in the memo. 
Your second question about standard errors is a really good one, and it is hard.  There are 
lots of different models that we have coming together, and I think Dave can probably speak 

really knowledgeably about the standard errors, especially from the FRB/US model.  But there is 

layering
, model upon model, 
to try to get these effects. 
I think we feel pretty good that we know 
for sure the sign of the first derivative, which is in what direction these things would happen.  

We pr
esented a lot of results, though, for different-
sized LSAPs in the memos, as Michelle 
pointed outŠ$750 
billion
, $1 trillion, 
$2 trillion. 
I think we can™t say with any confidence that 
we know the difference between a $750 billion LSAP and a $1 trillion LS
AP.  We are pretty sure 
we know that the 
$1 trillion
 one does more, but those are so close to each other that I don™t have 
       
              
      
                      
     
     
   
         much confidence in being able to differentiate.  
It™s t
hat sort of uncertainty 
I see, b
ut I don™t 
know if you want to talk about the 
macro effects. 
MR. PLOSSER.  I™m sorry.  Just to push it just a little bit.  So rather than the difference 
between 
$750 billion 
and 
$1 trillion, let™s just take one of them, the 
$1 trillion
 one.  And you 
estimate, what was it, 62 basis points on the unempl
oyment rate after two years?  Was that it? I 
can™t remember the exact number.  Whatever that number was, can you give me a standard 
error 
on that point estimate? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I™m going to come to that directly.  
First
, just to reiterate what 
Seth s
aid, your logic is correct.  To the extent that you think 
that the 
pass
-through 
from buying 
Treasuries 
into corporate 
bond yields
, stock market prices
, the exchange rate, 
and 
things like 
that
, are 
less than in the model simulations
, you are going to get smaller results. 
Second, I agree with Seth that the 
pass
-through 
effects 
that 
we have in there
Šas we have 
been saying right from the start back in 2008, early 2009Š
are
 highly uncertain.  And as time has 
gone on, I think the one source of uncertainty that has gone down is the 
concern
 about whether 
purchases 
would have any effect
.  At least we 
now 
think they ha
ve an effect. 
But having said 
that, 
there is 
still 
much uncertainty around these estimates. 
In terms of actually coming up with a confidence interval, I can™t do that, but I c
an say 
the following qualitative things that 
I think 
are helpful. 
First, take the model that Min We
i and 
Canlin 
Li 
developed that we are mainly using for pricing the effects on Treasuries
 and MBS.  
Now, that model kicks out a standard error.  I don™t know what it is, but it does not 
have 
tight 
error bands.  There is considerable width 
to the confidence intervals.  That said, we think the 
number is reasonable.  But could the number 
be somewhat smaller or somewhat bigger?  Yes. 
One point on why 
it could be bigger is, if you go back to the first LSAP, the event studies 
                                        
          
           suggested 
the LSAP
 might have lowered 
Treasury 
yields by 100 basis points.  
In the analysis that 
Min and 
Canlin
 are doing, it™s 50.  So that™s an example, 
where they are not necessarily taking 
the highest-
side estimates. 
There are other studies that suggest that we could be getting lower effects on financial 
markets than in the FRB/US analysis.  On the other hand, 
FRB
/US ignores some things, 
such as 
the 
potential 
pass
-through to house prices
; it has no effect 
in the simulations
.  And, there 
are 
confidence effects
 that Seth alluded to.  Even if you knew what the financial effects would be, 
there would still be a subs
tantial confidence interval for the economic effects
.  I don™t have them 
off the top of my head, but we have generated confidence bands for FRB/
US 
impulse responses 
over the years.  They are a lot like 
those in other models.  They are fairly significant 
around what 
the unemployment rate 
effect 
would be.  
The effect
 could be considerably closer to zero, or it 
could be bigger.  L
et™s say that
, for 
a given LSAP, the point estimate is a half a percentage point 
on the unemployment rate after three years
Šthat™s t
rue 
for the way we are scoring 
alternative 
B. Could it be a quarter?  Yes.  A quarter 
is certainly inside the 
70 percent 
confidence interval
.  Could it be three-quarters of a percentage point? Yes.  That would be inside the 70 
percent
.  So 
that™s just sa
ying what
, I think
, everyone agrees upon: there are v
ery wide confiden
ce intervals 
on these effects. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  While I was listening to Seth™s disclaimers at the beginning, it sort of 
sounds like an Allegra ad on television [l
aughter]
: These are the risks, et cetera.  And the papers 
actually were quite good.  The paper you particularly referenced had a lot of disclaimers in it.  

And what I am interested in seeing vetted more thoroughly is the degree to which this 

compounds the complexi
ty of a
n exit when we decide to exit. 
          
          
                        
    
     It seems to me one of the virtues of, 
particularly
, ﬁThe 
Effect of an 
Additional $1 T
rillion 
LSAP 
on the E
xit 
Strategy
ﬂ was the discussion of substantial uncertainty.  There are lots of 
quotes in there that are qualified. 
It seems to me that the proponents of 
an extended LSAP would 
take a view from a signaling channel perspective that one of its benefits is that 
it is effective 
precisely because it makes it more difficult to either raise short
-term interest rates or sh
rink the 
balance sheet for some time.
  And in a way, what I am concerned aboutŠand I am interested in 
learning more
Šis the degree to which we tie the hands of our successors, or if not tieŠ
maybe 
that is too strong a wordŠwe tangle their hands, and how much 
more difficult the exit strategy 
becomes. 
It strikes me that the stronger the recovery
Šthat is, the more rapidly we achieve 
equilibrium interest rates
Šthe harder it is going to be for us to exit.  And I would like to see that 
vetted a little bit more. 
I thought the papers touched on that, particularly the paper you referred 
to, but I think it would be helpful, Mr. Chairman, if we got a better sense of what complexities 
this imposes upon exit at the right time. Just a comment. 
MR. CARPENTER.  No, that™s 
really helpful. 
MR. FISHER.  I don™t know what your take is on this. 

MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely.  We clearly have a lot of details to write down.  So if 
the Committee wanted to exit 
next week
, or something like that, we would have lots and lots and 
lots an
d lots of details to write down, none of which are we prepared to give you right now, 
because the world presumably, between now and exit, is going to change.  And so it is going to 

take some time. 
That said, I just want to leave you with one thought.  When 
we were writing these 
memos, one of the first points that we wanted to have clear in our heads before writing themŠ
all 

of the staff who were working on this, including staff at the Desk who are experts on both 
      
  
                            
      
    
           
  
financial markets as well as 
the execution of things and the staff 
at the Board
Šwas
, does 
anybody think that if we were to do another LSAP as envisioned in these memos, that when the 
Committee wants to tighten monetary policy
, the staff would not be able to follow through on 
that
?  Because I wanted to make sure that everybody was able to look in their heart of hearts and 
say, ﬁWe think that the Committee will be able to tighten policy appropriately to hit its
 dual 
mandate,ﬂ and everybody said, ﬁYes, we think we are in that situation.ﬂ How we do it is not 

perfectly clear yet
, for a variety of reasons
.  But we would have had to write a very, very 
different memo
, I think, if we really thought there was some risk to the conduct of monetary 
policy in terms of our ability to execute the exit strategy. 
MR. FISHER.  You point out in the memo that there is a learning process here, 
in terms 
of the different tools that might be used.  But I still think we should press this in our discussion 

before proceeding. 
MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely. 

MR. FISHE
R.  Yes, sir. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I 
want to follow up on one point b
ecause it also relates to what 
President Plosser was talking about.  I think, 
whether it is connected to fear that we won™t be able 

to exit or whether it is a signaling that the Committee is willing to be more accommodative 

persistently out in the future, those policy expectations 
can have a big effect 
on some of the 
results
.  Ofte
n, the way we score thingsŠand I think I threw out a half a percentage point a 
second agoŠ
doesn™t take 
into account this additional signaling effect
 about the future path of the 

funds rate t
hat 
you potentially can get.  T
here is some evidence from the even
t studies that you 
did get 
it with the first two LSAP programs
Šthat by announcing 
a program
, you are also 
sending the signal that you are going to be more willing to keep rates lower for longer. 
      
           
               
        
           
    MR. FISHER.  That™s what I was
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right. 
At least as far as the model scores it, if that™s fully 
credible, if the expected funds rate path the market has really flattens out, in principle, you get a 
nontrivial kick from that. 
MR. CARPENTER. 
The only thing to highlight, though, is the difference 
between a 
willingness to keep the interest rate lower
 for longer versus an ability 
to raise them
.  And we 
don™t currently worry about the second partŠwe don™t worry about the ability to raise interest 

rates.  But what the Committee decides to do, obviously, is about the willingness to keep interest 

rates lower
. MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Does the FRB/US model allow you to 
isolate the kind of intermediate estimates
Šthat might be credit aggregates or asset price index 
levels
Šthat fit between lower interest rates and GDP growth, so that you could actually get a 
sense of the transmission mechanism working through the model? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
You can snip cer
tain transmission mechanisms and see what it 
does to the total effect 
if you
 just zero it out.  We have done experiments like that, and what it 
shows is, roughly speaking, changing 
Treasury 
yields, if it doesn™t go out into any other asset 
prices, doesn™t do anything in the model, to a first approximation.  
What matters is that it goes 

into private long-term interest rates, like MBS and corporates; second, that it goes into 
the 
stock 

market; and, third, that it goes into exchange rates.  So you can think of 
it as 
three channels
: cost 
of capital, wealth effects, and exchange rate.
  The model says each of those is worth 
roughly a 
third of the overall effect.  So if you didn™t believe one of the channels was operating, or you 
      
                                  
  thought it was operating only half 
as effectively as it usually does, you could then scale the 
numbers down with that rough math.  And that would be approximately correct.  
But in terms of 
what it implies for bank lending, or something like that, no, the model doesn™tŠ 
MR. LOCKHART. 
It doesn™t explicitly estimate the
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It doesn™t have any explicit predictions about what happens to 
bank lending or anything like that. 
MR. LOCKHART.  So to simplify, for my purposes, the exercise assumes some kind of 
historic
al correlation between lower interest rates and economic activity. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Which may or may not prevail in this current situation. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Which may or may not prevail, with one very important 
caveat.  Because housing is at such an extraordinarily low percentage of GDP, in essence, 
that 

historical correlation has been marked down in these analyses.  Ordinarily housing is a big 

source of a kick.  In these scenarios, the direct channel on housing construction activity is worth 

hard
ly anything.  It™s a little bit, but it™s very small.  That could be right or wrong, but in the 
results that Seth was showing and 
that 
were in all the other analys
is we™ve sent you, 
there is,
 in 
that very important sense, 
an attenuation of the effectivenes
s of monetary policy, whether it™s 
conventional or unconventional right now. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to follow up on this issue 
about confidence intervals.  In 
figure
 1, there would be data uncertainty; there would be 
uncertainty about transmission channels; there would be uncertainty about models.  If you 

layered all of that together, you are going to get very wide confidence intervals.  But on 
              
          
    
   
          
              exhibit 
2, where we are
 looking at the SOMA holdings, there we can sort of mechanically map 
out, more or less, what is going to happen.  There is some uncertainty based on interest rates
, and 
so on, but 
I just want to be clear on this
: This is
 much more solid, I would say, than page 1, 
which is very uncertain and very speculative about 
what the effects might be. Is that a fair 
assessment? 
MS. EZER. 
Our portfolio projections depend importantly on the interest rate 
assumptions that were provided, so those confidence intervals will feed through into our 
projections when it comes to things like Federal Reserve income over time.
  When it comes to, 
say, the top-
left
 panel, the path of the portfolio over time, the confidence interval is probably a 
little bit smaller
, provided that the 
assumptions that we made about the timing of liftoff and the 
strategy used for exit remain constant.
  There the confidence band would be in your projections 
for prepayments on your MBS portfolio.  But since you are assuming that you are going to get 

rid o
f your holdings of agency securities over a set period of time, it is just going to change kind 
of the wiggles in how MBS declines over that period.  But we would still eliminate it over a 
five
-year period with confidence. 
MR. BULLARD.  Just one other comment, Mr. Chairman.  On exhibit 2, 
panel
 4, ﬁD
eferred 
Asset.
ﬂ  T
hat is kind of a nice term
, ﬁdeferred asset.
ﬂ As far as I know, the Committee 
has never used the deferred asset.  It strikes me as a possible political firefight to bring that into 

play.  
All 
of the scenarios here, other than 
option 1, if I™m reading this correctly, would bring the 
deferred asset into play
, with possible repercussions, I think, 
for the Federal Reserve. 
MR. CARPENTER. 
Just a small bit of clarification:  I
t has never been the case that we 
have had
, for the Federal Reserve 
System as a whole
, a deferred asset
.  It has 
been the case on 
several occasions that there has been a deferred asset for a given Reserve Bank. 
        
       
                     
     
        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think the defense in that case would be that 
the total, 
which was including the very high 
remittances
 early in the period, still would be higher than 
historical norms. 
MR. POTTER.  That™s correct. 
MR. BULLARD.  That might be a hard story to tell when the time comes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair
man
, you have a two-hander? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
  Yes.  I think the confidence intervals on interest rates are 
going to be almost proportionate to the confidence intervals on the real economy variables, 

because you are not going to know what the trajectory o
f short
-term rates is going to be or the 
shape of the yield curve. And, in fact, you are probably even more uncertain about the shape of 

the yield curve because you have never gone from purchasing all of these assets to selling all of 

these assets.  So we
 don™t really know how the market is going to react to that. 
The second thing I just want to note very briefly is a lot of this also depends on what 
monetary framework you are actually going back to.  And the presumption of the staff memo is 

that we are going back to a 
corridor system.  But you might decide, as you go through this, that 

maybe IOER works pretty well. 
And 
you might actually want to go back to a floor system that 
would allow you quite a bit more discretion in terms of how your exit actually works.  And that 

would feed into a lot of these projections.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Again, I want to thank the staff for all of the work 
you 
did to help prepare us for this meeting, including the work on LSAPs, but also work on other 
tools like IOER.  So we appreciate it very much.  
Let me turn to item 
2 and cal
l on Simon Potter 
to discuss financial developments. 
                 
                             
    
                                                                             MR. POTTER.
2 Thank you
, Mr. Chairman.  Over the course of the 
intermeeting 
period, global financial markets were dominated by three areas of focus: 
the ECB™s 
new Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) pr
ogram, fluctuating expectations for 
further policy accommodation from the FOMC, and continuing concerns over global 

growth prospects.  By the end of the 
intermeeting
 period, market perceptions of the 
effectiveness of policy measures to at least attenuate t
ail risks facing the global 
economy contributed to improved risk sentiment in financial markets, as seen in 

higher advanced economy sovereign yields and stock markets. 
I will begin with developments in U.S. interest rates, which in the Treasury 
market were moderately higher over the 
intermeeting
 period.  The upper-
left panel 
shows the decomposition of changes in nominal yields for 5- and 10-
year securities 
during key portions of the intermeeting period.  
Nominal 
Treasury yields increased 
significantly early in the period, with the 10-year yield up by more than 35 basis 

points at one point.  Most of the 
initial increase in yields was driven by improved risk 
sentiment on expectations of a forceful ECB policy respons
e, as well as by stronger
-than
-expected U.S. economic data
.  The rise in yields partially reversed following the 
release of the August FOMC minutes and continued somewhat after the Jackson Hole 

symposium.  The move lower in the 5-
year real component was co
nsistent with 
growing expectations for policy easing.  
To date, there is little evidence of worries 
of the fiscal cliff affecting pricing in the Treasury or other markets. 
At the same time, inflation compensation
, as derived from inflation
-indexed 
securities
, rose at the 5
- and 10-
year tenors
.  Higher energy prices contributed to the 
increase in inflation breakevens, particularly at shorter maturities
.  However, spot and 
forward 5
-year breakeven inflation rates remain well within recent historical ranges, 
as seen in the upper-right panel. 
As shown in the middle-left panel, dealers continue to assign the highest 
probability of a first increase in the 
target
 rate to the second half of 2015.  However, 
the distribution has continued to shift from earlier liftoff
 dates and into 2015 and 
beyond.  The survey results are broadly consistent with market-
implied measures of 
liftoff, as market prices indicate significant odds that the target rate will not be 

incre
ased until the middle of 2015. 
Immediately following the F
OMC statement on August 1, interest rates increased
, as markets had been pricing in close to even odds of an extension of the forward 

guidance
.  The middle-right panel shows an event study based on the small sample of 

forward
-guidance surprises.  Reading from left to right, the blue dots represent the 
three events in our study: 
first, the decision to maintain the late
-2014 forward 
guidance at the 
most recent 
meeting; second, the extension of the forward guidance to 

late
 2014 at the January meeting; and third, the introduction of the original mid-2013 
language in August 2011.  
The 
x-
axis measures the surprise component of these 
decisions, which we measure in months and derive from the difference between the 

announced 
forward
-guidance date and the ex
pected month of liftoff calculated from 
2 The mate
rials used by Mr. Potter are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 
      
               
  
    
       
      
                 
          
   our d
ealer surveys
.  The 
y-axis measures the change in the 10
-year Treasury yield 
after the FOMC announcement
.  Alternative methods of measuring the surprise in 
months yield broadly similar results
.  Averaging across 
these measures suggests a 
rule of thumb of roughly a 1 basis point change in the 10-
year Treasury yield for each 
month of 
forward
-guidance 
surprise
.  Of course, measuring announcement effects is 
complicated by the interaction between forward guidance and 
expectations for the 
balance sheet
, including exit, which this analysis does not consider.  In the three 
events examined
, there were no explicit changes to the balance sheet or exit 
principles. 
Turning to other domestic assets, MBS spreads to Treasuries ar
e narrower over 
the 
intermeeting
 period, as seen in your lower-
left panel
.  Investors attributed much of 
the fluctuation in MBS spreads over the period to shifting expectations for Federal 

Reserve purchases, especially in the last few days.  By contrast, t
wo other 
intermeeting developments may serve to tighten mortgage market conditions on the 

margin
.  First, the FHFA announced that it will raise guarantee fees on GSE loans by 
10 basis points starting in the fourth quarter of this year, a fee that lenders w
ill likely 
pass on to borrowers.  Second, the Treasury announced that the wind-down of the two 

GSEs™ portfolios will accelerate to a 15 percent yearly rate, from 10 percent at 

present
.  Much of the wind-down is expected to occur through paydowns, 
necessita
ting only a small portion of sales from the portfolio over the next year.  

Given this, investors do not expect the accelerated wind-downs to be disruptive to the 

MBS market, and spreads to Treasuries were little changed following the 

announcement. 
The final panel looks at how recent developments have affected 
U.S. 
risk assets
.  Overall, the stabilization in European financial markets and heightened expectations 

for domestic policy easing have supported both equity and debt markets.  
The 

S&P
 500 index rose over the intermeeting period by more than 4 percent and is 
currently at its highest level since the beginning of 2008.  
Near
-term uncertainty, as 
measured by the VIX, is near multiyear lows
.  High
-yield bond spreads have 
tightened to levels last observed in
 2011:Q3, and corporate bond issuance in July and 
August has been higher than 
over the same period last year. 
Your second exhibit turns to developments in Europe and global asset prices more 
broadly.  
The most important 
development 
in global financial markets was the 
steadily growing expectation that the ECB would announce an effective new program 

to purchase shorter-
dated peripheral sovereign debt
.  As seen in the top-
left panel, 
these expectations led to a significant narrowing of
 peripheral sovereign debt spreads 
to German yields, particularly at shorter maturities wi
thin the scope of the program. 
Many of the uncertainties regarding the new program were resolved by the ECB 
announcements last week, leading to a further narrowing of peripheral spreads, 

additional gains in European equities, and appreciation of the euro against the 
U.S. 
dollar and the Swiss franc.  
Indeed, euro
-area financial markets have exhibited a 
greater degree of stability over the 
intermeeting
 period, and investors do not appear to 
be seeking significant protection 
against 
large swings in asset prices
, as seen in the 
                                       
    
  
  
               upper-
right panel
, ﬁImplied Volatility on 
Euro
pean Equities and on the Euro-
Dollar 
Currency 
Pair
.ﬂ 
As Steve Kamin will note in his briefing, the OMT
 program has the potential to 
ease financial stresses but must be accompanied by fundamental reform measures at 

the national level
.  Changes in forward peripheral spreads to Germany appear 
consistent with this view
.  Your middle-left panel shows Spanish an
d Italian 
five
-year 
debt spreads 
relative to Germany on a 
five
-year
-forward basis
.  These forward 
five
-year spreads have come down much less than spot spreads on instruments that are 

within the maturity range
 of the ECB™s purchase program. 
In the near 
term, financial markets will face a number of uncertainties, including 
the ongoing EU and IMF review of Greek compliance with the terms of its aid 

program.  In addition, for those countries 
not already in a program, the ECB will not 
activate the OMT unless
 there is agreement on conditions for accessing fiscal support 
facilities
.  It is unclear whether Spain will take this step w
ithout renewed market 
pressure. 
Looking forward, both Spain and Italy need to ramp up debt issuance over the 
remainder of the year
, after issuing at a somewhat tepid pace in recent months
.  This 
can be seen in the middle-
right panel
.  Spanish and Italian banks have historically 
been a significant source of demand for their own sovereign™s debt.  
However, that 

source of demand has drop
ped
 off in recent months.  As shown in the bottom-
left 
panel, since the ECB™s last three
-year LTRO, Italian banks have added to their 

sovereign debt holdings at a greatly reduced pace
.  Spanish banks have actually 
brought down their holdings of sovereign debt since the first quarter, given their own 

funding difficulties.  On a more positive note, anecdotal reports suggest that asset 

managers are reducing their underweight positions on Spanish and Italian debt, and 

access to primary debt markets has improved 
for Spanish and Italian banks. 
The last panel of this exhibit focuses on global risk assets 
more 
broadly.  
The 
accommodative policy stance of many central banks has been supportive of equity 

markets in recent months, particularly in the 
United States
 and Europe.  
In contrast, 
emerging market equities have generally underperformed, reflecting investors™ views 

that th
ese regions may be experiencing a slowdown in economic activity.  China™s 
Shanghai Composite I
ndex remains at levels last seen in early 2009. 
Your final exhibit focuses on recent Desk operations and market expectations for 
additional policy actions as reported in the d
ealer 
survey.  
Over the intermeeting 
period, the Desk purchased $60 billion in longer-term Treasury securities and sold or 

allowed
 to mature without reinvestment $58.5 billion of shorter-
dated securities under 
the maturity extension program (MEP).  These operations continue to proceed 

smoothly.  In particular, the Treasury security purchase operations have recently met 

with better de
mand.  As shown in the upper-left panel, the previous trend toward 
lower coverage ratios and less favorable prices for the purchase
 operations reversed 

somewhat. 
       
              
             
  
                          
           As shown in the upper-right panel, the MEP transactions have been lengthening 
the average dura
tion of the SOMA™s Treasury holdings in line with the policy intent.  

This measure is expected to reach about 
eight 
years if the program continues through 
the end of the year, far longer than the historical range of two to three 
years.  This has 
pulled the average duration of the overall portfolio higher as well, given that the 

duration of the MBS portfolio has recently remained steady at around 
two 
years. 
The next two panels focus on the reinvestment of principal payments on the 
SOMA™s holdings of agency debt and MBS.  Over the intermeeting period, the Desk 

purchased $33 billion of MBS.  These reinvestment purchases have generally 

proceeded smoothly, with market trading volumes remaining steady and only some 

instances of specialness in the coupons being pur
chased. 
The middle-left panel shows the monthly pace of paydowns, which has 
averaged 
about $26 billion since October of last year.  Given continued low interest rates, we 

expect the paydowns to run at roughly $31 billion per month through the end of the 

year.  Such a pace would suggest that 
the 
MBS purchases resulting from the 
reinvestments of the agency paydowns would constitute about one-third of the gross 

issuance of TBA
-eligible securities. 
The middle-right panel shows the distribution for the 30-
year sector of principal 
paydowns to the MBS portfolio, as well as the coupons in which the Desk has 

reinvested.  The portfolio continues to shift into lower-coupon securities, reflecting 

the overall decline in 
rates and the decision to concentrate purchases in newly
 issued 
TBA securities that are more liquid and more directly linked to the primary rate
.  Since June, low interest rates have led to paydowns of holdings of lower-coupons 

MBS, including the 3.5 and 4 percent coupons.  
Newly issued securities also have 

longer duration than those paying down, so these purchases have extended the 

duration of the MBS portfolio. 
Your final two panels of this exhibit show results from the most recent 
dealer 
survey.  
We use
d a phone poll this Monday to update some of the answers, following 

the significant developments in Europe and the e
mployment 
report.  As seen in the 
lower
-left panel, dealers assign a 90 percent probability to any easing action being 
announced at this mee
ting
.  More specifically, dealers place very high odds of 
80 percent on a change to the rate guidance.  The median respondent also saw a 

65 percent chance of an announced increase in the size of the SOMA portfolio.  

Expectations for these policy actions fi
rmed somewhat following last Friday™s 
employment report.  The derived joint probability for an extension of the forward 

guidance and the announcement of additional asset purchases increased to 57 percent 

in this Monday™s phone survey, up from 46 percent in 
the 
dealer survey. 
The panel to the right shows the dealers™ projections for the size and distribution 
of additional asset purchases anticipated through the end of 2013, as derived from 

respondents™ expected path of the SOMA balance sheet.  Respondents ex
pect the size 
of the balance sheet to grow by around $600 billion by the end of 2013.  Median 

expectations are for an increase of $300 billion in Treasury and about $300 billion in 
             
                  
                 MBS holdings by the end of 2013.  While not asked specifically about the st
ructure of 
a potential asset purchase program, some respondents indicated in their written 

comments that they expect an open
-ended program conditioned on economic 
variables.  Mr. Chairman, this completes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions for Simon?  President 
Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Two questions for Mr. Potter.  The first has 
to do with 
the 
duration of our holdings of agency MBS.  The graph indicates the average 
duration of our current holdings is around two.  Now, would our average duration of purchases 

under what we™re going to talk about later today or tomorrow, would that be substantially larger? 

Do you have a sense of what that would be? 
MR. POTTER.  Yes.  Somewhere between four and six.  Is that right, N
ate
? MR. WUERFFEL. 
That™s correct
. MR. LACKER.  Four and six? 

MR. POTTER. 
Yes
. MR. LACKER.  Okay.  So the other question I haveŠ
I was at a conference a couple of 
weeks ago.  I believe I saw you there, Mr. Potter, andŠ 
MR. POTTER. 
Symposium
, yes
. MR. LACKER.  An economist there was arguing that the effect of our forward guidance 
occurred more via revisions in investors™ expectations about future economic conditions rather 

than a change in their views about our future reaction function, and 
becaus
e you folks have such 
rich interactions with the dealer community and you talk to them about 
this forward guidance, I 
wondered if you guys had a view as to the economist™s assertion. 
MR. POTTER. 
Those dealer economists also 
read about
 Jackson Hole.  Some of 
them 
were there
, so I think they viewed that with quite a lot of interest.  I
n the dealer survey
, some 
               
     
            
        
        
      
   people thought that the change in rate guidance might be not just a calendar type, but trying to 
distinguish it from just a pure expectation of where you expected the economy to be.  I don™t 

think it™s possible to get a very clear answer from these respondents, because I don™t think the 

FOMC
™s been completely clear on this either. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Simon, I think I heard you correctly.  So we™ve been purchasing about a 
third of the eligible TBAs, and you also mentioned that there™s a planned 
increase
 in the 
rate 
of 
GSE wind
-downs to 15 percent from the 10 percent level earlier.  I
s that likely to change? If we 
were to proc
eed with just 
$30 or $40 billion, as outlined in a
lternative 
B, would that change our 
percentage of the eligible TBA purchases, given the contraction that™s occurring among the 

agencies
? If my memory is correct, they had about $1.4 trillion.  It goes back 
to last March. 
I can™t remember the last time I looked at the numbers.  So that™s about $15 billion; 15 
percent 

translates to about $15 billion, I think, in the contraction.  I™m just curious if it 
affe
cts the 
percentage of eligible TBA that we™d be hold
ing if we were to proceed. 
MR. POTTER.  No, I don™t think so. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

MS. LOGAN. 
We™re currently purchasing about a third of gross issuance.  That number 
is going to go up to 60 to 75 percent, depending on which option the Committee chooses. 
MR. FISHER.  Right, s
o that is not affected by
Š MS. LOGAN
.  The reduction that the GSEs are doing is happening 
in more than just 
TBAs
; they™re reducing in other types of securities 
as well
.  So I would think that number is 
probably fairly small.  In terms of the total amount outstanding, we™re currently going to have 

about 18 percent of the MBS, and that would move to about 25 percent. 
       
    
   
      
             
         
        
    
   
 MR. FISHER.  Okay
, thank you.
  And just an observation, if you look at your 
panel
 5 and
, particularly
, the high-
yield 
spread 
on panel
 6, things obviously are going our way.  T
his is 
what we would like to see, as well as the equity price response.  What doesn™t seem to be going 
our wayŠand I only point it out as an offset, even though it™s a short time horizonŠ
is 
it seems 

that the 
breakeven 
inflation rates
Šwhether it™s the 
5-year
, 5-year forward
; the 
5-year
; the 
10-year, which is not on this chartŠbottomed in the spring of this year, and the slope is upward.  

We can talk
, perhaps
, later.  I don™t know if we™ve done an LSAP-
type program in a context 
of 
rising inflation expectations or 
not. I think there was at least a 
chart in the 
Teal
book that would 
indicate we haven™t done one yet under those circumstances. 
But I just point out, Mr. Chairman, that if you draw 
a line from the bottom of the 5-
year 
rate, it really bottomed out in the summer of 2011 and has been on the rise. I™m not saying it™s 

dangerous, and it may be something that we would like to encourage, 
or some at this table would 

like to encourage, but we do have rising inflation expectations.  And to say inflation expectations 

are contained
Šwe might think about how we want to phrase that as we get down to the policy 
statement of tomorrow. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I™m not sure I take the same inference.  The 5-
by-5 
is pretty 
flat and is lower than it was last year. 
MR. FISHER.  
And 
the 
5-
year? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  At
 the margin, and the 5-year is obviously being affected by 
the oil price movements. 
MR. FISHER.  And the 
10-year also is not on this chart, and then gold prices, of course, 
have increased significantly
, for those 
who 
care about that ancient relic. 
       
      
           
           
                
   
            
  
                                                     MR. POTTER. It is true that the deflation risk we can calculate is lower than it was in 
2010. MR. FISHER.  Right.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questi
ons for Simon? [No response] 
Okay.  Seeing 
none, we need to vote to ratify domestic open market operations since August.  
Without 

objection?  Okay.  Our next item is the economic and financial situation, and David Wilcox and 

his colleagues will make that
 presentation. 
MR. WILCOX.
3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think there should be a single 
summary exhibit. 
You all may be relieved to know that my prepared text includes 
1,192 words, and I do not plan to ad lib an additional 2,000 words into my delivery.  
[Laughter] 
As you can see from the upper-
left panel of the forecast summary exhibit, the 
near
-term outlook for real GDP growth in last week™s edition of the Tealbook is 
broadly similar to the one that we sent you in July.  To be sure, the July gain in real 

PCE was better than we had expected.  However, consumer sentiment
Šshown in the 
lower
-left panel
Šhas remained downbeat, job gains have been modest, and the price 
of gasoline has moved back up, all of which caused us to largely discount the 

favorable spending news.  Similarly, July shipments of capital goods were stronger 

than we had expected, but forward-looking indicators, including the continued decline 

in the capital goods orders data, as well as the subdued responses to various surveys 

on capital spending plans and business conditions, are consistent with only subdued 

near
-term increases in business outlays.  If you squint hard at the upper-
left panel, 
you will detect that we shifted a little GDP growth from the second half of this year 

into the first half of next, reflecting our assessment that the drought will depress farm 

output in the second half of this year by more than we had predicted in July. 
The one component of aggregate demand that has seemed to have been on a 
somewhat stronger trajectory relative to our expectation in the July Tealbook was net 

exports.  Even so, last week™s forecast called for GDP growth to average just 

1.8 percent through the middle of next year, about in line with our prediction for the 

growth of potential over this period. 
Since the Tealbook closed, the main piece of economic news was last Friday™s 
employment report.  In a seeming exception to Dave Stockton™s famous description 

of the usual shelf-
life of t
he staff economic forecast, our jar of mayonnaise survived 
its first 48 hours in the Mojave Desert with only relatively minor signs of spoilage.  

[Laughter]
  The red line in the bottom-right panel summarizes our effort to combine 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
          
       
                                   
      
   
 the signals from the estab
lishment and household surveys (the latter of which is not 
shown on the chart because it is so noisy compared 
with the establishment results), 

and to control for weather effects and recession-
related seasonal adjustment 
distortions.  As you can see from the downward tilt toward the end of that line, the 

estimated underlying pace of private payroll employment growth has trended lower 

over the course of this year and now 
is 
at the low end of the range that it has occupied 
during the past 2½ years.  The unempl
oyment rate unexpectedly declined 
0.2 percentage point, but like many other analysts, we have been inclined to see more 

weakness than strength in the totality of the results from the household survey, given 

that the employment measure from that survey and 
the participation rate both 
declined.  Based on our projected path for real GDP over the next several quarters, we 

continue to expect the unemployment rate to average around 8¼ percent through the 

first half of next year.  I should also note that the workweek was lower than we had 

expected, and average hourly earnings were flat
, rather than increasing slightly as we 
had expected.  In combination, these results suggest a modestly weaker trajectory for 

compensation and
, therefore,
 household spending than we had factored into the 
Tealbook. 
Two other key pieces of information released since the Tealbook were also 
weaker than expected.  In particular, vehicle assembly plans now point to a slower 

pace of motor vehicle production in the third and fourth quarters th
an we had 

projected in the Tealbook, whileŠ
as Steve will discuss shortly
Šthe latest foreign 
trade data were slightly to the soft side of our expectations in terms of the
ir implications for GDP growth. 
In all, these bits of information would cause us to shave about ¼ percentage point 
off our forecast for the pace of real GDP growth during the second half of this year, 

leaving our forecasted average growth rate for this quarter and next at an anemic 

1¼ percent. 
Turning to the medium term, we upgraded our outlook slightly relative to our July 
projection.  As Steve will discuss, the improvement, such as it is, partly reflects a 

somewhat less worrisome situation in Europe than we had previously believed.  As 

we described in the Tealbook, even after factoring in the disappointment that we think 

would ensue from an announcement of no change in the stance of monetary policy at 

the conclusion of this meeting, we judge that stock prices would remain on a slightly 

higher trajectory and the dollar would be slightly weaker than we assumed in the 

previous projection.  These small positive influences are only partly offset by the 

increase in oil prices, part of which may itself reflect the improvement in sentiment 

related to the crisis in Europe. 
The small upward revision 
to real GDP over the medium term led us to shave a 
little off of our projected path for the unemployment rate, which is shown in the top-

right panel of the exhibit.  Even by the end of next year, however, we expect no 

significant reduction in the unemploy
ment rate. As real GDP accelerates more into 
2014, the unemployment rate declines about ½ percentage point, ending that year at 

about 7½ 
percent. 
         
    
    
     
         
   
   
     
         
     
       
    
  
  Aside from the crisis in Europe, the other main concern that continues to loom 
over the domestic outlook is the fiscal cliff.  On this front, there have been no major 

developments recently, and we continue to expect none, 
at least through the 

November elections.  At this stage, I can only assure you that our decision to stand 

pat on our fiscal policy assumptions reflects no lack of concern or uncertainty on our 

part:  The fiscal cliff continues to figure prominently in our thinking as a serious 

threa
t to the still
-anemic recovery. 
Turning to the inflation outlook, the incoming data on core PCE price inflationŠ 
the 
middle
-right panel
Šhave been close to our expectations.  We continue to project 
that core inflation will hold steady at about 1½ percent through the end of 2014, 

reflecting anchored inflation expectations, a persistent margin of labor and product 

market sl
ack, and modest gains in imported goods prices. 
In response to the upward move in spot prices for crude oil since the July 
Tealbook, we have marked up our near-
term projection for headline PCE inflation
Š the middle
-left panel.  We have, however, made only small revisions to our near-
term 
food price forecast.  Although we now expect the quantity effects of the drought to be 

worse than we had forecast in July, the futures prices that we used in preparing our 

July food price projection had apparently already in
corporated almost all of the price 

effects.  Despite the upward pressure from food prices that we think will begin to 

show through around the end of this year, we expect headline inflation to step down 

slightly in the first part of next year, as the antici
pated reduction in crude oil prices 

implied by futures markets pushes down retail energy prices.  Steve will now 

continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.  In 1972, when Chinese Prime Minister Zhou Enl
ai was asked what 
he thought was the historic impact of the 
French 
Revolution, he famously answered: 
ﬁIt™s too soon to tell.ﬂ 
[Laughter] 
By those standards, assessing the implications of 
the European Central Bank™s plans to intervene in peripheral debt markets would 

seem hopelessly premature.  And yet, as Simon has described, anticipations of 

aggressive ECB action have substantially calmed European financial markets, slightly 

brightening an admittedly still
-cloudy outlook. 
As described in its announcement last week, the ECB plans to purchase sovereign 
debt on the secondary market, provided that the beneficiary governments enter into an 

arrangement with the region™s financial backstop facilities and agree to policy 

conditionality.  Although the ECB will be announcing neither a target ceiling for 

yields on peripheral debt nor the amounts it intends to purchase, it has signaled a 

more aggressive and sustained program than its earlier forays into bond markets. 
Beyond simply comforting investors that the ECB is riding to the rescue, these 
plans could ease financial stre
sses in a number of ways.  First, by lowering yields, the 

bond purchases would reduce public debt service burdens and improve fiscal 

sustainability.  Second, and as a related matter, by taking sovereign bonds out of the 

hands of private investors, ECB purchases may create room in those investors™ 

portfolios for new issues, thereby improving the governments™ access to financing.  
          
  
           
                 
   
   
         
                     
  
    Finally, the package of ECB purchases
, plus access to the regional financial backstop 
facilities
, is widely anticipated to involve less stringent conditionality, and thus less 
stigma, than the full
-blown IMF and EU rescue packages received by Greece, Ireland, 
and Portugal.  In consequence, it is more likely, though far from certain, that Spain 

and/or Italy may request financial assistance before market conditions have become 

so adverse that further financial turmoil is inevitable. 
With markets figuring in brighter prospects for official support, financial stresses 
over the next several months are likely to be less pronounced than we assumed in the 

July Tealbook, and we are anticipating that, barring further adverse shocks, European 

markets could soon begin the long, slow process of normalization.  However, we are 

still very far from being out of the woods.  In the near term, European l
eaders still 
need to work out the conditionality to be required of governments benefi
ting from the 
financial rescue facilities and ECB intervention, and that could be contentious.  

Additionally, IMF and EU officials are currently assessing the status of Gr
eece™s 
struggling adjustment programŠalthough Greece™s official creditors are expected to 

approve a much
-needed disbursement by October and postpone more difficult 
decisions until later, this is not assured, and a messy Greek exit from the euro area at 

this time could be quite dangerous. 
Taking a longer view, the ECB™s new program is not, to 
coin a phrase, a panacea. 
It can only give Europe breathing space to implement the fundamental reforms that 

will ultimately restore confidence.  If the Europeans do not make progress on the 

measures needed to achieve fiscal and financial stability
Šbudget consolidation, 
growth
-promoting structural reforms, and region-
wide banking initiatives
Šthe 
ECB™s ability to contain financial tensions will be sorely tested.  Accordin
gly, market 
confidence likely will not be fully restored until the peripheral economies prove they 

can cut their budgets, improve growth prospects, and strengthen their banksŠ
and all 

that could take a number of years. 
In consequence, economic activity in Europe is also likely to remain subdued for 
some time to come.  To be sure, the easing of financial stresses, combined with some 

data that have been less bleak than expected, have led us to project a somewhat 

shallower recession than we wrote down in the July Tealbook.  Even so, in our 

current projection, euro-area GDP continues to contract through the middle of next 

year and recovers only very weakly thereafter. 
The outlook for our other trading partners, while hardly as bleak as that for 
Europe, is nonetheless subdued.  Excluding the euro area, aggregate foreign growth 

dropped from roughly 4 percent in the first quarter to 
less than
 3 percent in the 
second, below its trend pace.  Moreover, since your last meeting, indicators such as 

PMIs and exports have ge
ner
ally come in on the soft side. 
These developments are worrisome, but considering the factors responsible for 
the slowdown, our best guess is that 
economic 
growth will bottom out in the coming 
quarters rather than deteriorate further.  The pace of 
deterioration in Europe, which 
accounts for much of the United Kingdom
™s stagnation this year, as well as the 
             
                               
              
                    slowdown in Asia™s exports, is projected to become only a little more pronounced in 

the second half of this year.  The recent weakness in U.S. growth has also weighed on 

our trading partners, but the U.S. economy should start picking up a few quarters 

down the road.  And much of Asia™s slowdown reflects the fading of the bounceback 

from Thailand™s floods and Japan™s tsunami last year.  All told, we 
anticipate that 
foreign growth outside the euro area will stay subdued at 3 percent over the remainder 

of this year.  It then picks up to 3¾ percent by 2014, as the euro area starts to recover, 

the U.S. economy picks up steam, and monetary policies around 
the world remain 

quite accommodative. 
Another factor weighing on foreign growth, especially in Asia, has been China™s 
slowdown from near double-digit rates in the past two years.  Chinese growth 

registered 7½ percent in the second quarter of this year.  With recent weak exports 

and PMIs leading us to revise down our forecast, we see growth remaining at that 

relatively subdued pace during the remainder of this year, before picking up to about 

8 percent thereafter. Under these circumstances, we continue to s
crutinize the data 
for indications of a hard landing, but we do not see any compelling signs that one is in 

the offing: 
 Retail sales growth has remained reasonably solid, housing prices have 

flattened out, and the government retains the monetary and fiscal scope to counter a 

decline in demand. 
The effect on oil prices of resurgent political tensions over Iran poses another 
threat to the global economy.  Crude oil prices have now retraced more than half of 

their decline from earlier this year, and our curre
nt projected trajectory of oil prices 
averages roughly 10 percent higher than in the July Tealbook.  A rise in oil prices of 

this magnitude should not substantially affect the foreign outlook.  By our rough 

estimates, it could reduce 
economic 
growth in the advanced economies by 
0.1 percentage point over the next year or so, while the effect on aggregate emerging 

markets growth is roughly a wash
, as gains by oil exporters offset losses by importers.  

By the same token, our inflation outlook is a bit higher i
n the near term but little 
changed further out.  However, no resolution of the problem of Iran™s nuclear 

program is in sight, and we are attuned to the risk of much steeper rises in oil prices. 
All told, considering the momentous developments taking place 
in the global 
economyŠMario Draghi™s plan to save the euro, China™s struggle to achieve a soft 

landing, and 
fluctu
ations in commodity marketsŠthe outlook for U.S. trade is, well, 
not so momentous.  In the first half of this year, notwithstanding the global slowdown 

and the rising dollar, net exports managed to eke out a 
small 
positive contribution to 
U.S. GDP growth.  We received trade data for July yesterday; both exports and 

imports fell, but the trade balance was little changed.  Accordingly, we retain o
ur 
view that for the next couple of quarters, the combination of slowing foreign growth, 

a still
-elevated dollar, and the effects of the drought on agricultural production leads 

to some moderation in export growth, and the external sector imposes a modest 
drag 
on the economy.  After that, net exports gradually shift back toward neutral, as the 

global economy picks up and European stresses subside, so that a reversal of flight-

to-safety flows allows the dollar to start depreciating.  Thanks to Mr. Draghi, th
is 
projection is based on a somewhat lower path of the dollar than in the July Tealbook, 
         
  
      
                     
   
                   
                                                         and thus a bit faster export growth and less drag from net exports.  Andreas will 

continue our presentation. 
MR. LEHNERT.
4 I™ll be discussing material from our recent 
QS report 
on financial stability 
and from an earlier memo on the effect of low interest rates.  In our 
report, the most prominent shocks we identified were an intensification of the 

European sovereign crisis and a U.S. recession, perhaps brought on by a s
uboptimal 
resolution of the ﬁfiscal cliff.ﬂ  The major vulnerabilities we highlighted were, first, 

the market™s perception that some large banks remain weak, despite substantial 

increases in capital and liquidity, which raises the likelihood of funding runs and 

increases the cost of raising capital; second, the unstable funding model of brokerŒ 

dealers
; and, third, the persistent risk of runs on money market funds. 
We have also placed increasing emphasis on vulnerabilities stemming from the 
low interest rate 
environment, and that™s what I™ll focus on today.  After all, long-
term Treasury yields haven™t been below 2.5 percent for a sustained period since 

1954, a time when the financial system was quite different. 
A low short-
term interest rate policy, given st
rained household and business 
fundamentals, is designed to improve macro performance.  The benefits arise, in part, 

from increases in asset prices and
, thus, the value of collateral held by businesses and 
households.  These increases should, in turn, enhan
ce financial stability. 
But a low 
rate environment could lead investors trying to boost yields to borrow too much, take 

on too much risk, or bid up asset prices enough to stretch valuations.  Relatedly, 

important parts of the financial system might become
 vulne
rable to a rapid rise in 
rates. 
To assess these risks, we surveyed a wide range of asset markets and financial 
institutions looking for signs of excessive valuations, greater leverage, 
or increased 

risk
-taking.  To summarize, we found little evidence that the low rate environment 
has fostered additional vulnerabilities to date: 
 Valuations for broad asset classes are 
not stretched
, and we identified only a few isolated pockets of increased 
risk
-taking. 
As shown by the top panel on your first exhibit, 
estimated term premiums 
for 
10-year Treasury yields are quite low, due in part to safe-haven demand for 

Treasuries resulting from strains in Europe.  Term 
premiums
Šand thus Treasury 
yields
Šcould increase quickly if, for example, concerns about the U.S. fis
cal situation were to intensify. 
Your next three panels cover valuations in three major U.S. asset classes: 
equities, residential real estate
, and corporate bonds.  Overall, valuations across these 
asset classes show little sign of pressure.  As shown in the middle left, stocks are not 

trading at unusually high multiples; indeed, forward price-
earnings ratios are 
generally well within their ranges over the past 20 years.  Our measure of residential 

real estate valuation, shown to the right, is near an all-
time low.  Risk premiums
 in 
4 The materials used by Mr. Lehnert are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 
       
           
                   
              
  
        
       the high-
yield corporate bond market
Šas measured by the implied forward spread far 
out in the future (the black line in the bottom-
left panel)
Šare near their average of 
the past 20 years, notwithstanding the extraordinary highs 
experience
d during the 
financial crisis. 
However, valuations of assets in narrower and less-liquid markets have shown 
signs of pressure. Issuance of so
-called leveraged loans has been robust this year.  
Moreover, there is a trend toward lighter use of loa
n covenants and increased 
leverage.  As shown to the right, average ratios of debt to earningsŠknown as a debt 

multiple
Šamong this class increased further this year, although it remains below its 
pre
-crisis levels. 
Your next exhibit considers evidence on l
everage and 
risk
-taking
.  In the 
nonfinancial sector, as shown by the pink and blue regions in the top panel, household 

and business leverage has continued the decline begun in the recession.  Government 

borrowing, by contrast, has picked up, leaving the ratio of debt held by the public to 

GDP at its highest level since W
orld W
ar II. 
As shown in the middle two panels, there are signs that, potentially, commercial 
banks are taking increased interest rate risk.  Banks have increased their holdings of 

long-
mat
urity securities. As a result, their portfolios may be more sensitive to a 
sudden rise in interest rates than they were a year ago, depending on their interest rate 

hedges.  The low interest rate environment, combined with an unlimited FDIC 

guarantee on transactions accounts, has attracted a surge of deposits to banks.  The 

ability to issue deposits at below
-market rates should benefit banks were rates to rise; 
however, we don™t have historical experience to judge the sensitivity of these new 

deposits to a rise in rates.  That said, as discussed in the Tealbook, results from a 

recent informal survey of banks suggested they did not think it was likely that 

deposits would decline rapidly when the added insurance expires.  We™re currently 

working with economists and supervisors from throughout the Federal Reserve 

System on an analysis of interest rate risk at banks and plan to include the results in 

our December report. 
Life insurance companies are vulnerable to extended periods of low interest rates, 
in part b
ecause they have a significant body of liabilities with guaranteed returns that 

exceed current yields on safe assets.  As a consequence, insurers may be feeling 

particular pressure to reach for yield by extending their exposure to duration and 

credit risk. 
Indeed, as shown in the bottom left, the average maturity of insurers™ 
bond portfolios has risen in recent years, as firms accept greater duration risk.  

However, the shift isn™t particularly dramatic, and we are working with colleagues 

here and at the F
ederal Reserve Bank of Chicago to understand the risks faced by, and 
posed by, these institutions. 
The panel to the right shows the rapid rise in assets of real estate investment 
trusts
ŠREITs
Šthat specialize in holding agency-
guaranteed mortgage
-backed 
sec
urities.  While these institutions are something of a niche player, their business 

model of funding agency MBS holdings with repo, while vulnerable to sharp rate 
            
    
                 
      
            
     
        
  
     
   
  
   
                                                   rises, has proved quite profitable in recent years, producing double-
digit returns for 
shareho
lders.  This growth is one of the clearest indications we have of the 
willingness of some investors to take on additional interest rate risk in order to earn 

higher current returns.  This willingness may be enhanced by the apparent safety of 

investing in G
SE-guaranteed securities. In terms of their systemic threat, at their 
current scale, the sudden distress of mortgage REITs would likely be painful but 

manageable for the broader financial system. 
I™ll conclude with a less quantifiable form of risk produced by the low 
interest 
rate 
environment, related to a sense that a great deal of money is sitting on the sidelines.  

Consider two examples:  First, respondents to the SCOOS report that their clients 

have significant unused borrowing capacity; and second, pr
ivate equity firms focused 
on leveraged buyouts have elevated levels of committed but uninvested capital.  
All 

of this and more amounts to ﬁdry powderﬂ that could be deployed quickly.  Thus, 

while our ongoing monitoring efforts have so far found little evi
dence that the low 
interest rate environment has led to excessive increases in leverage, asset valuation
, or 
risk
-taking, investors do have the means to rapidly shift their portfolios.  Ed Nelson 
will continue our presentation. 
MR. NELSON.
5 I will be referring to the packet 
labeled ﬁMaterial for Briefing 
on the Summary of Economic Projections.ﬂ 
As shown in the top panel of exhibit 1, under your individual assessments of 
appropriate monetary policy, you see real GDP expanding only moderately t
his year
, but you expect the pace of the recovery to pick up next year and that economic 

growth in 2014 and 2015 will be somewhat above its longer-run value.  

Correspondingly, you expect the unemployment rate, shown in the second panel, to 

stay near recent readings for the rest of the year
, before gradually declining over the 
subsequent three years.  All of you expect that the unemployment rate at the end of 

2015 will be appreciably below its present rate; nevertheless, almost all of you expect 

it to be above what you judge to be its longer-run normal level.  Turning to the 

bottom two panels, you generally expect total PCE inflation of around 1¾ percent 

over the four quarters of 2012.  For 2013 through 2015, you generally see core and 

overall inflation stayi
ng close to or slightly below your 2 percent inflation objective. 
Exhibit 2 tabulates the ranges and the central tendencies of your projections, 
along with comparisons to the June SEP and the current staff forecast.  Compared 

with your June projections, you now anticipate a slightly stronger recovery and a 

somewhat larger decline in the unemployment rate over the projection period.  Your 

inflation outlook is little changed.  The Tealbook forecastŠwhich embeds the 

assumption of no additional accommodationŠputs economic growth in 2013 and 

2014 at the lower end of your central tendency, and the unemployment rate above it; 

the 2015 forecasts, however, are within the central tendency.  The Tealbook forecast 

for inflation runs consistently below your central tendencies for 2013 to 2015. 
5 The materials used b
y Mr. Nelson are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
                   
             
     
     
       
   
      
     
               
        
          
  Exhibit 3 provides an overview of your assessments of the appropriate path for 
the federal funds rate.  As shown in the top panel, most of you think that it will not be 

appropriate to begin raising the funds rate until 2014 or later.  About two-
thirds of 
you now see firming only beginning in 2015 or 2016, compared with about one-third 

of you in June.  Four of youŠtwo fewer than in JuneŠ
now believe that economic 

conditions will warrant increasing the federal funds rate before 2014.  Two of you 

favoring a funds rate increase before 2014 cited the need to tighten policy relatively 

soon in order to prevent inflation from exceeding the Committee™s 2 
percent 

objective, and two pointed to the need to forestall financial imbalances.  Many of 

those who would not raise the funds rate until 2014 or later cited sizable output or 

unemployment gaps alongside an inflation profile unlikely to exceed 2 percent over 

the medium run. 
The bottom two panels of the exhibit provide your assessments of the app
ropriate 
target for the federal funds rate at the end of each year of the forecast period and over 

the longer run.  For the 6 participants who 
see the funds rate leaving the effective 

lower bound in 2014 
or earlier
, the median value for 
the funds rate at 
the end of 2014 
is 
1.75 percent.  The 12 participants who expect that the funds rate will not leave the 

lower bound until 2015 judge that the appropriate funds rate at the end of that year 

will be 1.6 percent or less, while the 1 
participant who sees the st
art of firming in 
2016 sees the funds rate at 75 basis points at the end of that year (not shown). 
Fourteen of you now judge that ﬁappropriate monetary policyﬂ calls for a more 
accommodative path for the federal funds rate than in your June SEP, involving 
either 
a lower target for the funds rate at the end of the initial year of firming or a shift out 

in the first year of firming.  Moreover, 11 of you indicated that appropriate policy 

calls for additional asset purchases
, at this meeting or before long. 
Exhibit 4 depicts the economic conditions that you anticipate for the year in 
which you expect the first funds rate increase. Your projected unemployment rates 

range from about 5¾ to 8 percent, with a median of 6½ percent, while your inflation 

projections 
are in a narrow range of roughly 1¾ to 2¼ percent, with a median rate of 
2 percent.  Generally, participants who expect the first funds rate increase in
 2012 or 2013 (shown by the 
blue triangle and 
white diamonds) see a higher level of 
unemployment at the time of 
the first funds rate increase
 than do those reporting later 
firming
 dates (shown by the gray circles, dark blue squares, and 
the 
gray triangle
). The final exhibit reviews your assessments of the uncertainty and risks 
surrounding your economic projections.  As shown in the top two panels in the 

column on the left, almost all of you continue to indicate that you judge the current 

level of uncertainty about GDP growth and unemployment to be higher than the 

average level over the past 20 years.  The co
rresponding panels to the right indicate 
that you continue to view the risks to GDP growth as weighted toward the downside 

and, accordingly, the risks to unemployment as weighted to the upside.  Many of you 

attributed your continued emphasis on downside growth risks to concerns about 

Europe and U.S. fiscal policy; other factors cited included uncertainty about the level 

and growth rate of potential output and the possibility of a hard landing in China.  
      
  
  
    
     
    
                                Turning to the bottom two panels, 8 of you assess the uncertainty attending your 

projections for total PCE inflation as higher, and another 10 of you see the 

uncertainty as broadly similar to the average level of uncertainty over the past 

two
 decades.  Most of you continue to see the risks to inflation, shown 
to the right, as 
broadly balanced.  Thank you.  That concludes the staff presentations. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much for your presentation.  The floor is 
open for questions.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Wilcox, the lower right-
hand panel 
displays a model estimate, and I 
was wondering what it™s an estimate of. 
MR. WILCOX. It™s a statistical exercise that tries to combine several different sources of 
information.  First and most broadly, it combines the payroll survey estimate of job gain with an 
adjusted measure from the household survey, 
where the adjustments
Š MR. LACKER.  Have been comparable. 

MR. WILCOX.  Štry to take the household measure and do about a dozen or 
15 adjustments that put it on
, as conceptually 
as possible, 
an apples
-to-apples basis with the 
establishment survey. 
The second category of information that it builds in is that we had one of our seasonal 
adjustment experts, Charlie Gilbert, take a close look at this series, specifically with a question in 

mind of trying to disc
ern effects on seasonal factors that stem from the timing of the sharp 
downdraft in employment in 2008 
and
 2009, and to advise us on the extent to which those timing 
effects may have bled into seasonal factors
, causing published estimates of seasonally adjusted 
job growth around the turn of the year to be systematically higher than they should actually be. 
The third type of information that™s built in is a regression
-based analysis of weather 
effects.  It seems like a dim memory at this point, but we had, a
s you will recall, an 
extraordinarily warm winter this year, and there was some speculation that that may have shifted 

the timing of employment.  Those weather
-related effects are pretty small, but they™re included 
           
    
                    
       
       
     here
, as well
, for the sake of completeness.  And then around all of that, what we do is just apply 
a simple 
Kalman 
filter to the resulting series in an effort to extract for you where we think all this 
statistical evidence would point in terms of what™s the best available estimate of job gain
, taking 
account of all that information that™s available to us. So it™s
, at some level
, nothing more than a 
statistical exercise to try to extract signal from noise.  On the other hand, it packs in a 
tremendous amount of information. 
MR. LACKER.  Those all sound like very useful and constructive statistical initiatives.  I 
just wondered what the target you were aiming at trying to estimate is. I mean, is it the trend or 

the current value? 
MR. WILCOX. It™s essentially a smooth
ed trend that takes account of both the 
information in the establishment survey and the household survey.  I mean, I could reiterate: 
It takes account of that
; it tries to adjust for weather and 
seasonal
Š MR. LACKER.  You™re aiming at a true measure of the cu
rrent gain
, or a true measure of 
the trend? 
MR. WILCOX.  True measure of the current gain, smoothing through 
a variety of 
sources of noise. 
MR. LACKER.  A smooth measure of the current gain.  I™m less confused now. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You™re confused at a 
higher level. President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I actually drove back from our western 
symposium this year with two geriatric dogs and other things, but I want to comment on the fact 

that driving across the s
tate of Nebraska, what
 struck me was the drought and the corn crops and 
just how dead the entire s
tate of Nebraska looked
, at least from Interstate 80. 
       
                                 You made some reference to the drought and the corn crop, and I remember reading 
somewhere
ŠI couldn™t find it in my searchingŠabout your estimated effects of the drought on 
GDP this quarter and next.  And I™d like to hear you talk a little more about what you think those 

effects were
; the ramifications of those effects, of how they bleed, in some sense, through in your 

forecast t
o your employment forecast, for example, through an Okun™s l
aw measure because 
GDP is lower
; how much impact you thought it had on the gap in the near term; and how that 
dissipates through your forecast.  Can you just walk me through those linkagesŠt
his is clearly a 
classic supply shock of 
a dr
oughtŠand how much then it feeds into other things that matter that 
we look at a lot for monetary policy? 
MR. WILCOX.  So I™ll take a first crack at it and invite my other colleagues to jump in 
with additional i
nformation.  We thought in July we had built in some quantity-
related effects
Š about $10 billion is my recollectionŠon farm output.  This time, based on USDA assessments of 

field conditionsŠ
people may be doing something a little more systematic, out walking
 in the 
fields with their clipboard and so forth to look at corn yields
; corn is one of the crops that is most 
affected
Šwe think that it™s about a $30 billion hit to real farm output this time, so substantially 
bigger than what we had built into the July projection. 
We think that that™s likely to show up mostly in a decumulation of inventories in the third 
and fourth quarters.  The way that inventory arithmetic works, the hit to GDP growth is going to 

be concentrated in the third quarter.  We™ve got the same rate of inventory decumulation built 

into the fourth quarter, but because it™s the same rate of decumulation in both quarters, the 
effect 
on GDP growth 
we™ve penciled in 
is zero in the fourth quarter.  
We also think there will be a 
small additional negative effect on agricultural exports as well, so that™s where in terms of the 

GDP accounting
Š        
       
   
                       
   
  
                    
MR. PLOSSER.  And that led to how much of a decrease in your estimate of 
GDP growth for the third quarter? 
MR. WILCOX.  About 0.8 
percent
age point o
n GDP growth
. MR. PLOSSER. 
Yes, 0.8 
percent
age point.  That™s what I thought 
I remembered. 
MR. WILCOX.  We thinkŠwe hopeŠthat™s going to be a transitory supply shock and 
that next year
, our planning assumption has been, crop yields are going to come back to normal.  
Now, there™s sort of a philosophical question about when that actually occurs.  If we were 
operating 
in annual data, it would be perfectly clear that it would happen in 2013.  
However
, the 
way that the BEA does it, and we™ve been in very close contact with them, is 
to smooth that 
through the four quarters of the calendar year, so that snap back to normal crop yields, 
basically 

at this point, of course, by assumption, occurs in the firs
t quarter. 
So we™re mimicking 
the 
BEA™s algorithm in packing in the return to a normal level of GDP in the first quarter of 2013.  

That™s not based on any pretense that anybody actually knows that that™s the way the corn plants 

are going to grow in 2013.  
That™s just the 
BEA 
methodology.  I wouldn™t have anything better to 
suggest to them if I were in their shoes. 
Now, farm proprietors™ income actually sees a much smaller effect because prices are up 
and there™s crop insurance, and so the implications for 
nominal farm income are much less 
severe than they are for real output. 
We think that there™s likely to be very little effect on 
employment because we™ve made the assumption that employers are going to smooth through 

this transitory effect.  I wouldn™t be surprised, of course, if there was some effect on things like 

farm equipment manufacturers and that sort of thing, but I think that™s going to be lost in the 

noise in terms of our ability to actually 
estimate it. 
       
                               
   
   MR. PLOSSER.  So this wouldn™t show up in 
any sense on your estimates of the 
magnitude of your output gap over the next two quarters? 
Would you raise that? 
MR. WILCOX.  M
echanically, I suspect our output gap will be a little wider over the 
second half of this year, and then it will just come back in the first quarter of 2013.  Is that right, 
Bill? 
MR. 
WASCHER
.  Yes, that™s right.  Because we tend to set potential growth on an 
annual basis, we didn™t make an explicit adjustment to the gap measures you see in the Tealbook 

for the effects of the 
drou
ght
.  I would say that in terms of when we look at Okun™s l
aw relationships and thinking about the path of the unemployment rate, 
we did take out the effect of 

the drought from potential in that equation.  So we didn™t want the drought to affect the 

unempl
oyment rate forecast. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Ye
s, that™s kind of what I was trying to get at.  Okay.  Thank you very 
much. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  One minor place it might show up, because we didn™t do the 
adjustment, would be in the Tealbook 
B rules thing. It™s pretty small, but the 
rules
 would 
respond to that. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Did I just understand correctly that you removed the effect of the 
drought on the gap, the unemployment rate gap? 
MR. WILCOX.  In our Okun™s l
aw analysis, in setting the unemployment rate. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It will bounce right back. 

MR. WILCOX.  I™m sorry? 
                           
               
    VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The effects are just going to go away in two quarters. 
MR. WILCOX. It is a transitory effect.  The fu
nds rate is constrained at zero.  So it 
doesn™t have any implication for the funds rate.  And in terms of calibrating the response of the 

unemployment rate to the GDP gap, we sterilized the GDP gap from transitory dro
ught
-related 
effects on GDP. 
MR. LACKER
.  Okay.  So let me just ask the question for which 
this is most germane
Š do inflation dynamics depend on this adjustment? 
MR. WILCOX. 
I think we™re talking about splitting a micron here, butŠ 
MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, but I™m just very curious about the principle here. 
MR. WILCOX.  The methodology is intended precisely to seal off the implications for 
core inflation.  I should say, of course, 
the first
-order implication for inflation is through food 
prices. 
MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, right, righ
t. MR. WILCOX.  That has been allowed to feed through. 

MR. LACKER.  Right.  But in terms of the gap™s effect on inflation, you want to sterilize 
it from the effect that the dr
ought is going to have on real output and employment in a 
year 
or 
two. 
MR. WILCOX
.  Correct, y
es. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question for Andreas.  
On exhibit 2, you have 
this chart that looks at nonfinancial sector credit to GDP.  
I keep staring at it, and I am still trying 
to figure out what implications I™m supposed to draw from it.  The secular uptrend from 1956, at 
          
      
              
       
                   
best
, flattens out for a while
.  So the first question is what implication do you think we were 
supposed to draw from this
?  And, second, if you looked at a char
t of 
nonfin
ancial sector assets 
to GDP, would that also show 
mostly a secular 
uptrend?  And then, how do you put those two 
together? 
MR. LEHNERT.  I think the
re are
 key macro questions that are impli
cated 
by your 
question, which I™m not going to touch, but 
just from a financial stability perspective, at the very 
highest level
, in some sense, financial stability concerns in a low-
rate environment arise when 
you see people and businesses borrowing more.  This picture was just supposed to 
be an easy 
way 
to portray the fact that we™re not seeing households and businesses borrowing more. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Right.  We could 
also interpret it as, gee, credit to GDP 
is still really, really high
, and
, therefore, that means bad things.  That is what I was sort of 
getting 
at. 
So you don™t take a negative signal away at all from the total level of credit to GDP is still 
high? 
MR. LEHNERT.  Ye
s, okay.  I treated that as a separate question.  So then there™s a 
question, are we approaching some kind of 
fiscal moment
, some sort of S
argent
Wallace 
moment, where the global carrying capacity for U.S. sovereign obligations is being reached? 

That™s something that we highlighted in our report as a potential risk.  
If there™s 
a material 
worsening in the fiscal outlook, 
or if 
there™s some really ugly resolution to the debt ceiling 

negotiations in January and so forth, all those things could have negative implications for future 

stability. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But the total level here, if you add household, business, 
and government together, that™s not a good sign. 
MR. LEHNERT.  If you look across countr
ies
, you would see a lot of different 
levels. 
           
          
   
  
      
    
   
           
    
     
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
They™re 
all over the place. 
MR. LEHNERT
.  Exactly.  So I don™t know why Denmark is one and Japan i
s a different 
one, but we can just judge the 
United States
 by its own history. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  First, I wanted to thank Andreas for a very good summary
, very helpful 
graphics
, and so on.  We™re in the middle of doing our 
SABR
 analysis for banks, and one of the 
positive attributes we have noticed is that we seem to be seeing a brighter picture for the average 

bank.  For example, the ones that we rate one or two probably are performing 
the best that we™ve 
seen in terms of the percentage of potential 
downgrades since December of 2006.  So I think 
that™s one positive aspect that wasn™t included.  I™m not being critical, but when you look at your 

second panel of long-
term securities held by comm
ercial banks and so on, there seems to be a 
healthier tenor, and we™re not done with the analysis yet, but I just wanted to point that out. 
With regard to seasonality, I wanted to ask Dave Wilcox about the August employment 
numbers; I think I™m correct in 
saying that that is a number that gets revised more frequently 

than others.  I think 17 of the last 22 years, i
t™s been revised, and if I remember correctly, last 
year it went from zero to 44,000 to 104,000, and I assume we™re taking account of the fact th
at 
that is often a highly unreliable number.  Am I correct? 
MR. WILCOX.  We™re taking account of the fact that it is the best possible information, 
and we don™t confuse it with truth, absolutely.  [Laughter] 
MR. FISHER.  So we assume it gets revised more o
ften than not? 
MR. WILCOX. 
Yes. 
           
          
   
              
             
  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
The BLS has a 
confidence intervalŠ
the 90 percent 
confidence 
interval is 
plus or minus 100,000.  So that gives you an idea. 
MR. WILCOX.  It™s a sample-
based estimate. It is based on a very large 
sample of 
employers. It™s a universal sample of large employers and a statistically drawn probability 
sample of medium an
d smaller employers, but there are a host of issues associated with 
constructing that number, including the fact that not everybody th
at ultimately will report
, 
reports in the first wave of responses and that seasonal adjustment, as my remarks described 

earlier, involves 
a great deal of science but some art as well.
  So I don™t have any specific reason 
for doubting or casting aspersions on the August number, but you™re absolutely correct that 

month in and month out, that™s a number that is subject to two-sided revision. 
MR. FISHER.  And then lastly, just listening to Steve Kamin, this is perplexing about oil 
and gas 
prices
, and particular
ly prices at the pump.  There may be some seasonality in terms of 
the 
switchover 
that
 occurs, but given the weaker economy, which I think almost all of our 
forecasts have envisioned, and given the production that™s taking place stateside, even 

accounting f
or the storm that took place in the Gulf, it just seems odd that we might expect oil 
prices to increase rather than hold level or decrease.
  And f
or what it™s worth, the ﬁoiliesﬂ that I 
speak to
Šfrom the independents to Tillerson at Exxon and so onŠ
their expectation is that this 
has been a bit of a bulge, and that it™s more likely to settle down and actually decrease somewhat.  

For what it™s 
worth
Šand I always emphasize that because Mr. Tarullo insists that I do so when I 
talk about my anecdotal evidence
ŠI just wanted to pass that on. 
MR. KAMIN
.  Thank you. 
Just to be clear, our baseline forecast for crude oil prices in 
the markets is, indeed, to decline over time from the current level. 
MR. FISHER.  It wasn™t clear the way you presented it.  So I wanted 
to add that. 
      
          
                     
    
  
   
    
   MR. KAMIN
.  Yes.  So just to clarify, what I was alluding to was future upside risks that 
could take place if geopolitical problems in the Middle East became more pronounced than they 
are now. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to come back to the financial 
stability handout, exhibit 2, 
chart
 1, which is ﬁN
onfin
ancial 
Sector 
Credit
-to-GDP Ratio.
ﬂ In 
answer to the earlier question, you said 
that the cross
-country evidence on this was all over the 
map, and that does not gibe with what I understood the cross-country evidence to be, which was 

that this line is basically trending up across the developed economies.  S
o it looks very similar 
actua
lly. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Sorry. I meant the cross-country evidence on the level.  I thought that 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley was asking, is 2.5 a magic number? I mean, this number is much bigger 
in some countries and much smaller in other countries. 
MR. BULLARD.  Oka
y, but the picture would look the same. 
MR. LEHNERT. 
Yes. 
MR. BULLARD. 
It has always been trending up, I guess.  The developed world has 
always been trending up, 
is that right? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
The tricky part about this is if you have a secular trend 
of more intermediation, then this is going to be an upward-trending number, and so the degree of 

intermediation in a financial system really is important in terms of what 
number you 
get. 
               
         
              
    
              MR. BULLARD.  When people showed this picture to me over the year
s, I always said, 
well, this was 
financial market deepening
, and 
good things are happening in the 
intermediation 
sector
.  It didn™t pan out so well later. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Well, and presumably by analogy, 
then
, the fact that it™s 
now falling 
for the household and business sectors 
isŠ MR. BULLARD.  Y
es.  Okay, thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I just 
wanted to make a comment on the 
financial stability report. I continue to find a lot of value in this, and I think particularly as we 

look at these trends 
in a low interest rate environment, I would take no exception to the 
conclusion that right now imbalances are not obvious.  But just thinking back to how we thought 

about land values in the 1980s, in the late 1990s and early 2000s, as we watched banks begin to 

concentrate in commercial real estate and even some of the subprime exposures, the point at 

whi
ch to know when to take signal from some of those things is very difficult, notwithstanding 
supervisors and others 
looking at them.
  So I think as you continue to monitor this, as we get into 
December and beyond
, looking at where these trends are going 
wil
l be 
very important. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any other questions for our colleagues? 
[No 
response]  Okay.  Seeing none, on the agenda, we have an opportunity for participants who want 

to raise questions or issues related to financial stability
.  And Vice Chairman
, if you™d like to 
start off
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen and I were in B
asel 
over 
the weekend, and I have to say that there was a 
pretty strong sense of unanimity that what the 

ECB did was essentially the best that t
hey could accomplish, given the various constraints under 
                              
   
                 
  
 which 
they were 
operating.  The fact that the purchases could be unlimited means that the 
program has the potential for actually being an effective backstop, and the fact that the ECB will 
be pari p
assu 
with other bondholders is important because it really will reduce the pressures on 
private holders.  
So in effect, 
there may be private holders, if they view this as credible, who will 
actually want to invest in these sovereign instruments for a carry trade because the yield 
curves 

in these countries, 
of course
, are very, very steep. 
There™s also a bit of carrot now to incent proper actions by the government.  So if you do 
the right thing, we will intervene and we will hold down your debt service cost.  And I don™t 

think th
ere was that carrot before
, so I think that™s pretty significant.  I think that the ECB has 

essent
ially put on the table something that could take the risk of an interest rate-debt service-
fiscal deficit spiral a bit off the table as long as the countries do the right thing.
  And in addition, 
if these purchases do, in fact, materialize, I think this does push you in the direction toward 

further fiscal union.  After all, the ECB is backstopped by 
the entire 
euro zone, so such purchases 
will increase the joint and several nature of the union.
  And finally, I thought the other thing that 
was noteworthy abo
ut the ECB action was that it was a 22 to 
1 vote, with only 
Weidmann
 of the 
Bundesbank dissenting.  Given the fact that the German political leadership, 
at least for now
, seems to be supporting the ECB actions, this means that the Bundesbank™s opposition i
s somewhat marginalized at this point. 
So that™s the good news. 
Despite this, I don™t think we should kid ourselves.  I think the situation remains very 
tenuous despite the ECB™s supports.  I™d be, probably, slightly darker than Steve™s comments on 

this.
  Several issues worth highlighting: 
First, the ECB program would only activate if the 
countries actually negotiate an MOU with the 
euro group, and already we™re hearing signs 
that 
Spain seems to be reluctant or slow in terms of pursuing it.  In fact, the Spanish may decide that 
                       
         
       
            the backstop might be e
ffect
ive even if they don™t seek an MOU.  That seems like a highly risky 
strategy, but it is something that they might decide to do.
  Second, the program obviously will 
only continue if they stay on the progra
m. And, third, it™s going to take a while for this all to be 
implemented because the MOU has to be negotiated with the e
uro group
, and all of the finance 
ministers have to agree, and several parliaments actually have to approve the MOU.  So this idea 
that this is going to be happening very, very quicklyŠ
I think the market is probably a little bit 
ahead of itself in terms of how quick
ly this will come into play. 
Other issues
Šthe 
ECB program will not necessarily crowd in investors, because it™s not 
clear how long this is going to last.  So you might buy things, but you still have quite a bit of 

risk.  
You still have a very bad feedback 
loop from the austerity programs to the economy, to 
fiscal performance
, and
 the state of the banking system.  This doesn™t take any of that off the 
table, and there™s still no road map as to where we™re actually going in terms of the ultimate 

destination
:  What does greater fiscal union in Europe look like? 
So this is a very important 
thing that the ECB has done.  I think they did the best that they could possibly do, and the good 

thing is they put the problem back in the lap of the governments, 
where it b
elongs.  They have 
done what they can do now, and now it™s up to the governments to decide, both in the core and in 

the periphery, if 
they™re going to go along. 
The basic model
, though, of this whole situation hasn™t changed.  Countries have to show 
they™r
e on a sustainable path to regain market access.  The core countries are unwilling to be 
explicit about the level of support because of 
fears that this will undermine the effort.  The 
constitutional court decision in Germany today, which was actually mostly positive, affirmed 

that the German commitment is limited to 
•190 billionŠthat™s it, and so that™s sort of 
significant. 
            
     
          
              
  
   
     
 I think the unwillingness of the German Constitutional C
ourt to be explicit does create 
uncertainty that makes progress more difficult.
  So we do still have a long way to go, and we 
don™t have big, solid backstops to absorb shocks or support confiden
ce.  The ESM
ŒEFSF resources are
 still very much too small to credibly backstop Spain and Italy, and the ECB support 
may be too uncertain as t
o its sustainability.  So it™s progress, but there a
re still a lot of questions 
on the table. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you for the financial stability report.  Like President George, 
I do appreciate the monitoring that you™re doing in this area.  I just had two quick questions.  

They both relate to money market funds.  We™ve had an SEC proposal that wasn™t proposed, and 

I was wondering about your perspective looking at Europe, 
where there™s more than
 $1 trillion of 
money market funds 
and 
they have a mix of floating and fixed NAVs.  I don™t know how much 
time you spent looking at the European money market funds, but I™d be interested in your 

perspective on the industry™s concern with the floating NAV, which se
ems to have been 
successful in stopping forward movement.  And then the second question is, given that they have 

both floating and fixed NAVs in Europe, and the deposit rate went down to zero, is there 

anything to infer about interest on excess reserves fr
om the European money market fund 
experience with the deposit rate going to zero
? MR. LEHNERT. 
Are
 those questions you™d like me to answer? 
[Laughter] 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If not here, at another time. 

MR. LEHNERT.  Very, very briefly, and I certainly don™t approach your expertise in this 
area, we™ve long maintained that the redemption of par, what you call the fixed NAV, is useful in 

certain circumstances.  There are certain elements of the U.S. tax cod
e and other things that 
             
    
     
        
  
   
          
     
     
                                                                 make it useful
.  But basically
, at the end of the day, it™s just a safe place to put your money
, and 
if 
it floats up and down a bit, it™s not the end of the world.  And, of course, the European 
experience highlights that, although p
resumably their tax treatment might be slightly different. 

Then what™s happened to European money markets since the deposit rate went to zero? It
™s maybe still a little early to tell what the long
-run effects are, but the initial wave of reports is that 
there hasn™t been an implosion of the money markets. 
MR. POTTER.  One fund closed.  The Bank of AmericaŒMerrill Lynch fund closed. 

MS. LIANG
.  I guess I would just add that even at current rates, the proportion of U.S. 
funds that are waiving fees is really
 quite high, so the implications of further reductions in 
money fund rates could have effects.  S
ome ballpark estimates
Šthey are not precise
Šis 
that 
about 70 percent of U.S. funds are waiving their fees at this pointŠthat™s a pretty big number. 
CHAIRMAN BE
RNANKE.  Okay.  Why don™t we take a break for lunch?  When we 
come back, I™ll talk briefly about the experimental consensus forecast, and then we™ll go to the 

economic go
-round.  Why don™t we reconvene at 1 o™clock?
 [Lunch recess] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
6 Why
 don™t we 
re-commence?  Please feel free to finish 
your fruit or your cookie. I™ll provide the entertainment here.  [Laughter] 
I™d like to talk for just 
a few minutes about 
the 
latest iteration of the experimental consensus forecast.  You have a 
handout 
with that title. It proceeded in the same way as in previous iterations
:  The staff sent out 
a preliminary Tealbook forecast about a week in advance and 
received your comments. We also 

had the benefit 
this 
time of having the SEP.  So using all that, 
we came up with the forecast 
that™s shown in table 1 on page 1, and which is diagrammed in exhibit 1 on page 4. 
6 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
                  
           
      
    
  
      Like the Tealbook, this forecast or projection is conditioned on no change in policy.  That 
is, it™s 
conditioned on the August policies of continuing the MEP and late 2014 guidance.  
Generally speak
ing, the data are quite similar to 
the 
JulyŒAugust consensus, which is shown 
immediately below.  One exception is the 2013 real GDP forecast on the very first line, 
2.2 percent, which is a little bit weaker.  That was not inconsistent with the comments that came 

on the first draft
; most people either saw the near term as being a bit weaker or about the same
.  But I want to come back to that number in a moment.  The unemployment and inflation numbers 

are pretty similar, and if you care to look at the figure, you™ll see that the trajectories are very 

similar obviously, particularly relative to the standard errors. 
Like last time
, we also looked at the consensus forecast under alternative policy 
assumptions, and that™s given in table 3 on page 3.  Under each variable, the first line, the status 

quo is, again, the same as the consensus forecast in t
able 1.  That™s the forecast assuming the 
August policies continue.  The subsequent lines include, first, a chan
ge in the guidance to 
mid-2015, so simply 
a mechanical moving out of the interest rate path to mid-2015, and then 
subsequent 
additions of 
a $750 billion or $1 trillion LSAP program.  So that gives the 
alternative
s.  The differences are consistent with the 
FRB
/US analysis
; I™ll come back to that 
point as well.
  And 
exhibit
 2 shows the paths for the federal funds rate, the unemployment 
rate, 
and inflation under optimal control, under the no-
policy
-change consensus forecast in red, and 
then the alternative policies provided in t
able 3. 
Now, this time an issue came up
, which was less of a concern last time, but 
it raises an 
important question that I think the subcommittee is going to have to look at, which is that, of 

course, the SEP is conditional on each person™s view of optimal monetary policy.  And in this 

case, if you turn to table 2, which shows median forecasts in the September SEP, you™ll see the 
        
           
     
    
  
     
    
      SEP is broken into two categories
: all participants and participants who assume further easing. 
A major
ity of people submitted a forecast in which they assumed that the guidance would be 
advanced to 2015 and that we would undertake additional asset purchases. 
So the SEP submissions actually assume that change in policy.  So then the question is, 
how do you get from those SEP projections back to the no-policy-
change baseline?
  And what 
the staff proposed, and what they did, 
was basically they took these policy differentials that are 
in t
able 3
, and they subtracted from the SEP results to get the baseline.  An
d to the extent that 
those differentials are not accurate or are different from what people expect, then that will, of 

course, create some noise in the baseline forecast. 
So I raise this for a couple of reasons.  The first is that we need to think aboutŠ
and we 
talked about this last time
Šwhether the consensus forecast we would want to release would be 
the pre-
meeting status quo policy forecast
ŠI think President Lockhart suggested that last time
Š or the postmeeting inclusive
-of-the-action forecast, or both.  We could consider both
; I think we 
need to discuss that.  If we do both, then we will have to figure out how to make sure people are 

comfortable with both the before and the after, if you see what I™m saying. 
For this meeting, I think it will not 
be 
very m
uch of a problem.  What I had proposed to 
do is, as was given to you earlier on, in 
item
 5 after the policy decision tomorrow, I will ask you 

whether you are comfortable with the consensus forecast inclusive of the policy action.  And if 

we do take policy 
action, then this whole issue will be irrelevant because we™ll be looking at the 
policies assuming 
the further easing
Šat least for those participants who submitted that. 
But I 
just want to flag this point and note that we are planning a discussion in October of this whole 

project, and certainly one of the issues we™ll want to discuss is whether or not we want to look at 

ex ante, ex post
, or both forecasts, and how we would best extract that information.  So, again, 
                   
               
         
    tomorrow after the policy decision, I™ll ask you if you are comfortable with the consensus 
forecast, including whatever policy decisions we m
ake; are 
comfortable, with reservations; or 
have a 
very 
different view.  And 
I™ll 
ask you
, if you have a different view, 
to briefly state 
what 
that 
difference is.
  Any questions or comments? Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
You have this issue that the SEP has some people 
who 
have no change in policy; others have changes in policy.  That™s going to still be an outstanding 

issue going forward.  Do you have any thoughts on how we wouldŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that™s what I™m raising
Šwe have to figure out how to 
deal with that
.  One possibility would be to specifyŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  A, B
, and C? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, ye
sŠI suppose.  If we™re going to do the ex ante, 
before
-meeting projection, then everybody would be asked to make a projection conditional on 
the policy prior to the meeting, and the forecast could be used to say, 
ﬁWe thought this was 
unsatisfactory.  That™s why we took the action we did today.
ﬂ  Alternatively, we could ask for a 

forecast conditional on one or more policy actions.  But that™s an issue that 
this particular 
exercise has made clear, and I™m just flagging it for discussion by the subcommittee. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It™s interesting to see the difference that people submit in 
terms of the policy, because you actually find out what people think 
about how 
efficacious the 
policy is
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, of course.  
That™s right.  That™s certainly one of the 
benefits of doing that.  But everything that we are considering here also has the cost of 

multiplying the number of projections and forecasts we™re asking people to do, and that™s 

something we need to take into account.  
President Lacker. 
       
              
         
           
          
MR. LACKER.  You mentioned parts of the consensus forecast process.  We™re asked to 
provide a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, and I™d urge the staff and all of us to give 
some thought to what that ought to mean.  As I read the instructions, I thought of f
our different 
interpretations of that.  You take as a given that what we™re trying to do in writing down a 

forecast is 
to write
 down the mean of a joint distribution of the economy and policy.  Well, if you 
ask us to submit a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, are you asking us to replace our 

reaction function with one that™s fixed at that path unchangingly, 
and averaging over that? 
What 
do all 
of 
the shocks have to be? 
What™s the most likely outcome that delivers that as the policy 
reaction
Šwhat
 economy is weak enough to justify that policy?  That™s a different question.  Or, 
do we take 
our reaction function and add-
factor it so that it delivers that policy 
as a mean? 
There™s a bunch of different ways you can think of doing that, but we ought to be precise about 

it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course
Šwe™ll have to be precise.  These are 
complexities. 
One possibility would be to have everybody, again, assume appropriate monetary 
policy and 
deliver that joint distribution 
that you™re describing; and then, 
try to see if th
ere™s a 
center of gravity 
of that, which looks like the consensus; describe that consensus; and then 
describe those wh
o differ and qualitatively how they differ.  So that would be one approach.  
Another approach could be, for example, to ask people to use a specific reaction function or to 

specify their own reaction function.  
President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. 
Yes
Šthank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I like the idea
, in principle, 
of having a consensus forecast based on status quo policy and then a consensus forecast based on 

the policy action.  I think, though, that 
in practice
, the latter is going to be very challenging
, because you could easily imagine that the Committee could come up with a choice of a policy 
            
  
     
                 
    
action that they had not considered ex ante.  And then it becomes very difficult to know how the 
timing would work and to 
get the logistics to work. 
CHAIRMAN BERNA
NKE.  No, absolutely.  And again, I think Governor Yellen™s 
subcommittee will solve these problems for us [
laughter] and bring that to us in October.  
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Let me just reiterate on this. I do think that the market expectation o
f the Committee™s policy as of a certain date, which encompasses all aspects of monetary policy, is 

a fixed point that we could rally around.  Everyone c
an give their prognostication based on that.  
That would give us just one exercise to do.  Usually the 
market ex
pectation is not a long way off.  
It might be somewhat off, but it™s not a long way off, and it would simplify the exercise in my 

mind and would keep it clear
er what we™re 
doing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s, of course, what the British and some others do. 

MR. BULLARD.  Ye
s. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Does that address President Lacker™s concerns?  I wouldn™t have thought 
so. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not exactly.  Only if it™s approximately 
right
. MR. EVANS. 
Yes
Šright. 
CHAIRMAN BERN
ANKE.  Anybody else?  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  Narayana made the point I was going to make. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments or questions? 
Again, we will be 
discussing this at the next meeting.
  President Evans. 
             
    
                    
   
   
        
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a question 
that™s a little bit different
? I
t was triggered by 
some comments that President Fisher made earlier in asking questions, where he alluded to the 
fact that some people around the table would be, however you put it, more accepting of a high
er 
inflation rat
e than others, or whatever.  And in exhibit 2 on page 5, this question comes to my 

mind, which is, 
there is an optimal control path that is shown that has inflation rising to
ŠI think 
it™s 2.3 percent, 
if it™s co
nsistent with previous Tealbook-
style analyse
s. I personally don™t see 
anything in this path that™s inconsistent with our long
er-run strategic approach that we adopted in 
January, and I just wonder if that™s the sense of the Committee or if there™s an important 

divergence of opinion there, which seems to be one of the points that President Fisher might 

have been raising. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we are clear that our objective
s are
Šthink of a 
quadratic objective function.  They™re symmetrical.  The
re is an 
increasing marginal cost 
of being away from each objective. 
We have a balanced approach, but people w
ill have different 
models of the economy, and they™ll have different weights in their objective functions.  So this 
is 
obviously not a purely value-fee projection.  
President Bullar
d. MR. BULLARD. Is 
exhibit 2 something that would be distributed as part of the 
consensus 
forecast
? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, nothing has been decided, but I would
n™t 
imagine 
we would want to do all of those things. 
MR. BULLARD.  So this is just an internal document, 
like the ones we always use. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. EVANS.  I wasn™t asking a question about communications.  I was asking more a 
question about how we interpret our long
er-run strategic document, 
because at various times
, we 
          
          
                
    
  make diffe
rent comments about these types of outcomes, and it strikes me that there™s less 
agreement on that particular observation than sometimes is given by the words that we use. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I™ve said in press conferences that it™s a symmetric 
objective a
nd we have a balanced approach, and so on.  
Anyone else? 
[No response] 
All right. 
Now we come to the main event. Let™s start ou
r economic go-round with President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Intermeeting data
, I think, 
have done little to 
alter the economic picture.  We
™re in a period of sluggish economic growth, clearly.  
Our Fifth 
District survey measures, which fell sharply in July, 
have 
bounced back to neutral readings now, 
and the tenor of our anecdotal reports has been middling of late, consistent with reports we™
ve 
been hearing since the spring.  While activity is weak, we
™re not seeing any signs in our D
istrict 
of a dramatic slowdown around the cornerŠ
or a dramatic pickup
, for that matter. 
I thought it was appropriate, Mr. Chairman, that at our last meeting you took a longer-
term perspective by focusing on economic growth over the entire recovery.  As you noted, real 

GDP growth has averaged around 2 percent since the recovery began.  I think 2.2 percent is the 

pre
cise number.  We keep seeing swings in growth every couple of quarters around that average.  
So it mak
es sense to focus on the longer-run path around which we™re fluctuating, rather than 
just the last quarter or two.
  At our last meeting, Mr. Chairman, you talked about why growth 
was so low, and you discussed the spider charts put together by Board economists Greg Howard, 

Robert Martin, and Beth Anne Wilson.  I believe they refer to them as butterfly charts, but I™m 

not taking a stand on insects here.  
The 
main purpose of their paper was to show that advanced 

economies recover as rapidly from banking and financial crises as they do from other recessions, 

and I thought they did a pretty convincing job of that.  
Their charts also show that the current 

recovery
 in U.S. GDP tracks quite closely the typical advanced economy recovery from banking 
        
                                        and financial crises
, as well as the typical advanced economy recovery from housing slumps.  
The message I take away from their work is that we shouldn™t have expected to do much better 
than what we™ve experienced, and I think that™
s consistent with the message from some other 
research along the same lines.
  Now, the authors don™t focus on the notion of a gap, however.  
And for many people right now, the motivation for furt
her stimulus is that the relevant gap is 
quite large. 
I was quite pleased to see the memo from Bruce Fallick and Jeremy R
udd on this subject.  
It™s 
a helpful, well-organized description of how the staff thinks about and estimates economic 
slack
Šlays it out
 quite clearly.  And I think this memo should help clarify our mutual 
understanding going forward. 
But I
™d like to make a suggestion or two for further clarifying our 
discussions.  My suggestion is that we distinguish carefully between two distinct concep
tual 

notions of slack.  One concept is defined by the number to which the unemployment rate would 

converge in the future in the absence of unanticipated shocks and under appropriate monetary 

policy.  This is essentially what 
we™ve referred to as the 
ﬁlonger-run normal rate of 

unemployment.ﬂ I think that™s what we called it in our consensus statement in January.  T
hat™s a 
fine term for it.
  When people refer to sustainable employment, this is the concept I think of
:  what the economy is going to converge to 
several years from now, after the current shocks we
™ve 
experienced have dissipated and
, under appropriate policy, we get back to some trend with no 
shocksŠ
the mean forecast out there.
  Now, this number probably doesn™t vary much over time 
because
, by defi
nition
, the effect of current shocks has faded out by the time the economy 
converges to this number.  In fact, this number might be close to constant over time, or it may 

vary only with some slow-moving and predictable things, 
such as
 the demographic compo
sition 
of the labor force and the like.  So I think when you look at a construct like the NAIRU, the non-
              
      
                              
 accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, it
™s constructed with this notion in mind.  I™
ll come 
back to 
the 
NAIRU in a minute. 
The second concept of 
economic slack
, which I think we should distinguish from this 
first one
, is based on the reference level of the unemployment rate 
with which it is most 
appropriate to compare the current unemployment rate for the purposes of assessing current 
monetary pol
icy.
  Equivalently, one can think of this just as well in terms of the reference level 
for output 
with
 which it™s most appropriate to compare current output for monetary policy 
purposes.  
This is sometimes referred to as the 
ﬁnatural rate,
ﬂ although some writers refer to this 
as the 
ﬁefficient rate
ﬂ and reserve 
ﬁnatural rate
ﬂ for something distinct.  But 
ﬁnatural rateﬂ 
tends 
to be the term that 
we™ve used around the table here and 
that 
others 
have used
, and it™
s what the 
staff memo uses.  So 
I™
m going to stick with that term for this reference rate. 
In some very simple models, these two concepts are identical.  But in general, they™re not 
the same.  Indeed, in our standard, modern, mainstream models, almost all of the shocks hitting 

the model should affect the natur
al rate, even if the longer
-run normal rate doesn™t vary much.  
Now, not all of the shocks that hit the economy should affect the natural rate.  That™
s very clear 
in these models as well, and I™
ll talk more a little bit later about 
the difference and
 what kinds 
of 
shocks fall in that category.  By the way, I™d mention that modern models are all extensions of 

the 
Solow 
growth model that the Chairman referred to at our last meeting. That model is 
deterministic, nonmonetary.  These mod
els are extended to include a role for monetary factors 

and to include the role of uncertainty and unpredictable shocks to the economy.  I think the staff 

memo would have been clear
er if it had distinguished between these two notions of slack, 
because the 
estimates they present in this memo
Šsome are aimed at this longer
-run notion, and 
some pretty clearly are aimed at this short
-run reference notion.  
For example, the NAIRU 
            
       
             
      
          
  
      estimates they present ar
e designed to estimate the long
er-run normal rate of unemployment, 
because 
they 
deliberately exclude high
-frequency factors, but our models tell us that™
s clearly the 
wrong benchmark for policy in a world in which the economy is hit by a range of shocks.  
So my 
suggestion would be that staff 
members
, when they present 
to 
us a gap or a natural rate concept, 
be clear about what they™re trying to present.  I™ll note hereŠ
and I
™ll come back to this in a 
second
Šthe discussion we had about adjusting the natural rate for the drought
; that
™s a high
-frequency 
adjustment.  But the logic for making that adjustment is really identical to the logic for 
this reference rate that responds to current shocks. I think it would also aid clarity if we, in our 

discussions, were mindful of this distinction between these two.  The gap between the current 

unemployment rate and the long-run normal unemployment rate is exceptionally high by 

historical standards, and that gap clearly represents a tremendous amount of human suffering.  

And I can understandŠeveryone should understandŠwhy that would add urgency to the search 

for remedies to that.
  But modern macroeconomics is pretty clear about the gap that™
s relevant 
for the conduct of monetary policy, and it™s conceptually different from the gap defined by the 

distance 
between whe
re we are today and 
where we
™re going to be several years from now. 
So how do you estimate policy-
relevant gaps? Well, you need a model because you
™re 
talking about a counterfactual; 
you
™re talking about something that doesn™t happenŠ
it™s a latent, 
unobserved variable.  You need a model to be able to extract something like that from the data, 

and different models, obviously, 
give you different estimates. 
The staff memo presents estimates 
derived from EDO, the Board™s New Keynesian dynamic stochastic gener
al equilibrium
 model.  
And it delivers 
an estimate of the current gap 
of 
a little under 3 percent, defined this second way, 
the natural rate way. 
That compares 
with 
the NAIRU
-based estimate that the Tealbook provides 
        
      
                 
  
         
     
       
     
         of about 4½ 
percent, so you can see 
that you can get a significant difference there
.  This 
illustrates the extent to which the model you bring to bear makes a difference. 
So how big is the relevant gap?  Well, I™ve said beforeŠand I think others around the 
table have said before
Šthat we don™t think it™
s large, and we
™ve tried to describe economic 
factors that, in theoretical models
, would affect the natural rate and so would
n™t
 add to the gap.  
So they™d reduce your estimate of the gap.  
Now, rather than repeat myself
ŠI know that hasn™t 
stopped 
me in the past
ŠI thought I™d take the opposite tack and talk about what™s in the gap.  
The economy in a model that™s taken to the data is envisioned as driven by shocks and other 
developments.  Those shocks 
all affect the data you see, but not all of th
em affect the natural 
rate.  So the things that affect the economy, but don™t 
figure 
into this natural rate, are the things 
that affect the gap. 
What could those things be?  Well, this depends, obviously, on the model 
you use to interpret the data, the mode
l you use to extract an estimate of the natural rate, and so 
determine the gap. 
Let™s take a look at
 EDO, the Board™s DSGE model.  Its 
estimate of the gap 
is based on the natural rate, as I said, and it™s near 3 percent.  What would it take for the gap to 

be that large in that model?  Now, I should caution here
:  What I
™m going to say is based on my 
understanding of the model conceptually, theoretically.  I haven™t looked at the empirical 

decomposition, but based on my understanding of what™s going on in t
hat model
Šthis is true for 
a lot of other models as wellŠ
you
™d have to believe 
that 
one of two sorts of things 
is going on 
for the gap to be large. 
First, you could believe that firms have not fully adjusted their prices in 
response to the downward shift in demand that occurred four years ago.  These models are based 

on the notion of prices being sticky temporarilyŠ
that people set prices and
, for a time
, they™
re 
not incented to
ward, 
or they
™re prevented from
, adjusting their prices to reflect developments 
that they
™re seeing at their doorstep.
  So this price stickiness keeps prices from adjusting.  A 
fall 
                                             
     in demand shows up in quantities rather than prices at first, and then later, as prices adjust, the 
adjustment shows up in prices rather than quantities.  So that™
s the general mechanism.
  To 
attribute it all to that, you
™d have to believe that there™s 
an incredible amount of price stickiness 
in this economy.  I don™t find that plausible, and I don™t think it lines up with other evidence we 

have on the degr
ee of price stickiness in the economy. 
The second class of things you could believe, in order to believe that the gap is large, is 
that the economy has been hit by a string of large shocks that have not affected the model™s 

natural rate but have affected t
he economy.  And this is what the model attributes the large gap 
to.  What would those shocks be? Well, in EDO, there 
are
 only two kinds of shocks that would 
affect the gap.  One is a string of upward shocks to the degree of monopolistic power that firms 

have in setting prices. Firms are monopolistic competitors.  They have a little bit of pricing 

power, not total, and the amount of pricing power they have is determined by the degree of 

substitutability between goods.  For some reason, goods are less of a substitute for each other 

now, so firms have more pricing power, and t
hat™s why prices haven™t adjusted
, quantities have, 
and the gap is high.  Alternatively, you could believe that a string of analogous shocks in the 

labor market ha
s occurred, so that workers have more bargaining power in setting wages and 
are 

able to extract a 
kind of monopoly power from the firms they work for.  Now, I don™t have direct 

observations on any of these.  You infer these from the model and the data.  You 
take the model 

as given, you infer these kinds of things.  But those don™t really match up, in my mind, to the 

kinds of anecdotal stories you hear from people.  You just don™t hear about firms having a lot 

more pricing power than they did four years ago, and it certainly doesn™t seem consistent to think 

of workers as having a lot more leverage now, either.  So I find both of these implausible.  
Now, 

as I said, this is based on my understanding of EDO
; my understanding of how the theoretical 
              
    
    
    
              
     
  
       
  
       model is built
Šthat is well documented.  In that EDO model, in the memo results, they didn™t do 
the decomposition.  They didn™t show us how much of the gap is due to sticky prices left over 

from 
2008 shocks, how much is due to monopoly power shocks, how much is due to wa
ge pricing shocks.  I said they don™t seem plausible, but the right way forward for us, in talking 

about these things, is to put some estimates on the table and do the decomposition.  W
e have a 
working group under 
way that works with a set of these models. 
There are 
other DSGE 
modelsŠPhiladelphia, Chicago.  What™s the other one? 
PARTICIPANTS.  New York. 

MR. LACKER. 
New York.  I forgot New York.  And there 
are
 others around the 
System.  I know 
that 
Atlanta operates a pretty elaborate model as well.
  So e
ach of these taken to 
the data would give you a different estimate of the gap, and they™d give you a different 

decomposition of what the gap was about.  We™d be able to look at those, if we had them in front 

of us, and say, ﬁWell, attributing the gap to this is persuasive to me.  It matches up with what I 

think is out there,ﬂ or, ﬁThis reason for the gap to be large isn™t persuasive to me.ﬂ  And we could 

have a discussion that goes beyond, ﬁI think the gap is big.
ﬂ ﬁNo, I think the gap is small.
ﬂ  ﬁNo, 
I think the gap is big.
ﬂ ﬁNo, I think the gap is small.ﬂ I think we could make progress by putting 
the cards on the table, by putting some more-
explicit analysis on the table. 
So that™s my suggestion for improving our discussion of the gap going forward.  As I 
said, the estimates of the 3 percent gap in EDO seem implausible to me compared 
with 
factors 
that I
™ve talked about that are likely to affect the natural rate rather than the gap
Šthings like 
the 
labor market
, skill problems, 
the 
housing overhang, and policy uncertainty, which 
aren™t 
captured by the models.
  We could have a debate then about what is in the model or not.  T
his is 
what goes into my thinkingŠthat we shouldn™t expect much from monetary policy now.  
                   
                     
 Moreover, we might be pretty close to where the policy-
relevant natural rate is right now.
  Thank 
you
ŠI took some extra time here.  I appreciate it.  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE C
HAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I don™t really understand why the DSGE model should 
be particularly relevant to the current set of circumstances, given that this is a financial shock, a 

huge financial shock, and my understanding is that DGSE models are very rudimentary, 
if 
they 

hav
e anything
, in terms of the financial sector.
  To go to the DSGE models 
as a source of 
determining the natural rate versus the NAIRU and 
the size of the gap seems a little bit 
ﬁoff the 
reservation
ﬂ relative to the source of the shock.  So I™m just curious what your reaction is. 
MR. LACKER.  Sure.  Let me say two things to that.  
The f
irst is that progress has been 
made in putting the rudiments of a financial sector in these models.  The New York model is a 

leader on that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  B
ut we™
re still in elementary school. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  The second thing I™d point out, though, is that if we™re going to 
think about the data we see, draw conclusions, and act on it, we™
re using either an explicit model 
or an implicit model.  There
™s no avoiding that.  Otherwise, what we™re doing is gibberish.  
An explicit model has the advantage of exposing all sides of the reasoning process to scrutiny by 

others.  You can say, 
and it
™s perfectly legitimate to think, 
ﬁAll right
Šyes, this factor that I t
hink 
is important is not in this model,
ﬂ and I just did that with EDO.  I just said, 
ﬁLook, it doesn™t 
have a very articulate labor sector
ﬂŠbut we can debate that, and we can look at the magnitudes 
and talk about that.  
So I think it
™s a vehicle for analysis and discussion that crystallizes our 
thinking, that pins things down, but I don™t think it™s constructive to say, ﬁX isn™t in the model.  I 
       
              
    
    
                have a free pass to say whatever I want.ﬂ I just don™t think that™s constructive.  I know that™s not 
what you were advocating. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, President Lacker.  You™
re a 
perfect straight man for me because 
I™m going to be rather brief 
[laughter] 
to preserve 
time for 
the main event. 
Reports from my 
District contacts were very little changed from August. 
Economic expansion remains positive but very modest.  Just a coup
le of comments from 

contacts.  First, housing-sector contacts and several of my banking directors repor
ted that 
residential real estate activity in general is clearly improving.  Prices have firmed in many areas, 

sales volume has increased, and permitting is rising.  Purchase mortgage applications have 

increased recently, and refinance activity remains positive. I have also seen data suggesting that 

the recent increase in purchases is bei
ng driven primarily by mortgage-financed homebuyers 
rather than cash investors.  Second, a director from a large management consulting firm offered 

the view that a number o
f his firms, very large corporate clients, have resigned themselves to a 
2 percent growth world, and that major actions these businesses might take to accelerate their 

growth are largely on hold.  We heard a similar theme from several contacts.
  And, third, 
inflation and rising business costs are not much of a concern among our contacts.  My director 

from the country™s largest home-
improvement retailer reported that suppliers are not asking for 
price 
increases in this environment. 
Let me shift to my 
Bank™s assessment of the national economy and outlook.  It has 
become pretty difficult, in my view, to reject the view that the economy has been on a roughly 

2 percent growth trend for most of the recovery.  Maybe I™m a little slow, but the recognition has 

gelled
 in my thinking, 
just in the last few weeks
, that this is the prevailing reality.  Based on 
                        
          
     
         recent estimates, this may even overstate the immediate reality.
  My outlook for GDP growth 
continues to show only modest improvement on this trend over the forecast horizon.  In 
particular, beyond this year and next, I remain less optimistic about the pace of 
GDP growth than 
the Tealbook.  With respect to employment, my baseline outlook has been a continuation of the 

trend of roughly 150,000 per month that has prevailed over the past two years.  This pace would 

be sufficient at current participation rates to make continuing but modest progress on the 

unemployment rate. However, last week™s job report makes it pretty clear that employment 

growth has fallen short of the 150,000 trend over the past four months.  Even though four months 

amount to a small sliver of time, I am concerned about the lack of any sustained progress on the 

unemployment rate since the beginning of the year.  It is getting harder to rule out the p
ossibility 

that returning to the 
scenario of 
150,000 jobs a month is at risk.  
My perception is that the well
-known uncertainty factors, including those associated with various downside risks, are 

contributing to some of the recent softness in the data.  I have no argument with the SEP bias that 

GDP growth risks are weighted to the downside, but I don™t rule out that these uncertainty drags 
could dissipate and that there is some upside potential.  For instance, some of the incoming 

information around housin
g and 
Europe has been mildly encouraging, and it
™s plausible that if 
the major sources of uncertaintyŠnotably, the fiscal cliff and European situationŠ
are resolved 

favorably, or more or less favorably, in a few months, the outlook actually could be brighter.  So 

it strikes me that this environment is not as clear
-cut as the situations that we faced on the cusp 
of LSAP1 and LSAP2. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Mr. Wilcox, did you want to add to the 
conversation? 
          
   
        
      
      
                      MR. WILCOX.  
Yes. I don™t have a detailed response to President Lacker™s comments, 
but I thought I might just offer a few observations.  Sometimes I
™m in sympathy with many of 
the points that President Lacker makes.  I think it™s impor
tant, though, to state that we take it as 
our remit to advise the Committee to the limit of our ability to measure the economy, to estimate 
and understand the economy, to observe economic processes.  We think it™
s critically important 
not to do more than that, and we™re profoundly aware of the extent of our ignorance and the 

ignorance of the macroeconomic profession at large, regarding key questions about how the 

macroeconomy works. 
I™
m reminded of a comment that Larry Summers once made in quite a 
differen
t situation
, in which he said, ﬁYou know, economics is an interesting field.  I doubt that 
when astrophysicists get together
, they debate the fundamental validity of the laws of gravity.  
And yet what we as economists do is, we have profound uncertainty about questions that are as 

fundamental as the laws of gravity.
ﬂ  We on the staff do make every effort to distinguish short-

run influences that we can identify.  For example, we have adjusted our reference level of the 

unemployment rate in light of influence
s that we can identify and estimate
, stemming from 
emergency unemployment benefits and from the quality of functioning of the labor market.  We 

have adjusted our measure of the gap between the actual unemployment rate and the reference
, 
or natural, 
rate of
 unemployment for those kinds of things.  But beyond that, we confront the real 
world in which data are imperfect, theory is deficient, policymaker and staff bandwidth is 

limited, and there are a lot of profound and fundamental debates to be resolved. 
With regard to EDO, it is a state
-of-the-
art DSGE model coming directly out of the 
intellectual tradition that President Lacker refers to. It
™s part, but only part, of the intellectual 

base that we consult in the course of putting together our analysis that we provide to the 

Committee.
  Now, whether the empirical properties of that model are plausible or implausible is 
                
                              
              
a little difficult for me to say.  They are what they are, and they
™re derived by an effort to work 
directly in that intellectual tradition.  W
e have pursued a diversified, 
multimodel strategy
, which 
we think provides our analysis with a greater robustness than would be the case if we had a 
single 
model or a single-
intellectual
-tradition strategy. 
So I
™m in sympathy with many of the 
points that President Lacker raises, but I think we need to recognize that the macroeconomic 

profession has a long way to go before we can deliver the kind of clarity and certainty that it 

seems to me is implicit in much of your remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President 
Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate Dave Wilcox™s comments 
there, and I™
ll have a few comments on the slack memo at the end here. 
Let me talk for a minute 
about the Eighth District economy, which continues to expand at a modest pace.  The drought in 

the 
District has been especially severe and is having an important effe
ct on agriculturally 
based 
businesses.  I generally agree with the Tealbook analysis of the 
effe
ct of the drought on the 
macroeconomy over the next couple of quarte
rs. 
District labor markets are improving slowly. 
The 
District unemployment rate, based on 16 D
istrict MSAs, has continued to decline this year 
and is, according to the most recent data, about 7.5 percent, noticeably below the national 

unemployment rate.
  Employment growth in the District has been slow, just a touch better than 
the national data, according to the most recent observations.  District real estate markets have 

improved during 2012.  Data on home sales for District MSAs, for instance, are up by 
a healthy 
margin compared 
with
 2011.  Specifically, year-
to-date home sales are up almost 13 percent in 
Louisville, 7 percent in Little Rock, 10 percent in Memphis, and 16 percent in St. Louis.  

Similarly, building permits for single
-family homes year to 
date in 2012 versus 2011 were up 
42 percent in Louisville, 14 percent in Little Rock, 46 percent in Memphis, and 23 percent in 
               
             
          
   
    
  
    St.
 Louis.  So I think that the housing part of the equation is moving off the bottom in 2012, and I 
find that encouraging. 
Natio
nally, I view the macroeconomy as being in a sluggish 
economic 
growth mode, but 
for a variety of reasons, I do not think the current constellation of data readings is one that should 
trigger outsized monetary policy action.  I view the U.S. economy as being on a path not too 

different from the one suggested in the work of Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rog
off as cited by 
President Lacker.
 They noted that post-
financial
-crisis or 
post-bubble economies tend to grow 
relatively slowly for a long time.  Our economy cl
early suffered through 
a collapse of a housing 
bubble, along with an associated financial crisis, so it is not really that surprising that the 

economy is following a path similar to the one experienced by other countries 
that 
have been in a 
similar situati
on.  In particular, the notion of a rapid return to the pre-
crisis
, bubble-influenced 
real GDP growth trend seems quite unrealistic accor
ding to the international cross-country 
evidence.  This, to me, is the leading hypothesis for our current situation.  I am concerned about 

the global slowdown and that, fed in large part by ongoing recession in Europe, this is affecting 

and will continue to affect U.S. multinational corporations.  These effects are quite apparent in 

my discussions with business contacts in 
medium and large firms in the 
District and across the 
nation.  Many are reporting troubling or worrisome movements in revenue and volume data 

during recent months.  While this bears watching, I do not think it is yet at the point where I 

foresee an especially severe impact on the U.S.  Some of this is certainly to be expected when the 

pan-European economy, which is actually somewhat larger than the U.S. economy, is in 
recession. 
I see U.S. inflation as subdued but generally close to target, unlike the summ
er and fall of 
2010, when nearly all measures of inflation were low and on a downward trajectory.  Again, this 
             
                 
   
   
             
  
     bears watching, but in my view, a threat of continued disinflation and possibly eventual deflation 
has not materialized, at least so far. 
Inflat
ion expectations are, by our own description, stable.  
Five
-year TIPS
-based expected inflation was about 208 basis points yesterday.  This, again, is 
not the situation of 2010, at least so far.  In addition, the five-year TIPS real yield of about 

minus 145 basis points is considerably lower than in 2010, suggesting that monetary policy may 

be much easier today than it was at that juncture.  In addition, I do not see financial stress as 

being particularly high at the current moment.  The St. Louis Financial Stress Index is showing 
a relatively tame reading. Of course, many factors could increase financial stress, but as of now
, those events have not occurred and, in fact, may not occur. 
I think it makes sense to wait and see what Europe can deliver during th
e fall.  As I
™ve 
told all of you before, I™
ve become 
more pessimistic on the medium
-term European prospects 
during the summer, as I have come to doubt that Europe has the type of either informal or formal 

institutional arrangements to deal with a crisis of
 this magnitude.  
Still, I think the jury remains 
out on that issue, so it would make sense for us to wait and see what the Europeans do, 
and see 

what happens.  
Certainly, recent declines in Spanish and Italian yields across the yield curve for 

government debt in both countries have been impressive 
and
 substantial, even if the medium-
and longer-term outlook for Europe is questionable.  
I am concerned that the ECB is not really 
easing aggressively in order to mitigate the 
euro
-area recession. Indeed, the ECB is preoccupied 
with selective debt purchases on a basis that requires some conditionality, which means that they 

have to wait for the country to react to their offer.  This throws off the timing of the relationship 

between the 
normal business cycle 
and 
monetary policy.
  So that™s keeping the ECB from acting, 
which makes me worried that the U.S. action could exacerbate the recession there by 

strengthening the 
euro.  And indeed, the e
uro has been stronger in recent weeks.
  You might say 
      
             
              
          
  
   
 we worry only about the U.S. economy, which I think is very true and very relevant, but this 
could end up feeding back to the U.S. in a detrimental way if we make the European situation 

worse. 
Longer
-term interest rates in the U.S. are already very low.  Ten
-year 
Treasury tr
ading in 
a recent session was around 170 basis points.  That™
s extremely low by rec
ent historical metrics. 
Longer
-term inflation expectations are in excess of 250 basis points, depending on which 
measure you use.  That implies negative real yields over a 
10-year horizon.  That™s an extremely 
long horizon to have a negative real yield.  I think the U
nited States 
can benefit from the lower 
yields that we have in place right now.  We can benefit from the flight to safety that has driven 

capital out of Europe, 
much as the U
nited States
 did during the 1997Œ98 
Asian currency crisis. 
Also, equity markets are at recent highs
Šfour
-year highs, 
if I™m not mistaken.  This seems to 
indicate among investors a certain confidence in the future of U.S. economic performance 

despite an ongoing worldwide slowdown, and I think the jury is still out a little bit on whether 

the U
nited States
 can be the strength in the storm here or whether we™re going to get pulled into 
the global slowdown ourselves.  Obviously, there are detrime
ntal effects from the rest of the 
world, but there are also offsetting 
flight
-to-safety effects in the U
nited States
.  So I think we 
could afford to see how that plays out for a few months here going forward. 
Labor markets in the U.S. are improving, although in a halting and uneven way.  It is 
sometimes noted that the national unemployment rate has not improved during 2012.  I might 

remind the Committee that this was also true in 2011.  We had 9.1 percent unemployment in 

January of 2011.  As of August 2011, 
we were also at 9.1 percent.
  However, today™s 
unemployment one year after that is 8.1 percent, 1 full percentage point lower.  That™s about as 

good as we can do in this game, about as good as we can do in one year™s time.  The U.S. 
              
    
       
       
          unemployment rate has 
rarely, if ever, dropped this much in one year during the past 25 years.  
This improvement, 
of course
, occurred unevenly, but it did occur nevertheless and from a 
starting point last year at this time in September that looked considerably darker than today
™s outlook.  
Some might say we did
n™t
 take action last year, but we took action through the m
aturity 
extension p
rogram.  That program is still in place and still on the table. 
In summary, as always, there are many ongoing developments that bear watching, but I 
think that the current readings on key aspects of the economy do not argue for outsized monetary 
policy action at this particular juncture.  I™m not saying I would never support it, but I don™t think 

that this moment is probably the right time. 
A few comments on the slack memo.  I do appreciate the memo, and I think it did a great 
job of outlining the approach to the slack issue that has been taken by the staff for, 
I belie
ve, 
many years at the Fed.  I thought it was accurate and outlined the issues very well.  The memo, 

to me, suggests that the ﬁ
get
-serious DSGE approachﬂ shows exactly how complicated this 
concept really is when you try to get down to it.  W
henever 
you
™re 
trying to fix something, it
™s good to know what you™re trying to fix.  And the great thing about the New Keynesian model is, 

you know what you™re trying to fix.  You™
re trying to fix the fact that there are sticky prices out 
there, and you can improve welf
are in that model in a certain way by certain types of monetary 
policy actions.  But different assumptions that you might make inside the model are quite subtle, 

and they can imply different welfare outcomesŠ
that is, different amounts of utility that actua
lly 
get delivered to households.  I think 
that 
there
™s no substitute going forward, that the Committee 
just has to take a stand on these complicated issues and we have to roll up our sleeves and say, 

ﬁWhat is it that we think we need
 to do?
ﬂ and ﬁW
hat is it that we want to fix?ﬂ
  The problem is, 
because of the subtleties inside these models, what we learned from the models is that you can 
          
        
                       
       inadvertently be doing more harm than good, depending on what™s actually going on in the real 
world and depending on whi
ch assumptions are really the ones that make the most sense. 
I think 
there
™s a very clear core idea, and you don™t have to read the whole literature to get at the core 
idea.  The co
re idea is that the flexible price level of output is a volatile object. 
Even in an 
economy that had no frictions whatsoever, there would be all kinds of shocks, and that level of 

output, which would be a Pare
to-optimal thing, would be moving around all of the time.  T
he 
actual level of output that we observe is probably not that level of output, and therefore there 

may be scope for a policy action.  But in any event, that volatile flexible price level of output is 

not going to be a smooth trend the way we traditionally have thought about it in macroeconomic 

circles since the 19
50s and 1960s.  Most of what we try to do when we think about potential 
output and measures of slack is to get a smooth trend.  I don™t think that that™s supported by the 

modern macroeconomic literature. 
The memo also makes it clear that there
™s tremendous 
uncertainty about estimates of 
slack, even if you™
re willing to swallow other assumptions about 
the 
statistical models or the 
economic models.  
As I
™ve emphasized in the past, even if all you want to do is forecast, and you 
don™t care about all of the the
oretical issues, the relationships between the slack measures and the 
actual inflation outcomes are questionable themselves and are weak and
, I think, 
have gotten 
weaker over time. 
I™ve talked about slack many times here, but I do think that, 
going forwar
d, it would behoove the Committee to put a clear model on the table.  W
e can argue about whether 
those assumptions 
are
 the right ones, whether 
we like them, 
and whether we think we can bring 
other evidence to bear on the particular assumptions.  And 
we can 
get it clear
er in our own heads 
how we think we™re helping matters with our policy. 
                                    
           I also thought it was very interesting in the memo
ŠI™ve often wondered about the term 
ﬁNAIRU.ﬂ  The memo makes it clear that the ﬁAﬂ no longer belongs in 
ﬁNAIRU,
ﬂ and in fact
, the ﬁNﬂ doesn™t belong in ﬁ
NAIRU
ﬂ either
Šso just ﬁ
IRU.
ﬂ It™s just 
ﬁIRU
ﬂ at the end.  T
he ﬁAﬂ 
stands for ﬁ
accelerati
ngﬂ 
and staff 
members 
make it clear that they™ve had to take that part out 
because it wasn™t working very well over maybe quite a long time period.  So I thought that that 
was interesting.  Maybe we should quit using the term, since the acceleration part isn™t in there 

anymore.
  Thanks a lot.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The past nine months remind me a bit 
of Samuel Beckett™s play 
Waiting for Godot. 
Rather than waiting for 
Godot
, we are waiting for 
the labor market recovery.  And like 
Godot, the recovery in the labor market continues to elude 

us.  
In the Beckett play, the character
s seriously consider suicide as their best solution to the 
seemingly endless wait.  I do hope 
that 
tomorrow we arrive at a better solution.  [Laughter] 
Unfortunately, last month™s labor market report was quite consistent with my submission 
for the e
xperimental consensus forecast.  I had a more pessimistic outlook for the next 18 months 
than the consensus forecast, and it assumed that we would not see robust employment growth or 

a significant change in the unemployment rate by the end of the yearŠ
or, for th
at matter, the end 
of next year
Šwithout further accommodation.  The modest employment growth did not surprise 
me, although I may not have sufficiently considered the possibility of the further declines in 
the 

labor force participation rate that were a striking feature of last Friday™s employment report, 

reducing the unemployment rate but for the wrong reason.  
One of the distinctive features of this 

recession and recovery has been the percentage of the unemployed who remain unemployed for 

greater than
 26 weeks.  Unlike the deep recession in 1982, in which there was a quick recovery 
        
                          
          and, as a result, a re
latively small increase in long
-duration unemployment, this recession has 
had a weak recovery, resulting in more long-duration unemployment.  Work being done by the 
staff in Boston that decomposes the 
Beveridge 
curve by duration of unemployment finds that the 
shift in the curve is primarily generated by workers who suffer long-duration unemployment.  

Faster growth in the economy would likely mitigate some of this problem. 
While some have attributed the slow recovery to a deleveraging process, I would put less 
weight on that argument.  Consumption and business investment have not been the laggards in 

this recovery.  Rather, government spending and housing account for much of the unusual 

weakness.  In fact, if you exclude housing and government spending from GDP for this recovery, 

it looks much like the previous two recoveries.  The unusually weak government spending is, in 

part, a result of the state and lo
cal governments pulling back in response to greatly diminished 
revenues, a direct consequence of the depth of the recession and the weakness of the recovery.  

Many were prepared for a revenue shortfall, with funds accumulated in their rainy day funds, but 

this recession quickly put most rainy day funds underwater.  Housing is usually a driver of most 

recoveries but has been absent for much of this recovery.  However, since the onset of the 

housing bust, the population has grown, per capita income has grown, 
interest rates are low, and 

prices are more affordable, resulting in tentative signs of a housing recovery.  This is a propitious 

time for considering additional stimulus to housing. 
If homebuyers feel that house prices are on 
the rise
Šas many indicators
 suggest 
and
 the Tealbook forecastsŠ
and that mortgage rates will 
remain this low only temporarily, we may start to get new homebuyers to commit before rates 

and prices rise. 
It is important to note the significant downside risks we are still facing.  While there have 
been some positive announcements about financial support out of Europe, the underlying 
                        
              
      
   solutions still require political support.  Domestically, while most are aw
are of the dangers of a 
fiscal cliff, the positive solutions still require political action.
  Should either of these risks 
materialize, we will need to consider a further array of tools: 
 possibly expanding QE even 
further, using asset purchases to target long rates
, or providing more commitment in our 
guidance.  An important addition to these tools might also be an expanded set of discount 

window actions.  The staff memo on this provides a good road map to possible ways forward.  

They include a variant of 
the Bank of England program, a mortgage program that would provide 
low-cost funding for banks to finance mortgage loansŠparticularly to those parts of the 

mortgage market that have been slow to recover, and programs that might require T
reasury 
support to reduce the credit risk entailed on certain types of lendin
g.  While some of these tools 
are likely to be most useful during a crisis where lending markets are disrupted, some could be 

implemented even in the current rate environment. I would encourage the staff to continue to 

search for creative ways that we can support those areas of the economy that are still troubled.  

As further progress is made, it may be worth discussing, either as an additional tool if the 

recovery continues to be quite slow or as a contingency plan should some of the tail risks 

materialize.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  During the intermeeting period, the 
economic data have confirmed that the ec
onomy remains stuck in low gear. Like the Tealbook, I 

expect only modest 
GDP growth in the second half of this year.  
Clearly, the economic recovery 
hasn™t been able to gain traction in the face of a variety of head
winds.  These include household-
sector d
eleveraging, tight credit for many potential borrowers, fiscal retrenchment, and global 
uncertainties.  Given these headwinds, absent further monetary policy accommodation, I would 
          
  
          
         
    
     expect sluggish growth and no meaningful progress toward our employment mandate until 2014.  
Indeed, when judged on a policy-consistent basis, my outlook is somewhat more pessimistic than 

the Tealbook forecast and consensus forecast, with slower 
GDP growth and a higher path for the 
unemployment rate. 
In gauging the medium-
term ou
tlook for the economy and the stance of monetary policy, 
I find the 
Kalman
-filter model that I developed with Thomas Laubach to be a useful tool.  A
fter 
this morning™s discussion, I™
m a little nervous about going into the 
Kalman 
filter, but I
™m assured 
that Thomas is ready with a white board to answer any technical questions regarding our model.  

But this model seeks to distinguish between transitory and highly persistent supply and demand 

influences on economic activity.  In response to President Bullard™s 
earlier comments, I would 
stress that in our model, we do not impose any restriction that potential output growth is smooth.  

We let the data speak to that.
  The highly persistent influences on demand can be summarized by 
what we call the natural rate of 
interest.  In the model, a highly persistent reduction in demand 
lowers the natural rate of interest.  And I think importantly for thinking about the stance of 

monetary policy and a number of issues around that, our balance sheet policies should boost the 

natural rate of interest, all else 
being 
equal, in this empirical model. 
So, influenced by Board 
staff research that highlights the information content of gross domestic income along with gross 

domestic product, I™ve estimated a modified version of the LaubachŒ
Williams model using both 

GDI and GDP.
  The current estimate of the natural rate of interest from this model is about 
minus 75 basis points.  The current real funds rate, therefore, is only about 1 percentage point 

below this estimate of the natural rate.  This implies that the current extent of monetary 

accommodation, including our balance sheet policies, has only modestly exceeded the severe 

headwinds that we™re facing in our economy. 
         
          
        
                             Given my forecast
s for subdued 
economic 
growth and very little pr
ogress on the 
employment mandate over the next few years, my SEP projection assumes considerable 
additional monetary policy stimulus.  In particular, I assume a new program of open-
ended 
purchases of 
Treasuries and MBS.  They expand the Fed™s balance sheet
 by about $1 trillion over 
the next year or so. 
And with this stimulus, I expect a faster recovery, with real GDP growth of 
2½ percent next year and 
3¼ percent in 2014, with the unemployment rate edging down to 
7.9 percent at the end of next year and 7.3 percent 
at the end of 2014.  
I see the risk
s to this 
outlook as skewed to the downside.  Another bout of brinkmanship around the fiscal cliff seems 

likely, if not inevitable.  The problems plaguing Europe also remain daunting, with considerable 

risk to our economy if the financial crisis intensifies. 
Here I would just echo the comments made 
earlier by Vice Chairman
 Dudley.  I share those views and was somewhat more pessimistic than 
perhaps the Tealbook™s description of recent events in Europe.  The bold program that the ECB 

has announced will certainly buy some short-run relief, but the underlying problems remain
:  a 
lack of political federalism, an unsustainable fiscal outlook, and disparities in economic 

competitive
ness across Europe.  So, in summary, the ECB™s actions may serve as a useful bridge 
loan.  
I hope it is not a bridge loan to nowhere. 
The fiscal cliff and the crisis in Europe are not just risks to the outlook; 
by increasing 
uncertainty
, they 
also 
seem alr
eady to be adding to the factors slowing our recovery.  It seems 
everyone I talk to stresses that uncertainty is holding back hiring and investment.  Indeed, 

uncertainty appears to have virtually paralyzed some businesses, prompting them to postpone 

capita
l spending and delay payroll expansions.  So a key question for monetary policy is whether 

this rise in uncertainty should be viewed primarily as a shock to demand, which lowers both 

output and inflation if not counteracted by additional monetary policy stimulus, or as a shock to 
            
    
       
                
           
   
supply, such as the drought, which lowers output but boosts inflation.  R
ecent theoretical and 
empirical research has addressed this question.  As I described back in December, empirical 
research by my staff at the San Francisco Fe
d finds that over the past 30 years, 
higher uncertainty 

operates like a negative aggregate demand shock that reduces both economic activity and 

inflation.  Following uncertainty shocks of the types that we currently face, expenditures on 

consumer durables, investment, short-
term interest rates, and inflation all fall
, while 
unemployment rises
, in this analysis.  
Now, I
™m sure President Lacker will be very happy to hear 
what I
™m about to say, and that is that we also looked at this issue in a fully micro
-fou
nded 
DSGE model.  This finding that uncertainty acts primarily as a demand shock is confirmed by 

the research using such DSGE models, both by my staff and by academic researchers. 
An increase in uncertainty causes households to save more for precautionary reasons.  This a
ffects 
both supply and demand in the models.  However, in these models, the demand effects are by far 

the dominant ones.  This is because the negative effects of an uncertainty shock on consumption 

are amplified when prices are slow to adj
ust, causing businesses to cut production further.  
This 
implies that uncertainty shocks lead to a negative output gap, a fall in inflation, and this is 

consistent with the empirical evidence I mentioned a moment ago.  All told, both theory and data 

sugges
t that the uncertainty shocks that I believe are holding back
 our economy today really 
should be seen more as adverse shocks to demand, which monetary policy should aim to offset. 
Turning to inflation, the medium-term outlook has not changed.  I continue t
o expect 
overall PCE inflation to remain below 2 percent for the next few years, and I view the risks 
to the 
inflation forecast as balanced. 
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 
           
   
                           MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like Presi
dent Lockhart, I
™m going to 
keep my remarks on economic conditions particularly brief today because I believe that we have 
more agreement on the outlook than we have on the policy implications of the outlook, which 

means 
that 
I™m not going to be as brief in my comments on policy 
tomorrow. 
My 
District 
business contacts remain concerned about the risks to the outlook, yet they are generally 

reporting only small changes in activity levels in their own businesses.  A few of my business 

contacts point to either a coming slowdown or a coming acceleration in their sales.  Their 

comments are consistent with the holding pattern around today™s 2 percent growth rate.  
In my 
current outlook, I expect the recovery to remain in this holding pattern for the rest of this y
ear 
and then generally pick up to a GDP growth rate of a little more than 2½ percent in 2013 and a 

little more than 3 percent in 2014.  In order to achieve these projected growth rates, I assume that 

we provide further policy accommodation by extending the period of very low rates into 2015. 
Among the data released since our last meeting, the August employment report stands 
out.  It was particularly disappointing in that the BLS confirmed that the economy had made very 

little progress in labor markets over 
the summer. While the month
-to-month swings in the 
household survey make the progress on the unemployment rate difficult to interpret, the decline 

in the employment
-to-population ratio to essentially its post
-recession trough makes it clear that 
there has
 been little sustained progress in labor markets.  Nonetheless, as GDP growth picks up 
over the next two years, I am expecting that we will make gradual progress on unemployment.  

As mentioned in the memo on economic slack, the Cleveland staff has taken a close look at the 

flows into and out of unemployment to examine the natural rate of unemployment.  This research 

finds that the trends of flows into and out of unemployment, often referred to as labor market 

churning, have been f
all
ing for several years.  This decline in labor market churning implies that 
             
                   
  the current path to full employment will likely be slower than in past cycles. 
Some 
commentators treat the slow progress on reducing unemployment as evidence that the natural 
rate 
is far higher.  However, in the Cleveland Fed model, a faster pace of GDP growth does 

lower the unemployment rate more quickly.  While this result is supportive of monetary policy 

accommodation, it doesn™t answer the question of the effectiveness of our no
ntraditional 

monetary policy tools. 
Turning to inflation, I have made only small changes to my outlook for inflation.  I agree 
with the Board staff that we
™re likely to see more disinflation in core PCE rates, but my forecast 
doesn™t get quite as far away 
from the 2 percent rate as the Tealbook anticipates. 
The risks to my economic outlook remain primarily to the downside for GDP growth.  
Although market participants seem to be taking a more optimistic view that Europeans will solve 
their problems, a 
crisis
 in Europe remains a large risk to 
the recovery in the U
nited S
tates
.  In addition, the fiscal cliff poses a significant risk of 
a dramatic slowing of the U.S. economy.  
These risks to growth imply that unemployment could end up higher than anticipated.  On 

inflation, I continue to see the risks tilted toward the downside, given th
e significant downside 

risk
s to economic activity and 
the
 low levels of 
some measures of 
inflation expectations.  In my 
view, these risks to growth, unemployment, and inflation make the outlook more uncertain than 

normal.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Following our July meeting, the key question 
was whether the incoming data would finally begin to show substantial and sustainable 

improvement in labor markets.  It™s pretty clear that the answer to that question is no.  Without a 

doubt, 2012 will go into the books as another year of unsatisfactory economic performance.  This 
                    
         
         
           
  
 is the third year in a row 
of growth around 2 percent.  This pace of growth leaves 
resource slack 
quite large. 
At the same time
, the inflation outlook is not threatening, and numerous theoretical 
and empirical analyses show that there are ways to provide additional accommodation th
at will 
improve this economic situation. 
In terms of recent developments, the problems that we™
ve characterized as downside risks 
earlier in the year have materialized into actual headwinds.  They are gathering in strength. 
My 
business contacts noted that 
their current operations are being adversely affected by increasing
ly negative forces in the U.S. and around the world.  Similar to some comments that President 

Lockhart made, apparently CEOs are sharing their gloomy outlooks with their fellow CEO 

interlo
cutors, and this has the potential to reinforce downward expectations and spiral into even 
softer spending and hiring.  
For example, one of my regular contacts repeated comments he had 
heard from the CEO of a major U.S. conglomerate, 
who was a former Fed Bank chair 

somewhere.  According to my contact, this CEO instructed all of his business units to plan for 

the possibility that the U.S. will experience a lost decade
, like Japan.  I think that™s disturbing.  
With regard to Europe, many of my contacts thought the odds of truly awful outcomes had 

declined, and that™s a positive comment.  The recent ECB announcements regarding outright 

monetary transactions give the fiscal authorities somewhat more time to maneuver, but the 

additional bond buying will be condit
ioned on fiscal consolidation that likely will be difficult to 
achieve and bad for growth in those countries.  And without stronger growth, the periphery 

countries are going to face repeated crisis events over the next several years. As one financial 

contact we spoke to put it, 
ﬁAll the Europeans have done is transform an acute problem into a 
chronic one.
ﬂ  The other elephant in the room is the U.S. fiscal cliff.  On the upside, my contacts 
say 
that 
surely the parties in Washington will find a way to limit 
the damage after the election
.           
                       
        But on the downside, many currently see uncertainty over the cliff weighing on activity, and no 
one can rule out the possibility of a messy outcome that would result in very significant fiscal 

drag hitting us around the turn of the year. 
One bit of positive news is that I™m hearing commentary that indicates monetary 
accommodation is helping.  Several financial contacts say that today™s low rates are leading them 

to increase investment, and that should facilitate futu
re activ
ity. 
For instance, we heard 
comments on how funding for distressed properties has increased and capital is being redeployed 

to the residential sector. Indeed, there™s been a 
lot of talk about residential construction 

improving, as several have noted.  Furthermore, refinancing continues to help firms strengthen 

their balance sheets, putting them in a position to increase investment or pass on funds to 

someone else more likely to spend them, as you pointed out at our last meeting, Mr. Chairman.  
I should 
note that while lo
w rates are pushing some to undertake more investment, our financial 
contacts do not say that 
they are seeing excessive risk
-taking or anything approximating 
financial 
froth
.  And in the past, they™ve not been shy about pointing that out when they have seen that. 
As I said earlier, condition
ed on our current policies, the outlook for 
economic 
growth is 
unacceptable.  It™s unacceptable in part because recent data reinforce the obvious point that high 

inflation is not a concern, certainly not relative to our long-run objective and certainly not within 

our balanced approach strategy.  And it™
s unacceptable because mainstream monetary analysis 
clearly indicates that there are means of providing more accommodation that can improve these 

outcomes
.  The Board staff analyses clearly demonstrate this.  The LSAP memos had simulations 
that pointed that out, FRB/
US™
s optimal control simulations and 
the nominal-income-
level
-targeting simulations point that out, too.  Mike Woodford™s careful analysis in h
is Jacks
on Hole 
paper showed the same. 
       
    
        
           
    
    
   
               
  
        While I™m at this point, let me make a couple of comments about DSGE models, which 
were discussed earlier today. It is certainly the case that we are presented with results from four 
models that are currently being l
ooked at: 
the 
EDO model out of the Board, our Chicago model, 
Philadelphia™s model, and New York™s model.  A 
question that President Lacker was asking was
, in the context of these models, how big 
is 
slack, 
and 
how is it measured
?  At some level within 
the 
context of these models, this is a bit of a red herring.  For instance, if you look at the 

projections, all of the inflation forecasts coming out of these models are under our 2 
percent goal, 

and that™s true through 2015.  So, 
even
 in a model that™s lookin
g at whatever measure it is that™s 
holding back inflation, 
there is no
 inflationary pressureŠand some of the models have much less 
inflationary pressure than others.  The second point is that the theory in these models is really 

about marginal costs.  That
™s the fundamental variable.  The firms in these models are faced with 
the following question: W
hen I get to change my price and I™ve seen things change, what™s my 
margin
al cost structure that tells me how much I should increase my price, given that I won
™t be 
able to do it next time for sure? What have 
I face
d, w
hat am I expecting others to face, and 
things like that? 
Slack i
s often viewed in these models as a useful proxy at best.  I
f there™s a lot 
of slack, then your marginal costs won™t be rising
; they™ll be low, and things like that.  But the 
fundamental is really about marginal costs.
  And so, when you think about that, these models are 
really looking at the inflation data and everything around those data and saying, ﬁWe just don™t 

see inflationary pressures.ﬂ I can™t tell you exactly what the resource slack is that is embodied in 

that, but we don™t see inflationary pressures, and that™s coming out of all four of the models that 

we™re presented with quarterly. 
Another point that President Lacker ra
ised is, if sticky prices are really what™s 
fundamental here, why haven™t they adjusted already
?  And you hear that a lot.  In these models, 
                     
   
  
     
    
         
      
     a lot of asynchronous price adjustment for whatever reason is 
given
, and John Taylor has 
contributed importantly to exactly that point going way back over the last 20 or more years.  
But 
even allowing for the fact that maybe there would have been adjustments already, I think it™s 
reasonable to assume that we™ve been hit with a sequence of negative aggregate demand shocks 

along the lines 
that I 
believe 
President Williams™
s comments were pointing at.  At least we™ve 
certainly been surprised the last three summers in a row that output has been lower than we were 

projecting, s
o something different is at work.
  And then it™s 
also the case that 
inflationary 
expectations matter in these pricing equations and models.  This is a little more delicate and 

subtle.  Apparently inflation expectations are stable in all of these models, but there 
are
 subtle 
modeling choices at work in each of them about what the stochastic process is for marginal cost 

pressures and how they™re updated and what inflation expectations are.  This gets at a point of 

dissatisfaction
Šwhen I talk with various people in the Federal Reserve, they might say, ﬁI do
n™t 
like looking at the FRB/
US projections because I see all 
of 
this monetary accommodation 
coming, and I don™t see inflation coming, a
nd why is that?
ﬂ  I talk to people, and they worry a lot 
about inflation.  
We aren™t able to model that
Šapparently not sa
tisfactorily, 
because they all 
come back to the same place, which is
, expectations are well anchored or the stochastic process 
is 
mean
 reverting at some level, and so we just don™t see things getting out of hand.  I want to 
point out 
that this is not 
a FRB
/US question per se, but it™s a statement about how much we 
really 
know within the context of well-articulated macro models.  It™s way beyond just FRB/
US. 
All of our DSGE models have that same feature. 
So the bottom line, Mr. Chairman, 
is that this is the
 third summer in a row that economic 
growth has failed to achieve escape velocity, and the economy™s liftoff has fizzled on the 
          
                 
               launching pad.  It seems clear that the outlook crosses the threshold that justifies more action.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Thank you.
  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When we were in Jackson Hole, 
we got to hear you, Mr. Chairman, talk about the tools we have available.  You described our 

asset purchase tools and our communication tools, and so I™d like to give you some feedback 

from the 
Ninth District about how we™re doing on the communication front.  I get the same kinds 
of questions, I would sayŠusually from different people, but they sometimes come from the 

same person
.  The first comment is
, as the FOMC 
considers its date to keep rates low through 
late 2014, people are concerned, 
why is 
it that 
the Fed 
is 
committed to keep
ing 
rates low for two 
years
?  How could the Fed commit like this without thinking about the fact that the world could 
change in some fashion
?  And the second 
comment is
, by saying that interest rates are going to 
be low for that long or 
are expected
 to be low for that long, the Fed is signaling that conditions 
will be weak, and that
, in and of itself, is suppressing demand.  Now, of course, I say to them, 
ﬁNo, you misunderstood what the FOMC is intending to say to you.  It is meaning to 

communicate that the economic conditions threshold for raising rates is now higher than you 

might have thought.  The recovery has to be further along than you might have thought.ﬂ  A
t this 
stage, my questioner says, 
ﬁWell, that makes sense, but why didn™t you guys just say that?ﬂ  A
t that point, I usually turn the conversation to something about fracking 
[laughter] because that 
seems to work.  To me, this kind of dialogue suggests 
that 
we need to communicate more clearly 
about our reaction function.  And communication about our reaction function is sometimes 

motivated in terms of accountability and transparency, and these are, I think, good motivations.  
      
       
    
                           
       But as my brief summary of my 
Ninth District colloquies indicates, communication about 
our react
ion function is also an 
essential
 ingredient to the effectiveness of policy. 
Now, the changes that have been made in B(5) relative to what was in the previous 
FOMC statement in July
ŠB(5) 
now represents even more of a commitment because actually the 
conditioning clauses have been removed, although 
many readers were not paying close attention 
to those conditional clauses anyway.  I think the lead-in sentence to B(5) is much better, but I 

have to say, most people don™t read the words that carefully in the FOMC statement.  Their 

takeaway is the year.  That™s the main thing they™re hearing. 
So before we communicate 
our reaction function, we have to start thinking about how we 
formulate one, and as I™
ve m
entioned before, I think that a good reaction function should have at 
least two inputs
: some measure of inflationary pressures and some measure 
of labor 
market 
underutilization.  These inputs would capture how well we™re doing in terms of our two 

mandates
, and our policy stance, I would think, should evolve as these inputs change.  
I see this 
as the basis for the approach that President Plosser, President Williams
, and I are following in 
our alternative policy statements.  The K
PW statements emphasize only those changes of the 
data that are viewed as leading to changes in measures of inflationary pressures and labor market 

underutilization.  
And then the KPW statement
s translate those changes in inflationary pressure
s and labor market underutilization into 
the rationale for the 
Commit
tee
™s policy decisions.  
At this 
point, I™ll digress briefly to say that I think we™ve completed our cycle of going through the 

parallel FOMC statements, and President Plosser, I believe, will bring forward the KPW 

approach to t
he 
subcommittee on communications for further consideration.  So I™m sure the 
subcommittee members are glad to hear that.
  That said, just like the FOMC statement itself, the 
               
                    KPW memos are very oriented around changes in monetary accommodation and how they 
relate 
to changes in conditions. 
Ultimately
, though, 
a Committee reaction function has to translate the level of 
inflationary pressures and the level of resource utilization into a decision about the level of 
monetary accommodation.  A 
key challenge we
™ve
 struggled 
with is that it™s much easier for us 
to reach accord about the changes in these variables than it is for us to reach accord
, at least 
qualitatively, about the levels of inflationary pressures and the levels of resource utilization.  A
s we saw fr
om submissions of the consensus forecast, there are very different views around the 
table on that.  Some might see this heterogeneity as precluding the possibility of developing a 

Committee reaction function, but I think this is where the consensus forecas
t process is a very 
useful way forward.  It provides a way for us to come together behind a 
Committee view about 
the medium-term inflation outlook and about the economy™s performance relative to the 

employment mandate, conditional on our current policy stance now and as anticipated.  
Then we 

can usefully formulate the Committee™s reaction function as a mapping from that consensus vi
ew into policy choices.  ﬁMedium-
term inflation is too high relative to target
ﬂ:  That would say you 
should contemplate reducing accommodation.  ﬁThe unemployment rate is too high over the 

medium run relative to 
mandate
-consistent levels
ﬂ:  Then the Committee should contemplate 
adding accommodation. 
Mr. Chairman, the Committee™s consensus view about the economy seems clear, and it™
s been described in many recent FOMC statement
s. The Committee expects inflation to be at or 
below target over the medium run and unemployment to continue to be elevated fo
r some time 
relative to mandate
-consistent levels.  That consensus viewŠ
inflation 
running too low; 
                 
        
                         unemployment, too highŠimplies a need for additional accommodation, accommodation that 
would lower unemployment while keeping inflation near target. 
I open
ed by discussing a public desire, 
at least in the Ninth District
, for greater clarit
y about our reaction function.  In the next go-round, 
I™ll describe how
, by fulfilling that desire
, we 
can also provide additional accommodation.  And I™ll return to the question being posed to me 

implicitly by my Ninth District interlocutors
:  Under what conditions 
will
 the FOMC begin to 
raise the fed funds rate? I will argue that our communications often suggest the FOMC is 

unwilling to tolerate low unemployment, even if that low unemployment rate is not translating 

into medium-
term inflationary pressure
s.  And I think p
aragraph 5
 of 
alternative B offers us an 
opportunity to clarify our attitude toward low unemploymentŠthat we™re not against low 

unemployment 
if it doesn™t lead to medium
-term inflationary pressures. Maybe that clarification 
could provide stimulus that™s appropriate in light of the Committee™s consensus outlook.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
The 10
th District economy continues to 
expand at a moderate pace. Our retail, restaurant
, and auto contacts reported higher sales and 
expect gains in coming months, particularly those in the auto sector.  
Energy activity expanded 

further as gains in oil drilling outpaced declines in natural gas drilling.  Housing marke
t conditions continued to improve, and construction activity increased for both residential and 

nonresidential sectors.  
Manufacturing activity in the 
District expanded at a slightly faster pace in 
August.  The number of contacts in our manufacturing surve
y who 
were expecting higher levels 
of production and shipments in six months moved notably higher, and expectations of 

employment gains remained in positive territory. 
One component of our survey that has softened 
      
    
       
                           over the past several months is the expec
ted level of new export orders.  The number of contacts 

reporting higher levels has been declining but still outweighs those expecting an outright decline.  

So far this year
, total 
District exp
orts remain above their level a year ago, though exports to 
Eur
ope have been decreas
ing. 
In terms of the D
istrict labor market
, initial claims for 
unemployment insurance have declined notably over the past few months, and layoff 

announcements have been modest.  Still, employers remain quite cautious about expanding their 

payrolls.  
In terms of ag
ricultural
 conditions, U.S. net farm incomes are 
projected to reach their 
second
-highest level in history despite the worst dr
ought in three decades. Farm incomes are 
being supported by higher crop prices and crop insurance payments, 
which are offsetting 

declines in production and livestock profits.  In addition, the persistent, strong demand from the 

ethanol and export sectors continues to strain low crop inventories and could 
place upward 

pressure on prices heading into 2013 as reflected in futures markets. 
Turning to the national outlook, the recovery has been progressing mostly in line with my 
expectations.  Overall, I take a similar view as the 
Tealbook in that incoming dat
a since the last 
meeting ha
ve not materially affected my outlook for 
economic 
growth.
  For the second half of 
this year, I anticipate 
that 
firms will remain reluctant to undertake large expansion projects or 
aggressively add to payrolls because of the near-term risk.  In particular, I noted in the most 

recent NFIB survey that small businesses cite taxes and the regulatory landscape as their most 

pressing problems, with poor sales third on the list.  These issues are reaffirmed when I talk with 

my business contacts, 
and suggest that monetary policy may find it particularly challenging to 

offset headwinds of this nature.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 
                    
                         MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Incoming information since our last 
meeting suggests that economic conditions in the 
Third
 District have continued to improve 
modestly.  Although labor markets and manufacturing remain subdued, the housing sector and 
retail
 sales have strengthened notably.  Housing markets in the D
istrict are 
showing their 
strongest signs of recovery since the recession began.  House prices are up significantly in the 

second quarter in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.  Housing permits driv
en mostly by multifamily
-sector housing have been on an upward trend, and residential builders and real estate agents both 

reported increased activity in August.  
The commercial real estate market is also showing 

continued signs of strength.  Tightening in the office market in C
enter 
City
, Philadelphia, 
is 
placing upward pressure o
n rents.  
Retail sales in the region have grown somewhat faster over 
the intermeeting
 period, and auto sales have continued to increase at a good pace. 
Turning to the nation, based on incoming information, my forecast for the second half of 
this year is not terribly enlightening. It™s modest
, and I think it will continue to be over the 

coming six months.  
How
ever, my medium-term and longer-term forecasts have not changed 
very much and, indeed, point to a continuing modest recovery.  Given the large size and nature 

of the shocks that hit the economy, a slow recovery, 
as we™ve heard
, is actually the most likely 
outcome.  It™s not necessarily evidence that our monetary policy stance is inappropriate.  Indeed, 

many of the rules reported in Tealbook 
B suggest 
that policy is about right.  Political and fiscal 
uncertainties at home and abroad still cloud the outlook and are holding back business 

investment.
  Overwhelmingly, 
the anecdotal evidence suggests that business leaders
™ reluctance 
to invest and hire i
s driven by uncertainty, not excessively tight financial conditions.  Households 
continue to deleverage, and that™s holding back spending as saving remains high.  My concern is 

that 
none of the
se headwinds will likely be ameliorated or substantially affected in the near term 
                
    
                             with further monetary easing or the 
further 
easing 
of 
financial conditions.  That doesn™t seem to 
be a constraint. 
I know I™m not alone in having wished for a stronger employment report last Friday.  
The 
payroll increase in August and the downward revisions to June and July were disappointing.  
Despite the strong actions that the Fed has taken, the unemployment rate remains above 

8 percent.
 This has generated a discussion about whether the continuing high levels of 
unemployment are structural or cyclical in nature. I actually don™t find this conversation very 

useful, particularly for policy.  Rather, 
I believe 
it™s better to think about whether the high level 
of unemployment can be addressed by further easing of financial conditions, whic
h is what 
monetary policy would entail.  
It seems to me that before we conclude that unemployment calls 
for more monetary policy accommodation, we must understand more about the nature of the 

shock that™s caused high unemployment and its unwelcome persiste
nce.  This is consistent with 
President Lacker™s observations.  It™s not about whether unemployment is 
cyclical, structural, 
permanent
, or temporary, necessarily.  It™s about understanding the nature of the shock that™s 
causing the problem that we observe. 
There™s still a lot we don™t understand about the labor market and its ongoing struggles.  
Academic and public debate expresses a wide range of views, and we should be humble about 

our state of knowledge.  We™ve discussed, for example, the difficulty of t
ransferring skills from 
one sector to another.  Those who lost their jobs in construction will have a hard time going to 

other industries.  But this type of unemployment cannot be solved by monetary policy.  

However,
 it™s not the only source of mismatch.  
Skill mismatch can occur within sectors, not just 
across sectors. 
Jai
movich and S
iu point to what™s called job polarizatio
n.  Job opportunities in 
middle
-skill occupations, which tend to be focused on routine tasks, 
are disappearing because of 
                
                  
          changes in 
technology and other things, while low-
skill
 and high-skill job opportunities are in 
fact increasing.
  The employment share of routine occupationsŠthis middle group, which 
includes jobs 
such as machine operators, meat
-processing plant workers, and 
office a
nd administrative supportŠ
has been decreasing since the mid
-1980s.  At the same time, the 
employment share of nonroutine cognitive occupationsŠincluding surgeons, lawyers, and, 
of 
course, economistsŠand that of nonroutine manual operationsŠ
whether it be janitors, 

gardeners, bartenders, 
or 
home health care
Šhave been rising. 
In other words, there appears to 
be a polarization in the job market to
ward the low and the high, 
or the tails of the distribution
, and away from the middle.  During the three jobless recoveries since 1991, the level of 

employment in these routine occupations has never recovered to pre-
recession levels.  The 
absolute level appears to fall and fall permanently.  The fact 
that 
this job loss seems to occur 
sharply during rece
ssions makes it appear to be cyclical, but it does not recover.  This is a 
phenomenon that cannot be addressed by monetary policy.  
For t
hose who point to low w
age 
growth as evidence against mismatch
, it™s interesting to note that real wages in the tail of 
the 
distribution actually seem to be rising modestly, unlike in the middle of the distribution.  Again, 

we do not have definite answers to what™s happening in the labor market, but we need to 

consider that evidence exists that the problems may not be amen
able to monetary policy 
or easing of financial conditions. 
The FOMC has applied a high level of monetary stimulus during this recession and 
recovery.  The fed funds rate has been effectively zero for four years, and we 
have said we 
expect 
it to remain 
there 
at least through late 2014.  We have implemented two rounds of asset 
purchases, followed by the maturity extension program.  Yet unemployment remains high.  

Given this evidence, one could draw two possible conclusions.  One is that monetary policy is 
         
    
    
                   
  
         
   
   
   the right tool, but we just haven™t implemented a large enough program.  Given the sluggish 
employment response to date and the large amount of stimulus that has been supplied
, it seems 

as though 
it™s increasingly plausible that further monetary accommodation
 is not going to be 
effective in quickening the pace of recovery to 
a higher 
level
 of employment
, much as we wish it 
could. 
One still might argue that because high unemployment is very costly and we are 
uncertain about the effect of more monetary policy accommodation, we should try it.  What do 

we have to lose?  Well, in my view, 
we have a lot to lose. The large
r the balance sheet becomes
, the higher 
are 
the risks to the economy that we will not be able to exit in a way that preserves 
price stability, maximum employment
, or 
our own credibility.  Ever-more-
aggressive action 
increases the r
isk of poor outcomes in the not-too-distant future or maybe the distant future.  
To avoid this, we are going to have to be relying on tools that are not guaranteed to work.  Inflation 

expectations, while stable, are stable 
until they™re not.  Should inflation begin to rise quickly, we 

may have to contract our balance sheet at a very fast pace or perhaps raise IOER very rapidly. 

Will that be disruptive to markets? We won™t 
know until we face that situation.  If our policy is 

not very effective at influencing unemployment rates, then inflation could begin to rise well 

before unemployment has shown much of a decline.  Will we have the fortitude to take the 

necessary actions to reduce accommodation
, and if so, how well will we be able to communicate 
our rationale?  Would we disrupt markets? Would we reverse the progress on unemployment? I 

have grave concerns that we are sowing the seeds of a very complicated exit for little or
 no benefit to the unemployment rate today.  
We say these exit risks are manageable, and I™d like to 

believe that they are, but we really don™t know that.  Given the unprecedented nature of the 

actions we™ve taken, how manageable these risks are is really 
unknowable at this time.  
We are 
       
      
                 
         
    
     
     
   
       and will be in uncharted waters.  That™s one reason I strongly urge us to be prudent.  To my 
mind
, at this point, costs of further action greatly exceed expected benefits.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank 
you.  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, just as 
President Lacker was 
a straight man for President 
Lockhart, in a 
way
, President Plosser has been a straight man for me
.  L
ike President Pianalto
, I will interlocutate 
[laughter] 
more tomorrow than I plan to do today. 
President Williams made a very important point. 
He talked about how uncertainty has 
paralyzed most businesses and how uncertainty acts as an aggregate demand shock.  I agree with 

that analysis. I hear that from my contacts.  The ques
tion is, is monetary policy effective in 
offsetting this form of uncertainty?  President George mentioned the National Federation of 

Independent Business.  She cited some data.  What she did not cite was that 93 
percent of that 

sample makes clear that they
 do not wish to borrow, 
either because of uncertainty or because 
they have access to capital that
™s abundant and cheap.  In my own surveys 
as preparation for this 
meeting, I asked a simple question
: If the actions we were to take at this upcoming meeting 
were 
to reduce your cost of capital by 25 basis points or more, what would it do in terms of your 

investment plans? I deliberately sampled larger companies because that™s 
where cap
-ex come
s from.  Employment comes from small
 and medium-sized businesses.  
We assume that, just by 

sheer wei
ght of numbers, significant cap-
ex come
s from large corporations.  And I would say 
that 
9 out of 10 said it would not change 
thei
r investment plans, even if we took action that led to 
a reduction 
of 
1 percent or more in the
ir cost of capital.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 
                       
     
                           
    
        VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  First, I want to make a comment on President Fisher™s 
last remark.  My understanding is that capital spending has never been particularly i
nterest rate 
sensitive.  It™s really driven by demand and capacity utilization, things of that nature.  So I 
wouldn™t expect that to be a really strong channel by which monetary 
policy stimulates the 
economy. 
MR. FISHER.  Can I just make a point to that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
.  Sure. 
MR. FISHER.  At least in the drafts 
of our statement, we were 
saying that 
business fixed 
investment was weak.  The question is, are we affecting business fixed investment?  And, more 

important than 
that, are we affecting employment? 
My point is that in the responses I™
m getting 
to anecdotal 
inquiryŠ
not systematically organized, although the systematic surveys that we see, 
through the NFIB and others, show 
that it is questionable whether or not we are ac
tually 
affec
ting employment.  The question is, 
are we affecting employment 
over the short term or the 
long term?  We have a wealth effect.  The Chairman has made that a very strong argument, 

including 
at the last meeting. 
If you™re advising 
a corporation about what to do with the savings 
that they can achieve through cheaper capital
, they can invest it in greater plant or equipment 
expansion, they can buy back their stock, or they can increase their dividends.  And I would 

argue that the former would have 
a more immediate impact on employment creation than the 
latter. 
Excuse me. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
My point was that I don™t think very many people in the 
room would debate the point that capital spending is not going to be very influenced by small 

changes
 in interest rates.  So I don™t think that™
s something that we have a big disagreement 
about around the table. 
                    
             
    
          
           
    
    As far as the outlook is concerned, since the last meeting, I think there™
s been very little 
change with respect to the U.S. data.  Some data are 
a bit better
Šthe retail sales data, the motor 
vehicle sales data.  Some are 
worse
Šlike the ISM, which fell below 50, and the components of 
the ISM were particularly weak. 
Inventory strength actually held up the ISM, which is a little 
concerning.  T
he cap
ital goods orders have clearly been weak.  I™ve noticed that, if you look at 
the nondefense capital goods orders ex air, the rate of orders now has 
fallen below the rate of 
shipments, and this is actually not a positive indicator for what™s going to happen 
to capital 
spending going forward. In terms of payrolls, I was prepared to come into the meeting, if we had 

a strong payroll employment report, to argue how noisy the data 
are
 and how we can™t take a
ny signal from 
that
. But the reality is, if you really
 look at the trendŠand understand that there™
s a 
lot of noise in the 
series
Šthe last two months, 118,000 per month
; so far this year
, 139,000 per 
month
; in 2011, 153,000 per month.  Now, there™s noise month to month, but if you look at the 

longer-
term tren
ds, 
what you see is basically either a flat trend or maybe a gradually slowing 
trend.  So that™s what I would take away from the payroll data. 
There are 
also two other negative developments that I think are really worth highlighting.  
First, I think the external environment continues to worsen.  We™ve talked a lot about Europe, but 

we haven™t really talked very much about China.  ChinaŠif you look at the 
official GDP growth 
numbersŠ
is still okay; 7.6 percent, I think, 
was 
the number for the last quarter.  But if you look 
at the actual indicators coming out of China
Šlike 
trade
, for exampleŠ
it would not at all 
surprise me if it turned out that the Chinese sl
owdown was much more substantial than what the 

official indicators 
show.  
We™re also going to be seeing a further shock to real income over the 
near term from higher oil, gasoline, and grain prices.  T
he grain price effect is going to be 
particularly probl
ematic for the EMEs
, where f
ood is a much larger share of the consumption 
          
  
      
          
        
        
     
    
 basket.
  Also, as many other people have noted, the risks in early 2013 are tilted to the downside 
given what
™s going to happen on the fiscal front.  I don™t think any of us knows 
with any 
certainty what
™s going to happen, but the uncertainty between now and then is negative for the 
outlook.  And I think most of us 
believe 
that we
™re probably going to end up with some greater 
degree of fiscal restraint in early 2013 than what we have 
right now. 
So to me, the economic outlook calls for us to do more.  Now, I agree that the tools we 
have are not that powerful.  But rather than concluding from this that we shouldn™t use them, I 
conclude that we should use them more forcefully.  I think 
a failure to act forcefully at this 
meeting would be very damaging to confidence; 
it would imply that we
™re out of ammunition or 
almost out of ammunition
; and it 
also 
might signal that we were cowed by the political 
environment, which I think would be very u
nfortunate.
  When I consider the risks to action 
versus inaction in an uncertain world, I also view the outcome very much as quite 
asymmetric, 
with the bias clearly on the side of action.  
Consider two alternatives
:  We do more, and the 
economy is stronger 
than expected
; versus, 
we do very little
, and the economy disappoints.  
Which creates the greatest disappointment? Surely the latter. 
I would be very happy if we did 
another round of LSAPs, extended the guidance, et cetera, and the economy turned out to 

surprise us and did better than expected.  In that case, we could cut off the LSAP program early, 

and the balance sheet wouldn™t have grown very much.  In contrast, if we do nothing and the 

economy disappoints, I think we will rue that as a lost opportuni
ty. I also think the timing is 
right.  The ECB did something very forceful at their last meeting, and following on right behind 

them might actually provide a firmer underpinning or momentum to confidence and market 

sentiment. 
       
         
             
           Now, what
™s the lesson of the past few years? Well, I think the lesson of the past few 
years is 
that 
we™ve been consistently disappointed on the 
economic 
growth side of the equation.  
There are two explanations for this.  One is that the headwinds were greater than what we 
thought, but there™
s another explanation as well
Šthat maybe monetary policy is not as 
accommodative as we thought.  And this goes back to President Williams™s 
comments. 
I™
m pretty convinced that monetary policy stimulus effects probably become attenuated over time, 
because part of the way that monetary policy works is by affecting the timing of spending 

decisions.  We don™t really have an experience where we
™ve had a period like this in which 

monetary policy has supposedly been very loose for many years in a row.  A
nd I expect what 
we™re seeing is that the monetary policy impulse to the growth side is actually lessening over 
time.
  Regardless of whether you say it™s consistent disappointment because of headwinds or 
consistent disappointment because monetary policy is not as 
stimul
ative
, as we thought, I think 
either way
, they both imply that we should do more.  
We™ve essentially foreshadowed forceful 
action in the August FOMC statement, the minutes to that meeting, and the Chairman™s Jackson 

Hole speech, so I think it™s time to follow up on what we™ve foreshadowed with action at this 

meeting.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anybody for coffee?  Coffee is available.  Why don™t we 
take 20 minutes and return at 3:10? 
[Coffee break] 
CHA
IRMAN BERNANKE
.  This i
s a prompt group.  I like this. 
MR. 
LACKER
.  Thanks to Debbie.  Thanks to the Deputy S
ecretary. 
MS. DANKER.  Happy to help. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  All right.  Governor Yellen. 
      
    
      
           
                     
     
  
    
MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The two employment reports we have 
received since our last meeting confirm that the economy is growing too slowly to generate any 
meaningful progress in improving labor market conditions.  They™re consistent with an economy 
that is expanding at or near its potential.  And although I was heart
ened by July™s strong reading 
on consumer spending, I agree with the staff™s reluctance to make too much out of one month of 

better data.
  Taking a broader perspective, incoming data provide no evidence of any 
fundamental change in the outlook for the better.  I agree with the conclusion, too, of the staff 

memo for this meeting that the preponderance of evidence points to a large margin of labor 

market slack. 
If payroll gains are sustained at their recent paceŠaround 125,000 per month in 
July and AugustŠ
there
™s a good chance that we will look back on a lost decade.  The SEP 
forecast I submitted this round shows unemployment hovering above 7 percent at the end of 

2014, even with substantial additional policy accommodation.  Moreover, continued progress at 

the pace we have seen recently is a big ﬁif.ﬂ 
Readings from some forward
-looking indicators, 
such as the expectations component of consumer sentiment and new orders for nondefense 

capital goods ex aircraft, do not bode well for household and business spending in the months 

ahead. 
Amid the search for explanations of the painfully slow recovery, there™
s been a lively 
debate about the role of economic uncertainty.  Now, there are many different sources of 

economic uncertainty, but many of you have highlighted uncertainty about economic policy, 

especially about European policy responses and about the outlook for U.S. fiscal policies.  

You
™ve noted that this policy uncertainty has been restraining household and business spending.  
And several of you have hypothesized that this might account for the weak spending and hiring 

we saw last spring. 
If uncertainty about economic policy as opposed to uncertainty about the 
                      
     
                    broader economic outlook, accounts for why employers were deferring hiring and investment 
decisions, then a lifting of that uncertainty might arguably provide a significant boost to 

spending.  Under a favorable scenario, for example, we could see some resolution of fiscal policy 

uncertainty in the months after the election.  My own view is that policy un
certainty has been 
exerting some negative influence on aggregate demand.  Some systematic evidence of its 

influence comes from empirical work by Nick Bloom at Stanford.  Bloom and his coauthors have 

developed a high-frequency measure of economic policy uncertainty, and they™
ve related this 
measure to key economic variables, such as payroll employment growth.  They show that 

increases in economic policy uncertainty foreshadow declines in output, employment, and 

investment, and that high levels of policy uncertainty in recent years, such as uncertainty about 

future tax policies and the debt ceiling, have hampered the recovery. 
But economic policy uncertainty is only one of many factors relevant to the economic 
outlook.  And the evidence, as I read it, strongly suggests that an uptick in policy uncertainty 

cannot account for last spring™s slowdown.  Bloom™s index of economic p
olicy 
uncertainty 
spiked up in the summer of 2011, but by March it had fallen back two-thirds of the way toward 

pre
-recession levels. 
It remained at low levels in April and May, at the very time when the 
economic recovery was sputtering.  On the premise that economic policy uncertainty affects 

economic activity through consumer and business sentiment, it™s also worth noting that several 

ind
exes of consumer sentiment and business optimism peaked in April or May.  
So an increase in 
economic policy uncertainty does not seem capable of explaining the spring slowdown.  This 

suggests to me that spending is unlikely to surge, even if policy uncerta
inty were to diminish in 
the months ahead.  Unfortunately, our current economic malaise has substantially deeper roots 

than just uncertainty about the future direction of economic policy, and these headwinds are 
           
       
    
        unlikely to soon subside. Uncertainty, broadly defined, does, however, influence my thinking 
about monetary policy.  Uncertainty provides a reason why we should act forcefully now to 

strengthen the recovery, rather than trying to keep our powder dry.  Given the downside risks to 

the current outlook, and the constraints on our ability to provide stimulus while the funds rate is 

at the lower bound, the best we can do at this point is to ensure that the economy is as resilient as 

possible in case we are faced with fiscal gridlock, a European debacle, o
r other negative shocks. 
Another argument for strong action relates to h
yste
resis.  We face the worrisome risk that 
the longer the economy operates with such high levels of slack, the more likely it is that the 

downturn will have a lasting negative impact on employment and potential output.  I™
ve seen no 
strong evidence for h
yste
resis effects yet, but our current situation is unprecedented, at least in 
recent U.S. history.  
In the early 1980s, the unemployment rate fell almost 
4 percentage points 
over the 2¾ years following its late 1982 peak, to 7 percent.  By contrast, since its most recent 

peak in October 2009, the unemployment rate has fallen less than 2 percentage points.  

Moreover, h
yste
resis effects may become evident not only in the unemployment rate, but also in 
labor force participation.  As the Tealbook box shows, the participation rate remains far below 

the staff™s estimate of its demographic trend rate, and persistently poor job-finding prospects may 

well leave a permanent imprint on the particip
ation rate.
  Taking this argument one step further, I 
would argue that just as there can be permanent costs of allowing unemployment to remain high 

for an extensive time, there can also be permanent gains in output and employment in a high-

pressure labor market.
  We saw some evidence of this in the late 1990s, when h
yste
resis seemed 
to be working in reverse by pulling population segments into the labor force that for a long time 

had been excluded.  Chronic labor shortages induced firms to invest more heavily in training, 
         
        
       
                        
and it fostered upward mobility as firms moved employees up through internal job ladders more 
rapidly. 
Hyste
resis provides a rationale for 
a more expansionary monetary policy.  The argument 
runs as follows.  Our usual loss function is symmetric around 
the 
NAIRU.  It thus assigns equal 

costs to given size deviations of unemployment above and below 
the 
NAIRU.  But with 
hyste
resis
, the penalty for a deviation of unemployment above 
the 
NAIRU should be greater than 
that for an identical deviation of unemployment below 
the 
NAIRU.
  The implications of such an 
asymmetric weighting of unemployment gaps for optimal monetary policy in the present 

circumstances are substantial.  Bob Tetlow, a staff member in the 
Board™s 
Division of Research 
and Statistics, has been exploring optimal control simulations where the loss function depends on 

the squared deviations of a transformation of the unemployment rate from the NAIRU, rather 

than on the squared deviations of the unemployment rate itself from the 
NAIRU. 
This is a 
tractable technique for, in effect, assuming an asymmetric loss function.  In Tetlow™s 

simulations, the only policy tool available is the path of the federal funds rate.  His results 

showed that even a moderately lower weight on unemployment undershoots below the NAIRU, 

relative to overshoots, could postpone the timing of liftoff substantially. 
Based on all of these considerations, in tomorrow™s policy go-round or maybe this 
afternoon™s, I will argue that strong policy action is called fo
r at this meeting. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was going to make comments about my 
forecast compared 
with
 the consensus, but I™m not entirely sure which one of the consensus 
forecasts to compare it 
with. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You pick. 
[Laughter] 
          
              
                      
        
       MS. DUKE. I
™ll just say that I think it
™s not inconsistent, but there are four assumptions 
that are a little bit different in my forecast than in the Tealbook and
, maybe
, in the forecasts of 
some of you.  Th
e first one 
is that there is an underlying strength in the fundamentals of the 
economyŠ
such as balance sheet strength, debt service capacity, and credit supply
Šand that this 
strength is being masked by low levels of business and consumer confidence as well 
as concern 
about risks posed by Europe and the fiscal cliff, but that whenever loan demand picks up, 
the 
credit supply will be fully available to meet it. 
The second
 one is 
that it
™ll be especially difficult 
to interpret data over the second half of this year and the first half of next year, as investment and 

purchase decisionmaking is increasingly either paralyzed or distorted by uncertainty about 

federal tax and spending policies, and that, on balance, the uncertainty itself will depress activity 

and lead to weaker outcomes for 2012 and 2013.  Third, the one place I do still see a potential for 

an upside surprise is in housing, and I 
believe
 purchasing mortgages might be helpful here, but 
not necessarily in the ways that you might think.  And, finally, I 
have assumed that we choose 
alternative B today
.  Furthermore, in light of my assumptions about the fiscal cliff, we™
re more 
likely to face deteriorating conditions than simply unsatisfactory progress as we approach the 

end of the year; 
and that the deter
ioration will lead us to continue asset purchases well into 2013. 
In recent meetings
, I™ve talked at length about my belief in the first assumption, and I™
m not going to repeat that today.  But I™d like to discuss assumptions 2 and 3 in this round and 

rese
rve comments about assumption 4 for the policy round.  
Beginning with my pessimism about 

the rest of this year and the first part of next, almost every conversation that I™
ve had with a 
business person or a banker recently has ha
d the same theme: 
Things s
eem pretty much the 
same
Šslow, steady improvement in business fundamentals, but with a new tendency to put all 

long-term investment or expansion decisions off until after the election.  Oddly enough, these 
                     
             
                  
businesses have the luxury of postponing decisionm
aking precisely because things have 
improved.  They™ve strengthened their balance sheets and found ways to grow the bottom line 
even in the face of sluggish top-
line growth. In fact, their profitability
-improvement efforts are 
likely at least partly 
responsible for the slow improvement in labor markets.  Indeed, the business 
investments that do get the green light are mostly directed at saving labor, and no one mentions 

any plans for hiring.  I believe the marked slowdown in business spending that we™
re already 
seeing is 
a direct result of a wait
-and
-see attitude. 
As we get closer to the end of the year and the expiration of tax cuts, implementation of 
expense sequestration, and expiration of fixes for doctors and alternative minimum taxes, 

businesses 
and individuals will have to start making adjustments for what could happen, whether 

or not it actually does.  For example, contractors who expect that they™
ll have to cut staffing if 
their contracts are affected by sequestration are legally required to is
sue layoff notices in 
advance, even if the spending is not ultimately cut and the layoffs don™t actually happen.  Those 

who receive the notices will surely adjust their spending accordingly, and this potential pall on 

holiday spending has to be making retailers nervous about their inventories.  Those same 

retailers are having to pull the trigger now on their inventory decisions in the face of a potential 

shutdown of E
ast 
Coast ports by a longshorem
en™s
 strike.  So who could blame them if they 
decide to shav
e a bit off their purchases just to be sure? 
Health
-care companies are especially 
cautious as they plan for both sequestration and implementation of health-
care reform.  Simple 
operational changes, like tax withholding tables, have to be put in place for all businesses.  For 

individuals, asset sales decisions, especially for sales of businesses, will have to be made soon to 

ensure the current capital gains tax rate. I had the personal experience of doing a new will 

recently, and my lawyer explained to me 
that things would be very different if I died this year or 
              
                
        
   
         
 in January [laughter].  For these reasons, I believe that the fourth quarter is going to be 
affe
cted 
by the fiscal cliff regardless of its ultimate resolution as businesses
, in particular
, hit the 
brakes. 
And I ca
n™t convince myself that a lame
-duck Congress will somehow resolve all of the fiscal 
issues by the end of the year, no matter how the election turns out.  In fact, the best case I can 
construct is a temporary extension that pushes the poli
tical wrangling well into the first quarter 
of next year.  And after the debt ceiling brinkmanship we saw last time, I think a perfectly 

plausible scenario is a plunge off the fiscal cliff
, on the assumption that some sort of deal will be 
easier to construct after the damage becomes more obvious.
  So I think we have to make 
contingency plans for how we can shore up confidence in the face of a really bad outcome, 
rather 
than thinking just about 
how we react if the recovery stays unsatisfactorily slow.  For these 
reasons, I
™ve taken on board a bit of a lean toward the 
ﬁFiscal 
Cliff
ﬂ scenario in the near
-term 
portion of my forecast. 
In contrast, my continued optimism about housing and the underlying strength in the 
economy shows through in my medium-
term foreca
st.  I think 
that 
the inventory factors that 
began to emerge early in the year are now taking full hold in house price movements, and that 

the momentum arrow is pointing up.  This makes a difference.  
The s
taff estimates that roughly 
3 million households, 
almost 
one-
fourth
 of underwater households, moved from a negative to a 
positive equity position in the second quarter.  The Tealbook baseline forecast assumes a 

5 percent increase in house prices this year that
™s already pretty much baked in, 
followed by a 
leveling
-off.  But some models are predicting continued strong gains in house prices.  Staff 
forecasts of house prices and residential investment are on the conservative side, tempered by 

concern about foreclosure pipelines, 
the elevated level of vacant h
ouses, weak household 
formation, and the tepid pace of 
the 
housing recovery so far. 
                                  Here I think there™
s reason for more optimism. 
Foreclosure pipelines are full because the 
exits are still clogged, but the pace of new delinquencies has slowed markedly.  
The exits are no 
longer clogged by national moratoriums or retooling for new modification programs.  The 

current backlog is more closely tied to state
-specific or operational issues that seem to me 
unlikely to suddenly clear and release a flood of foreclosures onto the market.  
As for the vacant 

inventory, a large portion of the vacant homes not listed for sale 
is outside of bank REO 
inventory.  
Becaus
e we don™t know why they™
re held off the market, I
™m not sure we can make 
assumptions about their sudden return to the market.  I view the potential for pent-up demand to 

show through in faster household formation and put upward pressure on house prices as even 

more likely than the potential for a surge in foreclosures to hold prices down.  At some point, 

demographics win.  Those kids now living at home with their 
parents will not stay there until 
they™re 40.  
[Laughter] 
And when they do form households, they™re going to require housing 
units, whether rental or owner occupied. 
MR. 
FISHER
.  We™re going to hold you to that. 
MS. 
RASKIN
.  Ship them to Betsy™s house.  [Laughter] 
MS. DUKE.  To me, this represents the one area of dry tinder in the economy that could 
be lit with a spark of confidence.  To be sure, mortgage lending conditions are still extremely 

tight, but some recent developments should help.  The specte
r of putback risk has reportedly 
been holding back loans to borrowers at the lower end of GSE standards.  
The 
FHFA has now 

committed to reducing putback risk beginning in January 2013 through better front-end quality 

control and time limits on liability.  Wit
h house prices on the rise, fewer loans should fall 

through 
because of
 appraisal issues.  Regulatory uncertainty should clear, 
as new regulatory 
               
     
                  
      
          requirements for loan origination, securitization, and servicing are likely to be finalized in the 
coming month
s. Probably the biggest drag on lending is the shrinkage of loan origination capacity.  The 
industry is showing signs of strain in what looks to be only a tri
llion
-dollar origination year, 
compared 
with 
a peak origina
tion of $3 trillion not that many years 
ago. 
But if high profits are 
the best fertilizer, we should see more banks entering the business.  I want to investigate actual 

data, but anecdotally, the bankers I spoke with this time 
who
 were in the mortgage business were 
actually having record profits, while those who weren™t in mortgage origination were wondering 

about their survival.  I™
m talking about the difference between a range of 
0.5 to 0.6 ROA, 
for 
those with no mortgage business, versus one of 1.30 to 1.50, for those with a mortgage business.  

So, for all of these reasons, I think there™s a lot of meat left on the house price and housing 
finance bone, and I™
m optimistic about that part of the forecast.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO
.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Because
 John captured my views on the 
economic outlook, I™m going to jettison most of what I would have said.  In fact, I think John 

captured my views better than I had captured my views.  So I thought I™d turn back to labor 

markets
, moved by some of Charlie Plosser™s comments.  The first comment I™d make 
is that it™s 
important to distinguish between cyclical lab
or market conditions and longer-
term labor market 
issues.  I don™t think there™s any doubt that we™ve got some chronic labor market issues in the 

United States.  There
™s been evidence of declining dynamism in U.S. labor markets for well over 
a decade.  There certainly is a substantial sense tha
t people currently taking lower-
income 
service
-sector jobsŠ
if they had better ed
ucation and trainingŠwould be available for jobs that 
might then 
be created with higher value added. 
What Charlie referred to as polarization is 
                         
     
                   
  
     
   undoubtedly true, but again, a chronic issue rather than a cyclical one.  I actually think that 
unlike so many other questions, there™s been a substantial convergence of viewsŠnot entirely, 

but a substantial convergence of viewsŠaround the proposition that a relatively small portion of 

the big jump in unemployment that we™ve seen is attributable to structural fact
ors. There
™s been, 
as you all know, substantial, good, and careful work from the Federal Reserve Banks of 

Cleveland, New York, 
and San Francisco over the past several years that
 has supported that 
conclusion.  A
nd I think among academic researchers, the c
onvergence is also manifesting itself
, as shown most recently in Ed Lazear™s paper at Jackson Hole, following on, by about five 

months, Jesse Rothstein™s paper, 
which surveyed much of the same material and came to many 

of the same conclusions. 
Jeff
, at the last meeting
, suggested that a paper done by Richmond Fed research staff was 
a dissonant voice on this basic proposition that structural unemployment was not a big part of the 

story.  This paper, of course, starts from a very different perspective on long-
term unemployment 
than the literature I just referred to a moment ago.  The Richmond Fed paper argues that an 

unobserved heterogeneity among unemployed workers means that newly unemployed workers 

have inherently different exit rates
, and that over 
time, the composition of the pool of the 
unemployed shifts toward workers who started with the lower exit rates.  I looked at the paper 

after Jeff talked about it at the last meeting, and I spoke with others here at the Board about it, 

and I actually don™t think it establishes a case for structural unemployment. There are a lot of 

empirical and technical questions about the paperŠ
it™s certainly interesting 
and may well have 
significant merit
Šbut I actually don™t think it™s making a structural argument, at 
least not if we 
think of ﬁ
structural
ﬂ as referring to nontransitory unemployment that can™t be affected fairly 
directly by fluctuations in aggregate demand.  It would be unsurprising to learn that firms are 
                
      
        
  
          more likely to lay off relatively less
-valued employees whose lesser perceived abilities may 
mean that they™re less likely to be quickly plucked up by a firm that is hiring.  That phenomenon 
is entirely consistent with 
a demand
-driven increase in unemployment.  
More generally, the 
Richmond Fed model attempts to decompose the variation in the pool of the unemployed over 

time.  So it addresses the reasons for fluctuations in unemployment over historyŠin recessions, 

but also in recoveries.  The reasons for unemploym
ent increases also explain the reversals that 
take place during recoveries.  That is, as there are fewer unemployed
, firms cannot afford to be 
as demanding and thus are more likely to turn to the pool of the supposedly less 
valuable 
workers. 
This seems
, to me at least
, more a 
cyclical than a structural explanation
, and thus, 
again, whatever the ultimate merits of the paper, I don™t think 
it really undercuts the consensus 

reached in the papers to which I referred earlier. 
One final thought on structural unemployment, 
and this relates a bit to what Janet was 
saying a moment ago.  The Richmond paper describes something as the ﬁtrue duration 

dependence
ﬂ position, as opposed to the ﬁunobserved heterogeneityﬂ position that it takes.  The 

true duration dependence position is that, quite apart from any inherent worker qualities, the bad 

luck of being unemployed for an extended period will itself begin to erode the overall 

employability of enough workers that there 
will 
be macroeconomic effects. As Janet said, 
histo
rically
, we haven™t seen much evidence of this in the United States, though many, myself 
included, have thought that the severity and duration of the current employment problem could 

produce some observable h
yste
resis effects this tim
e around.  L
ogically
, one would think that at 
some point these effects would manifest themselves.
  But I have to say, 
to date
, there still isn™t 
much indication of any such effects.  And indeed, I think if one looks at what™s been happening 

to long-term unemployed, you might sa
y there™s actually been a little bit of an improvement in 
                                       
their performance, which would suggest that we™re not sliding closer toward h
yste
resis, but that, 
once again
, for reasons not entirely understood, the U.S. 
labor market seems relatively insulated 
from those effects. But again, as Janet said, basically
, whether you believe that h
yste
resis is 
around the corner or not doesn™t change your policy prescription.  If you think that it hasn™t 
clicked in to date but it might, that™s an argument for greater stimulus now in order to stop it 

from happening.  If you think that there™s unlikely to be h
yste
resis and thus the cyclical 
explanation dominates, then obviously the unemployment should be susceptible to increased 

aggregate demand stimulus.  So, in that sense, I think 
these arguments
 happily converge around 
the same policy prescription.  And for me, 
this all, again, reinforces the view that the story of the 

economy is still one of inadequate aggregate demand.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  First
, I™d like to thank Governor Tarullo for reading the Richmond Fed 
paper
.  Second, I™d like to point out 
that
Šin terms of the distinction I was making before 
between what the unemployment rate would converge to in the long run and the reference rate 

that™s relevant for current policyŠ
a shock that hits the economy today, if it™s a structural shock 

that™s permanent and long lived, 
it is going to affect the longer-
term normal rate of 
unemployment
. But whether it™s permanent or transitory is irrelevant for whether it affects the 
policy-
relevant rate today.
  See what I™m saying? It doesn™t matter if it fades out right away or if 
it™s going to last a long time. It could affect the policy
-relevant rate to
day either way. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How does that handle policy lags?  Monetary policy doesn™t 
work for 
a while. 
       
                     
                 MR. LACKER.  I think that™s orthogonal.  I think that™s tangential to this question.  In the 
models, you™ve got policy lags.  Policy tak
es effect over time, but it™s still the case that you™re 
carrying around this reference rate
ŠPresident Bu
llard talked about a flex price equilibriumŠ 
and it™s affected by both transitory and permanent shocks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook has not changed materially since 
the JulyŒ
August meeting.  Maybe incoming data ha
ve been mixed, but forward-looking 
indicators still remain consistent with an economy growing in the near term in 
a range between 
1½ per
cent and 
2 percent. 
Similarly, the fact
ors shaping the medium-term outlook have not 
changed significantly
; the general contours of my outlook remain the same.  Yes, some of the 
incoming data during the interme
eting period suggested modest increases in household spending 
and employment, and the household sector showed some further slight signs of improvement.  

But no data 
are 
yet showing a basis to believe that these modest increases will be sustained to 
such an extent that faster momentum might be expected
.  Indeed, other data, such as those for 
business spending and consumer confidence, remain soft.  It is not yet obvious that this path, 
or 

even
 a couple of months of stronger-
than
-expected economic activity
, could reduce the amount 
of slack in labor market
s or alter the trajectory of expected inflation to a degree that would 
obviate the need for a further easing of monetary policy.  
Last week™s employment report
Š payroll employment only 55,000 higher than reported in July, 
after taking into account 

revisionsŠdoes not suggest above-trend 
economic 
growth or a declining trend in the 

unemployment rate.  It suggests, 
instead
, that the unemployment rate is likely to move sideways 
with no sign of a substantial and sustainable strengthening in the pace of economic recovery. 
               
                          And this unsatisfactory modal projection is what exists 
before
 even considering downside 
risks to the outlook.  One particular downside risk that remains quite elevated relates to what 
we™ve been talking about
Šthe depressed level of labor participation and the enhanced level of 
long-
term unemployment. 
The decline in the labor force participation rate since the
 beginning of 
the recession is ominous, and although the Board staff predicts that over the next couple of years 

the labor force participation rate will flatten out, the recession
, as Governor Yellen described, 
may well have permanent effects on the labor force participation rate
, just as the high-
pressure 
labor market of the late 1990s pulled people back into the labor force 
who
 had been excluded for 
a long time
Šonly now, unfortunately, 
in reverse. 
In addition, with a substantial and growing 
proportion of unemployed workers having been jobless for long periods, we face an elevated risk 

that such a high level of long-term unemployment will persist long enough to permanently 

depress labor supply and potential output.  Unlike downside risks emanating from the European 

crisis and U.S. fiscal policyŠ
which
, were they to occur, 
theoretically can be addressed with 
accommodative monetary policy after the fact
Šthe potential h
yste
resis created by drops in the 
labor force participation rate and increases in long-
term unemployment will prove intractable to 
address with accommodative monetary policy that isn™t inflationary.
  So I find the particular 
downside risk of h
yste
resis to be especially pernicious because it™s difficult to address after the 
fact. 
But
, more optimis
tically, it is one downside risk that monetary policymakers do have some 
ability to mitigate prior to its occurrence. 
Similarly, I wonder about the permanent or transitory nature of household and business 
expectations.  The economic outlook appears damped by some form of pessimism.  Look at the 

Michigan survey question on the proportion of households expecting unemployment to improve.  

Earlier this year
, that number had recovered, but now it has dropped down again.  
Similarly, 
      
        
     
                         
  households™ income expectations for the coming 12 months have hardly recovered at all since the 
recession despite the fact that actual income has somewhat increased.  On the business side, 

expectations for business conditions six months hence as measured in the Empire State and 

Philadelphia Fed surveys have dropped back sharply again.  In the case of the Empire State 

survey, they™re back close to levels seen during the recession.  Capital spending plans also don™t 

look great.  Surveys from the National Association 
for
 Business Economi
cs show capital 
spending to have dropped sharply in the second quarter.  Surveys from the National Federation 

of Independent Business show capital spending to be gradually rising, 
but still remaining at less 

than half of 
its pre
-recession level. 
It™s diffic
ult to project whether these expectations will 
transition from being temporary blips to permanent shifts, but the fact that these expectations 

have tried to recover from the recession before but been knocked back, sometimes more than 

once, might be a facto
r that could keep households and businesses from getting too hopeful 
again. The longer we have an economy that looks bleak as far as the eye can see, the more this 

bleakness gets built into expectations.  Households and businesses now see a recovery slow to 

materialize.  They assume that things will get better because they always have, but then th
ings 
don™t 
get better
.  So households and businesses start to wonder if this is just a delay or if it™s just 
the new normal.  If they think it™s the new normal, it could become just that.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In terms of the outlook, I™m reasonably close to 
the consensus forecast you put forth, and just a shade more upbeat than I was at ou
r last 

meeting
Šthat is to say, maybe a tenth or two lower on the unemployment rate for 2013. 
I™ve 
interpreted the incoming data since the last meeting inclusive of the jobs report on Friday as 

approximately a 
wash and feel 
as though the situation in Europe looks just a bit brighter.  So, 
             
       
     
   
                    
  
 overall
, I would say it appears we™re still about as 
ﬁstuck in the mud
ﬂ as we have been over the 
last several months, and I agree with Governor Tarullo™s characterization that it™s largely an 
aggregate demand phenomenon. 
In trying to think about the factors that are leading demand to be so sluggish and about 
the channels by which monetary policy might be able to help, I™ve been struck by a few pieces of 

survey evidence.  Now, they turn out to be the s
ame pieces of survey evidence that Governor 
Raskin was just referring to, thereby scooping a fair portion of what I was going to say. 
MS. RASKIN.  It happened to me for a long time.  [Laughter] 

MR. STEIN.  I™m going to 
just start juggling next time. 
Anywa
y, just to underscore, 
really
Šon the Michigan survey, we had a very interesting briefing a few weeks ago by Claudia 
Sahm,
 in R
esearch and 
Statistics
, who
™d been looking carefully at these data.  And the gist of the 
finding is, not only 
is it 
low, but 
also, basically
, it fell 
from
 2007 to 2009, and it really hasn™t 
recovered since.  Moreover, it™s not well explained by household characteristicsŠt
here™s a large 
negative residual there in a way that seems different from previous experience. 
In a similar vein 
but mu
ch less scientifically, I looked at a different survey, the Conference Board™s Consumer 
Confidence Index, which also fell in August.  Very much to your point, they do a breakdown of 

the index into views of the current situationŠ
a present situation in
dex
Šand a future 
expectations piece, and all of the drop was coming from the future expectations piece.  
So I was 

curious.  I went back and compared it 
with
 previous peaks of unemployment that we™ve had.  
The ones I looked at were May 1975 and December 1982.  W
hat you see is
, at those times when 
unemployment was also very high, if you ask
ed people about the present situation, it was dismal, 
but if you ask
ed them about future expectations, it was not nearly so bad as it is today.  These 
are 
just a couple of data points, but 
they™re 
consistent with what I take to be the spirit of Claudia™s 
                  
             
         
    
 work, which is, it™s as if, given where we are today and given the current situation, 
people feel 
the future is considerably more pessimistic
.  And again, I think this is pessimism as opposed to 
uncertainty, which has a slightly different implication because it™s less clear that, if the fiscal 

cliff resolves itself, this kind of thing gets fixed. 
Another survey on the business side
: I just yesterday got a s
urvey that Duke University 
does in conjunction with 
CFO 
magazine
, where they talk to 900 CFOs of U.S. firms.  One of the 
new questions in there this time
ŠI think, 
actually
, Steve Sharp
e helped them design this 
questionŠasked the firms if they would in any 
way change their capital spending plans for a 
given change in interest rates.
  Here
, it is strikingly like a large
-sample version of President 
Fisher™s CEO conversations, where only 3 percent of the firms say they would in any way 

change their capital spen
ding for a 50 basis point movement in rates.  
Now, I take Vice 
Chairman
 Dudley™s critique here.  First of all, in this one, unlike consumer confidence, we don™t 
have a benchmark
, so I don™t know what people would say in normal times
.  But as a Bayesian
, I™m inclined to think that there™s something going on here, even though I wouldn™t say it™s a huge 
thing. 
So, putting this together
Šnow, 
this part is very impressionistic, but I gue
ss the overall 
feeling I get 
from 
looking at these various pieces of survey e
vidence is the sense that when we 
make a policy move now, we™re playing more for whatever effect we can have on consumer and 

business confidence than for the normal hydraulic 
effe
ct we would have on financing conditions 
per se.  That is to say, we may know more about how to move interest rates than about how to 

influence confidence, but it™s the latter that, in some sense, is the dragging anchor.  This is not an 

ﬁalways
ﬂ situation.  I think it™s, in some 
respects, 
the opposite of where we were in 2009 at the 
                     
                    
  
  time of QE1
, when really the thing to do, the imperative, was to fix financing conditions, and 
people would figure it out one way or the other. 
I don™t know if this has any implications for policy. I
t strikes 
me that
, if this is right, it 
should color particularly how we think about the communications aspect.  I, 
like many others 
here
, believe
 that the need for action is clear, but I think, less so than usual, the bond market is 

not really our primary audience.
  So maybe when we think about policy, 
we want to worry less 
about putting together the biggest, most inclusive package that has the maximum bond market 

impact
, and worry more about, how do we deliver a simple and coherent message that normal 
humans can understand, as opposed to mainly Fed w
atchers
?  I think we™ll have a chance to talk 
about some of these issues.  I™m not sure if this concept is fully operational, but I have this 

conviction that we really have to think about our audience as being business m
anagers and 
householdsŠ
more so 
than at other times
.  There™s so much talk about, what are the Fed watchers 
expecting us to do
?  And I think we don™t want to get overly caught up in delivering just to them.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Than
k you.
  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
It does seem to me that there™s a decent 
degree of agreement
, or at least overlap
, about the status and outlook for the economy, and that 
the real question is, what can monetary policy do, 
and
 what should it do going forward?  And 
I™m going to defer that to tomorrow. 
In that spirit
, I propose to deprive the Committee of my 
detailed recitation of intermeeting events and proceed to 
the executive summary part of it
, which 
is, 
really
, that we™ve b
een on a round trip.  We had positive news early in the intermeeting 
period, which 
was a trip to hope and back, and it left me very much in the same place where I 
started
:  I see an economy with a substantial amount of slack that is growing at about 2 
percent
;          
                     
        
       inflation that is bouncing around just below 2 percent on commodity effects, 
but close to target
; and better financial conditions for now.  But as Europe improves, the fiscal cliff begins to 
approach in a serious way, and what I am hearing is that there is little to no hope of action in the 

lame duck.
  Of course, that depends on the arrangement of forces after the election, s
o it™s 
completely unknowable. 
Ultimately and most important
, there is little, if any, reason to expect 
significant improvement in job creation in the coming months. 
My conversations with a group of about 10 diverse industrial companiesŠ
this is not 
auto
s, so it™
s away from one of the real strengths
.  The other parts of the industrial sector, 
let me 
say
, are pretty weak
, and they s
trongly confirm that last point about employment.
  Outside of a 
couple of bright spots like housing and li
ght
 vehicles, it™s soft everywhere, especially in Europe.  
Big customers are postponing orders
; they™re not canceling them.  It™s nothing like from 2008 to 
2009, but the softness that began about six months ago is now the new normal for these 

companies.  The game is about share gain and taking out costs.  It™s 
a low
-growth environment.  
All new projects are on hold, and there is no hiring.  In fact, the 
entire goods
-producing sector of 
the economy lost 16,000 jobs in August.  If you look just at the manufacturing piece of that and 

go back over a quarter, there was a net creation of 15,000 jobs, and two-thirds of that is auto.  I 

want to say that you hear, 
ﬁUncertainty, uncertainty
,ﬂ 
from all 
of 
these people, but they™re really 
talking about two different things.  These are not people who roll over at 4:00 a.m. to check 

Twitter for the latest news from 
Karlsruhe
 on the German decision.  A 
particular compan
y in the 
beverage manufacturing business had a big order from a German OEM for a beverage line, and 

that order has been pushed out at least a quarter.  That™s uncertainty.  It™s about demand.  
As far 

as Europe relates to these companies
Šand 
these are pretty global companies
Šit™s really focused 
on demand.  The fiscal cliff is something different.  There™s a sick feeling in people™s stomachs 
                   
  
     
  
       
              
 that this is really bad, that this is our country not being able to function, and 
it™s like last August 
on steroidsŠnot that there™s anything wrong with steroids.  [Laughter]  They™ve been very 
helpful to me lately. 
Let me say where that leaves me
.  The question that looms isŠ
and I™m going to
, again
, leave aside monetary policy
Šwhen do we break out of this
?  And I really do believe that we 
will.  We always have. 
I can 
remember many of these cycles where you really wonder if this is it 
and we™re never going to get out. I really do feel that
 if you look at our own projections, 
essentially
, all of us project that we™re going to have those 3 
percent, 
4 percent catch
-up years.  
They™re now scheduled for 2014 and ™15, but really, there™s a ton of uncertainty around that.  So 

I™m going to share this highly anecdotal evidence in an effort to end on something of a high note. 
I talked to both private equity investors and hedge fund investors, and it™s always very 
interesting to compare the two of them.
  The hedge fund investors are in a really difficult 
environment.  They™re traders who get marked every quarter, 
and
, in a world that has very few 
ways for them to make money, they™re generally very conservatively positioned, and their 

investor base seems to be fine with that.  
Private equity firms are feeling quite differently about 

things.  They basically think about creat
ing value over a three
-to five
-year period, and many PE 
firms right now, large and small, think that this is a great time to buy. In fact, a str
ing of large 
industrial properties, which would ordinarily have been expected to trade to corporations, 
has 

trade
d to private equity.  T
here are three reasons why the private equity firms are feeling 
aggressive.  First, the
ir natural competitors
, these big companies
, are all frozen on the sideline
s, 
sitting on their cash, ruled by risk-averse public boards, and out of the game.  If anything, 
they™re 

going to wind up being net sellers as the recession goes on.  Second, leveraged 
finance markets, 
as Andreas was discussing this morning, are very attractive
, with low rates and issuer-
favorable 
            
                                    
      
   terms that are just about
 reminiscent of the bubble days, and all 
of 
that provides critical 
flexibility in case deals don™t go well. 
Third
Šand really the one that™s relevant for this policy 
exercise
Šprivate equity firms think about the medium term, and they see the future as bett
er. 
These large private equity firms 
are completely global; 
they 
each own hundreds of companies in 
every major economy and 
in 
every vertical
; and they systematically mine the data that they get 
and they™ve got the talent on board to do that.  This is not the private equity industry of 20 years 
ago.
  So they™re seeing something.  They really are.  It™s pretty consistent, and what™s holding 
back the volume of deals is only supply.  There was quite a similar pattern back in the early 

2000s after the dot-
com c
rash.  In that period, as many will recall, the S&P lost about half of its 
value.  We had a very soft economy in 2001 and 2002, a stri
ng of corporate accounting scandals 
leading to Sarbanes
ŒOxley, and a deflation scare in 2002.  Across the board, 
net sellers of 
businesses were
 on the sidelines, and the private equity firms were extremely aggressive during 
that period.  Those deals turned out to be, 
in many cases
, some of the best investments in the 
history of the industry.  It turned out to be a great time to buy.  I would also add that they were 

net sellers in 
2005 and 2006.  So the question is, 
why take any signal from this, right? I realize it 
doesn™t tell us anything at all about the next few quarters
.  B
ut I will say that it™s a bit of a sign
al to me because this is a group of investors with very successful and, in 
some cases
, long track 
records that were looking ahead to strong growth in the medium term, 
and they were willing to 

put more than just an opinion on the line in that belief.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Could I ask the Governor a question?  Geographically, 
do they express any preferences about where they want to have the business? 
MR. POWELL.  Yes.  T
he hedge funds are, as 
a staff mem
o from Matt and Fabio
 pointed 
out, unanimously not believing a long-run solution in Europe.  They™re just very pessimistic.  
I                  
            
       
          
would say the private equity firms are 
in the same place.  You see very little private equity 
interest in Europe.  There™s great uncertainty 
and
 that kind of thing.  
In t
he United States, you see 
a lot of activity
Šagain, restrained only by a lack of supply.  When there™s a good company 
that™s out there, the bidding is furious, and they™re all saying, 
ﬁThis is the time.
ﬂ  This happened 
10 years ago. 
And Asia
ŠI can™t really give you any call on that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  I see I have two hours now.  
[Laughter] Let me summarize and just make a few comments.
  Participants didn™t see much 
change in the o
utlook, on net, during 
the interme
eting period.  Economic grow
th is still sluggish. 
The near
-term growth outlook is modest, and the recovery is in a holding pattern.  Output and 
employment growth are falling short of levels needed to reduce unemployment.  Headwinds for 

recovery include fiscal policy, deleveraging, tight credit, and international factors, including not 

only Europe, but also slowing in China.  
Some felt that we risk a lost decade, but another view is 

that recovery has been consistent with previous experiences with banking and financial crises, à 

la Reinhart and Rogoff. 
Recent labor market reports have been weak, although unemployment has fallen in the 
past year.  Some decline in unemployment is due to reduced participation, and employment-
to-population ratios are at post-trough lows.  H
yste
resis is a risk and a possible rationale for action.  
Retail sales data were a bit better, and households continue to deleverage, but consum
er confidence is soft, and people are unusually pessimistic.  
Real 
estate activity is improving in a 
number of D
istricts.  Sales are up
, permits
 and 
prices are also rising
, inventories are low, and 
delinquencies are falling.  Rising prices may stimulate further sales.  There is some strength also 

in commercial real estate
.         
   
           
  
       
      With regard to measurements of slack, there was, again, discussion of the issue.  Staff 
analysis concludes that slack is high, and it was noted that inflationary pressures remain low.  
Some argued that measurements of slack should distinguish the long
er-run normal rate and the 
current equilibrium rate
, or natural rate, which varies over time.
  Discussion of the structure 
of 
the labor market noted that routine jobs are disappearing, but 
declining dynamism may be more 
chronic than cyclical, and the long-
term unemployed are not completely shut out of the labor 
market. 
Uncertainty remains an important issue for businesses, holding back investment and 
hiring.  Job growth is particularly weak.  Small businesses are concerned about taxes and 

regulation.  The fis
cal cliff is a particular risk, as is electoral uncertainty. Some research 
suggests that higher uncertainty acts like an aggregate demand shock.  Policy uncertainty is a 

headwind, but not the only one, as the Bloom index suggests.  
In agriculture
, the dro
ught will 
impede GDP growth over the next several quarters.  However, farm income has been supported 

by high prices and crop insurance.  Energy activity is expanding.  Manufacturing reports are 

mixed.  Auto sales are up.  Firms are focused on gaining market share, but among financial 

firms
, private equity is more optimistic and aggressive. 
In the financial sector, long-
term interest rates are very low
, with negative real yields, but 
it was noted that the equilibrium real yield in the economy may also be neg
ative.  Financial stress 

ind
exes are not particularly worrisome, and financial froth has not been reported.  
Firm balance 
sheets are strong
, and credit supply is available when loan demand strengthens.  The ECB™s 
actions have again helped calm Europe, but further progress requires action by governments.  

Risks remain serious, 
and economic 
growth on the Continent should remain weak. 
                    
  
   
   
          
         
              
  
 With respect to inflation, the outlook has not changed much.  Inflation seems likely to 
remain near or below 2 
percent in the m
edium term. Low inflation is also predicted by DSGE 
models.  Businesses are not particularly concerned about their costs.  Inflation expectations are 
stable, and there™s little evidence of disinflation. 
There was a good bit of premature discussion of mone
tary policy
, which covered, among 
other things, the effectiveness of possible actions, the risks and benefits of actions and inaction, 

and issues of communication. 
Any questions or comments? [No response] 
I come after Governor Powell
, so I have an 
even 
more difficult task. I™ll try to respond a little bit to some of the comments that were made 
today.  The basic outlook is, as everyone has pointed out, that we have an economy 
that 
is 
growing very slowly, at or below trend, and, by the usual Okun™s l
aw re
lationships, we™re not 
seeing very much progress in the labor market. 
Unemployment is about the same 
as in 
January, 
and I note that aggregate hours 
are 
also only about ½ percent higher than 
they 
were
 in January.  
President Bullard noted that there was a p
eriod of improvement in the unemployment rate around 
the turn of the year.  One interpretation of that is that it was a one-
time payback for the rapid 
drop in jobs during 
the recession. 
In any case, 
economic 
growth, if anything, is slowing relative to earl
ier in the recovery. 
Now, how do we explain, understand, and interpret the very slow growth we™ve been seeing? 

That was also 
discussed in the go-round.  One possibility is that there™s been a once-
and
-for
-all 
level shift, that we™ve dropped down to a lower level and 
are 
continuing a
t trend at about the 
earlier pace.  So the suggestion there is that we are close to potential and output 
growth going 
forward will remain trend
-like.
  This interpretation does not look implausible if you eyeball 
graphs for GDP or consumption growth.  It is consistent with some 
earlier episodes of financial 
      
               
        
           
     crisis, and
, among others, the IMF has given this perspective a little bit of support.  
The 
alternative interpretation held by others around the table is that we remain well b
elow potential.  
I think it™s perfectly possible to rationalize that.  First, there have been ongoing headwinds, both 
endogenous and exogenous.  The endogenous ones include 
financial balance sheet, financial 
accelerator type
s of 
effects 
and the exogenous ones include Europe, fiscal, and the like.  So 
there 
have been continuing headwinds, and, of course, 
sticky prices
Šas was pointed outŠ
are part of 
overlapping price-setting coordination issues and the like.  I think both of these interpretations 

are conceivable, and they probably both have some truth in them.  
As President Bullard 
mentioned, I don™t think it™s very likely that we™ll return to the pre-
crisis trend. 
Now, on the permanent drop in the level, I™m a 
little bit bemused by the appeal to 
Reinhart
ŒRogoff because the
irs is a strictly reduced
-form observation, 
it has no structural 
interpretation, and it could involve any number of reasons, including uncontrolled factors 
such as 
poor policymaking.  So I don™t take that as a very convincing answer unless I understand better 

what the rationale is that is explaining the slower growth.
  The second story does provide a 
rationale, does provide an explanation.  Notably, labor utilization does appear to be exception
ally 

low, and I won™t repeat Governor Tarullo™s comments, but Eddie Laz
ear, who I don™t think is 
necessarily inclined to find 
a cyclical source of unemployment
, is just the latest of the majority 
of studies in this area 
to find a significant cyclical compo
nent.  It™s true that the short-
term 
equilibrium unemployment rate can vary.  There™s no question about that.  S
taff 
members have 
tried to include some of that in their analysis.  B
ut we need 
a story.  It™s possible, based on that 
kind of analysis, 
that the equilibrium unemployment rate is 
above the long
er-term natural rate at 
this point.  We don™t know.  I want to emphasize that on all of these thingsŠon the economy, on 

the effects of policy
Šwe™re incredibly uncertain, and we have to make decisions under 
                 
   
            
      
    
       
   uncertainty.  We can™t let waiting for certainty be the condition for taking any action.  We have 
to make the best choices we can, given a very uncertain situation.  
So, in that kind of world, of 
course, there are 
type 
I and t
ype 
II errors.  This is similar
 to what 
the Vice Chairman was saying. 
We are close to our inflation objective.  We™re quite far from our unemployment objective, at 

least the long
er-run unemployment objective.  Arguments 
have been made that staying far away 
from the long
er-run unemployment level for a protracted period has its own costs 
besides the 
temporary costs of the cyclical unemployment. 
In terms of our policy tools, I do agree with President Plosser that having a good grip on 
the costs and the risks of those tools is very importan
t, and that™s one reason why we have been
, in some ways, not as quick to use the tools as we might have been if we were using short-
term 
interest rates as our policy tool.
  But I feel that I™d like to thank the staff for the work that™s been 
done over the last couple of interme
eting periods. I think the work on market functioning, the 
work on financial stabilityŠ
all 
of 
those things have made me more comfortable, 
at least
, that we 
can manage the costs of these 
unconventional policy tools. 
Now, I might as 
well take the advantage to talk a little bit about the policy tools and some 
of the issues that have been brought up.  I have great admiration for Michael Woodford.  I hired 

him, I coauthored with him, I was his colleague for many years, and I think he™s a 
terrific 
economist.  And I think a lot of what he said in his paper at Jackson Hole was very useful.  I do 

think that he understates the consensus in the literature about the impact of unconventional tools, 

particularly asset purchases, on the economy.  I won™t go through an extended discussion, but I™ll 

make just a couple of observations on the empirical side.  
He focused primarily on the event-
study evidence.  He came to that with a M
odigliani
ŒMiller type of financial markets perspective, 
which has a lot of theoretical appeal but obviously is not empirically very successful.  It doesn™t 
                  
    
    
                 
     explain a lot of premiums
, a lot of volatility
, in actual financial markets.  So
, using that 
perspective, he was inclined to dis
miss the results from the event
-study research. 
But this 
research does tend to find, 
almost uniformly
, that asset purchases do have effects on financial 
conditions, notwithstanding the fact that it™s very difficult to measure the surprise component of 
a change in asset purchase policy. I was very
 much involved in the literature on measuring the 
effects of surprises in the federal funds rate, and there at least you have a futures market that can 

tell you what was expected.  Obviously, 
that™s very difficult in the case of asset purchases, and 

theref
ore you w
ould expect the event
-study literature
, if anything
, to bias down the findings, the 
impact of asset purchases on financial conditions.  But beyond that, in looking at only the event 

studies, Woodford™s paper ignores two other major literatures.  O
ne is a substantial literature on 
the effects of relative supplies of 
Treasuries on term premiums.  I would cite, for example, 
Kutt
ner
 (2006) and Greenwood and V
aya
nos (2010), and this appears also in work by Ga
gnon, Hamilton and Wu, and others.  
And a sec
ond line of research is based on no-
arbitrage term 
structure models, such as the 
Li and Wei
 paper that has been used a lot here at the Board.  So 
there have been 
a number of different approaches, and again, I do think that the bulk of the 
evidence is that 
these tools do have effects on financial conditions.  Obviously, 
there are issues 
about the transmission to the real economy, and I take some of the points that have been made, 

but there are factors there working in both directions.  For example, to the ex
tent that credit 
markets are becoming less tight
Šstandards and terms are becoming less restrictiveŠl
ower 
interest rates will have more effect rather than less effect. 
The central message of Woodford™s paper, though, which I do agree with very much, is 
that expectations management is really critical to managing monetary policy at the zero bound. 

And I agree with Governor Stein that the language is very important.  How we present what 
         
    
              
         
      
   
           
  
    we™re doing is going to be very important.  I
n particular, 
and 
we™ll talk about this tomorrow, 
trying to signal that the Fed, rather than being pessimistic, is determined 
and 
that the Fed will be 
supporting the economy.  We™ll be there.  We™ll be a backstop.  We™ll provide confide
nce. I 
think that™s a very important part of what our communication should be about.  P
ersonally
, I™ve 
learned something from both Woodford™s discussion and th
at discussion around the table about 
how we should be talking to markets and to the public.  And a very small thing, but in my press 
conference statement tomorrow
, I™m going to try to talk a little bit more to the average person 
than I have been, and try to explain what we™re doing and why it™s helpful more broadly.  So I do 

expect the expectations c
hannel to be very important, but I think I disagree that by itself it™s 

sufficient
. The main problem is that we™ve already said that we™d keep rates low for three years. 
How much further out can we go? 
For example, 
Woodford argues that a nominal GDP targ
et, 
if 
adopted, would allow us essentially to make commitments many years in advance.  I™d like to 

actually raise the question once again to the group because we looked very carefully at nominal 

GDP targets more than a year ago now
, I think, and there was 
really no support at that time
.  The 
basic argument is that
, in order to work, people have to be persuaded that you™ll stick to this 
target for a very extended period, many years, even though a nominal GDP target may involve a 

period of inflation well above your normal range of inflation.  Moreover, of course, there™s also 

the risk that, if that happens, then inflation expectations will become unanchored.  So I think that 

was the case against nominal GDP targeting. A few people have talked about it. 
If I™
m missing 
something and you want me to hedge more when I™m asked about it tomorrow, which I™m sure I 

will be, I™d like to hear that tomorrow because, again, the take of this group a year ago was th
at nominal GDP targeting, price-
level targeting, and so on, 
while useful, are limited in 
that they 
             
                 
         
       
     
     require credibility very far in the future. 
And that™s why I think one of the benefits of asset 
purchases is that they can be used as a concrete action, as a commitment device
, to help 
strengthen the expectations ef
fect of announcements and communication so that they really are 
complementary
Šmore than we have given them credit 
for 
and more than I really said in my 
remarks at Jackson Hole. 
So there 
are
 a lot of interesting issues here.  I think what I™d like to end on 
is just to come 
back to the point that I know we™re all in debating mode.  We want to persuade our colleagues, 

and that™s certainly laudable, but the fact is that nobody really knows precisely what is holding 

back the economy, what the correct responses a
re, 
or 
how our tools will work.  A
nd I believe we 
all have to try to think hard about, 
in a Bayesian context
, using information that we have and 
thinking about both the risks of action and the risks of inaction, what the best choices are, 

acknowledging and
 understanding that whatever we do, it™s going to be a shot in the proverbial 
dark.  I think, 
really
, it™s going to be very important for us to pull together, 
in a sense
, to support 
whatever efforts that we make.
  Any questions or comments?  President 
Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thanks for those remarks.  I 
found them very useful in my own thinking.  I, too, thought the staff™s work on LSAPs over the 

last couple of inter
meet
ing periods has been really helpful, but even mor
e broadly, I certainly 
came to the question of the efficacy of the LSAPs from the same M
odiglianiŒ
Miller framework 
that Mike sketched, and I found the empirical work on the asset pricing side very informative.  It 

certainly shaped my thinking moving away from the Mo
digliani
ŒMiller framework. 
Our statements, 
alternative A and 
alternative B
, make reference to continuing to study the efficacy of 
the LSAPs.  Part of that will have to be ongoing work and ongoing study of that linkage between 
                               
        what™s going on in the financial markets and how that™s getting through to the real economy.  
At least for me
, that™s a major source of uncertainty still. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me make one comment on that, which is, 
you 
sometimes hear the following kind of statement:  
ﬁTight monetary policy is not causing the 
problem
; therefore, easing monetary policy won™t help.
ﬂ  That™s a non sequitur.  If, say, tight 
fiscal policy is the problem, if that™s the reason the economy is growing slowly, it doesn™t mean 

that 
monetary policy can
™t mitigate that.  So I think that kind of argument needs to be looked at 
very carefully.
  We are doing a lot.  We are absolutely doing a lot.  There™s no question about it.  
Nobody can blame the Federal Reserve fairly, in my opinion, for being tightfisted and stingy and 

not willing to take risks to try to support the economy.  
But the fact that it™s not our fault that the 
recovery is slow doesn™t mean that we can™t try to help if we think, in fact, that the benefitŒ
cost 

ratio is appropriate. 
What I™d like to do is let Bill English do his introductory remarks for tomorrow.  I™m in 
your hands.  The reception starts at 5:30.  Would people like to continue with the policy round, 

or should we just have Bill and then start fresh at 8:30? 
PARTICIPANT. 
Break
. PARTICIPANTS
.  Fresh. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fresh.  Okay. 

MR. 
FISHER
.  Governor Powell needs to take a nap. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  He™s not the only one.  [Laughter] 
All right.  We™ll ask Bill 
to make his opening presentation and take any questions, and then we™ll recess for reception and 

dinner.  
Bill. 
         
    
  
    
          
   
  
     
          
                                                                         MR. ENGLISH.
7  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think the policy 
alternatives are being handed around right now.  They are the same as the ones we 

distributed earlier this week. I guess I™ll wait just a mome
nt until everybody has 
them. 
The first page of the handout illustrates the effects of three different policy paths.  
The black
 solid lines in the charts depict the experimental consensus forecast, which 
is conditioned on unchanged policy.  The 
red
 dashed lines show the results of a more 
accommodative policy, one 
that™s 
consistent with an a
lternative B that shifts back the 
date in the forward guidance to mid-2015 and, in addition to $30 billion of MBS 

purchases a month and completion of the MEP this year, involves buying longer-
term 
securities at a rate of $75 billion a month through the middle of next year.  The 

balance sheet implications of this alternative are shown at the top right.  So long as 

the public correctly anticipates that the Committee will follow this policy, the result is 

a more rapid economic recovery that takes the unemployment rate to 
6.3 percent by 
the end of 2015, about ½ percentage point lower than in the consensus baseline; the 

inflation rate (shown at the bottom right) is a bit
 higher but remains near your 

2 percent longer
-run objective. 
The 
blue dotted lines show the results of an even more accommodative policy; 
this corresponds to alternative A and includes a new $1.25 trillion LSAP and a shift in 

the date in the forward guida
nce to mid
-2015.  
In this case, the unemployment rate 
falls to 
about 6.1 percent by the end of 2015, and inflation runs a little higher than 
under the other policies. 
If, in reviewing the outlook under 
the 
unchanged policy, the Committee views the 
likely outcomes for employment and inflation as inconsistent with its mandate, it 

might choose to ease policy by strengthening the forward guidance in the statement 

and engaging in additional asset purchases.  Alternative B
, on page 5, 
may offer the 
Committee an attractive approach to moving strongly in that direction at this meeting, 

but without committing now to a large, discrete purchase program.  Alternative B 

completes the MEP and starts buying additional MBS, with an explicit proviso that 

the Committee will c
losely monitor developments ﬁin coming monthsﬂ in deciding 
whether to continue the purchases and scale them up. 
The first paragraph of 
alternative B updates the description of the economy to 
reflect the mixed incoming information over the period.  The second paragraph 

differs from past statements by expressing the medium
-term outlook as a conditional 

forecast, noting that the Committee is concerned that ﬁwithout further policy 

accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained 

improvement in labor market conditions.ﬂ  Then the third paragraph announces that 

the Committee will complete the MEP as planned and will commence purchasing 

MBS each month.  The options you™re offered here are rates of $30 billion or 

$40 billion a month.  The higher rate of purchases would have the advantage of 

providing more impetus to growth, but some policymakers may prefer the lower rate, 
7 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
      
                          
             
      
      
    
              perhaps to allow for some future ramping-up in reaction to shocks, such as a full 

encounter with the fiscal cliff or
 a worsening of the problems in Europe.  Staff work 
suggests that purchases even 
at the higher pace would be unlikely to cause problems 
with market functioning. 
The fourth paragraph signals another decision point coming in the future.  It says 
that if, ﬁin
 coming months,ﬂ the ﬁoutlook for the labor market does not improve 
substantially,ﬂ the Committee will continue its MBS purchases 
and undertake 
additional asset purchases ﬁas appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a 

context of price stability.ﬂ
 The paragraph offers an option to include the possibility 
of employing other policy tools as well.  Participants may find that additional 

reference attractive if they think that changes in forward guidance, new lending 

programs, or a reduction in the inte
rest rate paid on reserves might also be appropriate 
in the future.  The paragraph concludes by noting that, as always, the likely efficacy 

and costs of asset purchases will be taken into account as the Comm
ittee calibrates its 
purchases. 
In paragraphs 5 and 5
, the statement offers two options for restating the forward 
guidance.  Both versions begin by putting the Committee™s decision with respect to 

the forward guidance in a more positive light and in the context of making progress 

toward its objectives by indicating that
, ﬁto support continued progress toward 

maximum employment and price stability, the Committee expects that exceptionally 

low levels of the federal funds rate will remain appropriate for a considerable time 

after the economic recovery stren
gthens.ﬂ  Paragraph 5 then continues by shifting 
the 
date of the expected commencement of policy firming out to mid-2015.  By contrast, 

paragraph 5
 replaces the calendar date with new conditional language that ties the 
timing of liftoff to the path of the
 unemployment rate, subject to constraints on 
inflation and inflation expectations.  Some participants may see this conditional 

language as preferable to offering a specific date because it will allow market 

participants to adjust their expectations for li
ftoff flexibly as information bearing on 

the economic outlook is received. 
The immediate market reaction to 
alternative B is hard to predict, in light of the 
policy expectations currently in the market and the decision point that would be 

highlighted in paragraph 4.  Primary dealers appear to place high odds on a new 

program of securities purchasesŠ
generally expected to increase Federal Reserve 
holdings by around $500 
billion 
to $600 billion by the end of 2013Š
and some see it 
as likely to be described in flow terms.  But it is not clear how they would gauge the 

likely scale of purchases under 
alternative B. An 
al
ternative B in which the 
Committee decided over coming months to purchase $75 billion in securities per 

month during the first half of next year would be roughly equivalent to the 

$500 billion 
to $600 billion now expected.  With most outside forecasts anti
cipating 
only slow improvement in labor market conditions over coming quarters, the market 

may come to expect the purchases to exceed this amount.  With regard to the forward 

guidance, ﬁmid
-2015ﬂ is in line with expectations, but the language in paragraph 5
 might be seen as pointing to even more accommodation.  On balance, a
lternative B 
might prompt a modest decline in longer-term interest rates, higher equity prices, and 
                          
              
                     
  
          
    
        a depreciation of the dollar.  However, the magnitude and persistence of the effects 

will depend importantly on what investors see as the implications of the statement for 

the ultimate size of the SOMA portfolio, as well as which version of the forward 

guidance the Committee chooses. 
Alternative A
, on page 3, 
may appeal to members who see 
the Committee as 
having persistently missed its dual objectives in the same direction and believe that, 

with the fiscal cliff looming and uncertainty about Europe unresolved, the downside 

risks to economic growth are very large.  They may believe that the 
Committee needs 
to send a clear signal that it is willing to substantially increase its holdings of 

securities and extend the forward guidance.  They may be concerned that the 

effectiveness of 
alternative B would be undermined by investor uncertainty about 
both the Committee™s decision to extend purchases beyond the next few months and 

the ul
timate size of such purchases. 
The first and second paragraphs of a
lternative A are close to those of 
alternative 
B.  The third paragraph of alternative A announces a new lump-
sum LSAP 
program, comprising $750 billion of longer-term Treasuries and $500 billion of MBS, 

at a combined pace of about $75 billion per month through early 2014.  The fourth 

paragraph clarifies that the new program replac
es the MEP and that the Committee™s 

reinvestment policy will continue.  The fifth paragraph, as in a
lternative 
B, extends 
the forward guidance to mid-2015.  Alternative A also provides possible language for 

a 10
 basis point reduction in the IOER rate. 
Beca
use $1.25 trillion lies well outside the range of most market forecasts 
for a 
new LSAP program, alternative A would likely lead to a notable drop in longer-
term 
interest rates, as well as higher equity prices and a lower foreign exchange value of 

the dolla
r.  These effects could be increased somewhat and accompanied by some 
decline in short-
term interest rates if a reduction i
n the IOER rate were included. 
Alternative C, 
on page 7, might appeal to policymakers who see the recent 
economic data as consistent 
with the view that the economic recovery is on a 
sustainable path and proceeding about as well as could be expected given the effects 

of the financial crisis.  They may see the elevated size of the Federal Reserve™s 

portfolio as well as the recent rise in 
oil and other key commodity prices as implying 
some upside risk to inflation.  As a result, they may judge that there is no need to ease 

policy through a change in the forward guidance or a new LSAP program, and they 

may even anticipate that the funds rate 
will need to be raised significantly earlier than 
markets anticipate. Other participants may have views that are shaped less by 

concerns about the outlook, but believe that the costs and risks associated with 

additional asset purchases are likely to exce
ed the benefits in terms of improved 

economic conditions. 
The first paragraph in a
lternative C is somewhat more positive about economic 
developments than in alternatives A and B.  The second paragraph is similar to the 

August statement but projects somewha
t stronger growth and higher inflation.  There 
are two versions of paragraph 3:  The first maintains the ﬁlate 2014ﬂ forward 
                                                    guidance, with an option to change the date to ﬁlate 2103ﬂ
; the second version, 

ate
-dependent forward gui
dance 
with language describing 
the factors the Committee would consider in determining the appropriate time to raise 

the target federal funds rate.  The fourth paragraph is similar to the August statement, 

except that it provides a more balanced outlook for policy. 
The markets would be greatly surprised by a statement along the lines of 
alternative C, especially if it signaled an earlier rise in the federal funds rate. Interest 
rates would likely jump higher, and stock prices could drop sharply. 
Draft dire
ctives for each of the alternatives are presented on pages 9 through 12 of 
your handout.  
Thank you
, Mr. Chairman.  That 
completes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there any questions for Bill? 
President Fisher. 
MR. FISHE
R.  Mr. Chairman, if I could ask Simon and the D
esk
Šagain, just to have a 
factual grip here
:  What kind of market penetration will we have on mortgage-
backed securities 
under the 
program of 
$30 and $40 billion per month?  You mentioned this earlier.  I apo
logize. 
MR. POTTER. 
That™s the flow rate relative to gross issuance. 
MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir. 
MR. POTTER. 
If we™re about one-third right now, if we added $30 billion, we™d be 
about 60 percent
; at 
$40 billion
, we™re about 70 percent.  
But i
n terms of the stock, I think that 
wouldŠ
what was that
, L
orie
? MS. LOGAN.  I don™t have the exact numbers for the particular scenarios, but the stock 
would be 25 percent under the $30-
billion
-per
-month pace, and it would be slightly higher under 
$40 billion per month
. I 
don™t have that exact number, and it depends on the length, but just for 
a maximum
, under the $2 trillion scenario that we had run, the maximum was 36 percent.  So 

that gives you the very upper bound. 
MR. FISHER.  And if w
e assume that we finish the MEP at 
year
-end, what will be our 
duration? 
       
      
     
    
        
     
                 
    
 MR. POTTER
.  The duration will be eight years, but we™ll own quite large amounts of 
some of the longer-duration securities.  T
hat™s 
in the Treasury part of the portfolio. 
MR. FISHER.  And of some of the particular issu
es, we have significant
Šabove 
70 percent
.  I
s that
 correct now? 
MS. LOGAN. 
We™ve a 70 percent per CUSIP cap.  So we can™t buy any
Š MR. FISHER.  That™s our cap per 
CUSIP? 
MS. LOGAN
.  That™s the c
ap. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 
MS. LOGAN
.  We™ve only hit the ca
p on ten issues, I thinkŠthe number that we™ve hit 
the 
maximum 
70 percent on
.  And most of those were old bonds in 
very small size. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you very much. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chai
rman. Bill, I just wanted to clarify since we have 
a few minutes here.  When we do this on page 1 here, there 
are 
three lines
, and then 
alternative 
B has a couple 
of 
options in it.  Are you saying that this is a rough guide to what 
alternative 
B would del
iver? 
MR. ENGLISH. Ye
s. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Or 
do you feel as though it wouldn™t make too much difference which 
option is chosen within the subgroups that are proposed?  O
r is it just 
that it™d get too cluttered
? MR. ENGLISH. 
What we tried to do here was write
 down something that seemed 
plausibly in line with 
alternative B. Alternative B has a couple of different choices that the 
Committee would have to make.  One is, 
later on
, what do you do in a few months after you™ve 
observed the economy?  Do you continue purchasing into next year? We™ve assumed that you 
                   
                
    continue purchasing for about, I think, seven months in this.  And then the other question is, 
what do you do with the forward guidance? 
We™ve assumed
, basically
, that the forward 
guidance goes out to mid-2015 and is compellingŠe
verybody believes 
it.  It™s possible, as I 
mentioned, that because market participants™ sense 
of 
the outlook is a bit weaker than our sense 

of the outlook, they may read that 6½ percent unemployment rate as pushing the liftoff even 

later
.  If that were picked up, then you™d get a little bit more impetus to the economy out of that, 
but we™ve not modeled that here. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  And the other thingŠI™ve been concerned about the withering 
of 
alternative C here.
  Alternative C isn™t mentioned in the graphs. 
MR. ENGLISH.  Alternative C would be, as long as you left the liftoff date unchanged, 
pretty similar to the consensus forecast.  What I™m taking out of that is the sense in the words in 

alternative C that mig
ht hint that things could move more quickly than that. 
So the straight 
consensus forecast is no change in the forward guidance, no additional purchases beyond the end 

of the year.  That broadly is consistent with a
lternative C but maybe doesn™t quite get 
the sense 
of what the words in a
lternative C could mean to market participants. 
MR. BULLARD.  Well, when you describe it, 
you say, ﬁ
Markets would be surprised
.ﬂ  
I think 
that™s 
accurate
Šthey
™d be very surprised by a statement like thatŠand that you proba
bly 
would have some 
effe
ct.  Plus, if we were going in that direction, which I guess we™re not, you™d 
have the possibility of moving up the date 
of liftoff
. MR. ENGLISH.  Right. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
One important point here
:  The black lineŠ
the consensus 
forecast
Šimplicitly has in it
 a significant disappointment 
for
 the market because they pull back 
      
           
       
     
               their expectations for liftoff to late 2014, and they 
remove 
their expectations of any furt
her 
expansion of the portfolio. 
MR. 
BULLARD
.  I see.  So I should read this as ﬁConsensus forecast/a
lternative C.ﬂ 
MR. ENGLISH.  Roughly. 
MR. BULLARD.  Roughly speaking.  Well, I guess, Mr. Chairman, 
I have a concern 
whether 
we have three options that are live options.  And I think it™s been hard while the 
Committee has been
 trying to think about ways to ease, and when the Committee shifts in the 
other direction, the same thing will happen.  But I think you want to have some things that are a 

little bit tighter, a little bit easier, and might actually have a chance of
Š CHAIRM
AN BERNANKE. 
We circulate this and ask whether it spans the range of 
views
 so, of course, we always welcome suggestions. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Well, it™s up to you.  But if you try to span the range of views, you 
might have to put something on the table that™s not going to be adopted.  But from my point of 

view, I
™d like to see three live things that we could do and things that we might be able to 
maneuver around. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The other way we
™ve used the alternatives
, of course, 
is to 
try out different lan
guage or alternative language. 
And in the past, 
we™ve co
mbined, mixed 
things together. 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  One is for you, Bill.  
I™d like your help 
with 
understanding the second sentence in B(4).  I™m having trouble with it.  I 
don™t think I understand it correctly, particularly the role of price stability.  So let me tell you 
      
   
     
      
    
                                 what I think it says, the way I read it. 
It says, ﬁIf the outlook for the labor m
arket does
 not improve substantiallyﬂ in coming monthsŠ
so, if that happensŠthen we™re going to do X.  So X, 
I think, 
is, as I read this, ﬁundertake additional asset purchases 
. . . as appropriate until 
such 
improvement is achieved in a context of price sta
bility.ﬂ
  As I think about that, if that 
improvement is achieved but it™
s not in a context of price stability, that seems to say to me that 
we™re going to still keep purchasing assets.  Have I got this wrong? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I want to defend Bill because he pointed out this problem. 
MR. LACKER.  I actually pointed it out to him yesterday. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You
 pointed it out to him.  Okay. 
MR. 
ENGLISH
.  You™re not 
the 
first
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
We have poetic license here. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  You 
don™t mean that literally, right? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It means that we
™re looking for improvement in a context of 
price stability. If we see improvement 
without price stability, that
™s not a good thing, and we 
won™t continue purchases. 
MR. LACKER.  But th
is says you
™re going to wait until you get im
provement with price 
stability. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it™s clear what
Š VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It™
s ﬁsubject to
.ﬂ That™s really what it means. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It
™s ﬁsubject to.ﬂ  W
hen we actually clari
fy this, assuming 
we go ahead and do more in January or whatever, we™
ll be a little clear
er in this kind of language 
here. 
                 
  
         
      
  
          
                 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  The second question I haveŠand I probably should have 
asked this during our first agenda item.  I™
ve asked t
his at times in the past
.  On the table is a 
flow of purchases of mortgage-backed securities.  I™
ve asked in the past 
about the thought 
experiment of buying mortgage
-backed securities versus buying an equivalent amount of 
U.S.
 Treasuries.
  What I
™ve asked 
about is, all right, comparing those two options, undoubtedly 
your forecast, as you™ve said, is that 
mortgage
-backed security yields 
will be lower with 
purchases of 
mortgage
-backed securities than 
with 
purchases of 
Treasuries, and that mortgage 
rates will 
be lower. 
Now, my gut instinct is that some other rates will be higher.  And I™
ve asked 
about this in the past, but did you do any work on that this time? 
MR. POTTER.  Which rates? 
MR. LACKER. 
Aren™t other rates going 
to be higher if we buy mortgage-
backeds rather 
than T
reasuries?  Because presumably
, that means 
Treasury rates will be higher than they 
otherwise would be.  Presumably, some other rates are linked to T
reasuries 
and not mortgage-
backed securities, and presumably, they™
re higher. Isn™t there some other rate that
™s going to go 
up if we buy mortgage-
backed
s rather than 
Treasuries? 
MR. ENGLISH. Not 
go up
, but go down by less. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Go down by less. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I think that™s right. 

MR. LACKER.  Oh, okay.  Well, noŠbut, see, I™m asking to compare buying X amount 
of T
reasuries 
with buying 
X amount 
of mortgage-
backed.  So rates 
go downŠ 
MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we are still buying Treasuries under the MEP in this 
program. 
       
           
           
                      
MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know.  But instead of buying $30 billion of mortgages, buy 
$30 billion of 
Treasuries. 
MR. ENGLISH.  I think the answer to your question is in table 1 in the options memo 
that we sent, which had an experiment where you do $500 billion of T
reasury purchases or 
$500 billion of MBSŠjust one or the other.  T
he term premium effects are a little bit smaller if 
you buy the MBS, so T
reasury yields decline by less.  They still decline. It
™s still a purchase of a 
longer-
term security and still taking duration out of the market and still p
utting downward 
pressure on longer-
term rates, but by less.
  The mortgage rate goes down by more if you buy 
MBS than if you buy T
reasuries, because you
™re pushing MBS down more and mortgage rates 
down by more.  And our estimate of the effects on inflation and output are similar in size.  
They
™re a little smaller for the MBS purchase
, based on our modeling and our assumptions, than 
for 
the 
Treasury purchase, but they™
re in the same ballpark. 
MR. LACKER.  So what other rates go down by less or are higher b
ecause you™
ve 
been 
tilting toward 
mortgage
-backeds
? MR. ENGLISH. 
In FRB
/USŠDave Reifschneider 
will tell me if I™m wrong
ŠI think, 
basically
, that 
other long-term rates, corporate rates or whatever, would go down by more if you 
bought Treasuries than if you bought MBS. 
MR. PLOSSER.  So the MBS would provide 
less pass
-through, in some sense, to 
corporates and other things.  Is that the idea? 
MR. ENGLISH
.  Yes. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Depends on what you think the 
degree of substitutability 
is between 
them. 
          
       
       
    
   
             
     MR.
 ENGLISH.  Yes.  And this really is pushing pretty hard on our ability to model this 
stuff, but that™s what our modeling 
says
. MR. LACKER.  So that takes away some stimulus, right? 
MR. ENGLISH. Ye
s, that™s right. 
MR. LACKER. 
And the MBS, on netŠ 
MR. POTT
ER.  Well, not overall, 
necessarily. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Well, it doesn™t take away stimulus relative to doing nothing.  
It takes away stimulus relative to
Š  MR. ENGLISH. 
Buying
 an equivalent amount of T
reasuries
. MR. LACKER. 
Right. 
MR. POTTER.  On thoseŠ 

MR. 
LACKER
.  In that sector. 
MR. POTTER.  Not necessarily for the economy as a whole. 

MR. LACKER. 
Right.  So the rationale for MBSŠ
is it that
, on net, 
real outcomes are 
better?  Or is it more of a sectoral argument? 
MR. ENGLISH.  The argument we gave in the memo was that you want to have a 
balance across the two so that you can ramp up or ramp down.  We know from the capacity 

memo that we sent the Committee before the last meeting that there
™s a maximum amount
, roughly, 
that we 
were comfortable saying 
we could buy over the next couple of years.  That 
maximum amount 
has a ratio of 
Treasuries to MBS, 
and 
we™ve roughly maintained that ratio in 
these purchase programs. 
MR. LACKER.  I understand.  Thank you. 
                              
                   
      MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
That
™s the main argument.  
There
™s a second argument, which 
is not in the model sims we
™ve run, but a lot of people believe that MBS could have effects that 
the model isn™t picking upŠ
say, large
r effects on house prices
, bigger effects on mortgage 
refinancing, 
or 
something like that
. CHA
IRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart has a two-
hander. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Is there a connection or correlation between lowering mortgage-
backed rates and other securitization vehicles such as auto, student loan, credit card? 
MR. ENGLISH.  There might be in practice, but we™re not picking that up in the 
modeling that we
™re doing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just one observation.  Presumably, the reason why you 
also might want to split it is a market functioning issue. 
You can go 
bigger if you split it 
between two markets than if you conce
ntrate all on one market. 
MR. POTTER.  We are still buying in the 
Treasury market. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
That was just a comment, but I have a question.  It 
seems to me 
as though the key money line in B is, ﬁIf the outlook for the labor market does not 

improve substantially, the Committee will continue its 
purchases of agency 
mortgage-backed 
securities and undertake additional asset purchases.
ﬂ  That
™s the key money line.  
Now, I
™d like 
to get st
aff members™ 
views of what they think people are going to interpret that line to mean in 
light of, say, the SEPs that are going to be put out 
and the Chairman™s press conference 
statement.  How do we think people are going to interpret that line?  That™s c
ritical
Šyou have to 
have a view on that to know what you™re really voting for, in some fundamental sense.  I know 

it™s judgment, but I™d love to 
hear your view. 
                  
    
   
  
     
      
          MR. ENGLISH. 
We™re not sure.  
I think we argued in our memos that it might be 
something like a
 ½ percent
age point 
decline in the unemployment rate that
™s sustained. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, I don™t mean the effects on the macroeconomy.  I 
mean, when people write the articles at the end of the day, what are 
they going to think about 
how big this is likely to be? 
MR. POTTER.  I don™t think it will showŠ 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They
™re going to have our SEPs, and they™
re going to 
have this information that shows that this unemployment rate trajectory
Š MR. 
KOCHERLAKO
TA.  You mean the purchase program itself? 
MR. POTTER.  The total amount forŠthey™re going to try 
to work out an expected date. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  And so I guess I™m asking, what kind of expected 
date do we think they can work out? 
MR. POTTER. 
The SEP will give them some information.  I don™t believe that shows a 
substantial improvement in the labor market for quite some time.  So that means that they
™ll probably be looking for sometime in 2013.  That™
s the way we
™ve been modeling this, I think.  
And the assumption you had, Bill, was something like $600 billion of total purchasesŠi
s that 
right? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Including purchases under the MEP, it was $750 
billion
.  But
, as I said 
in my remarks, it could easily be more.  P
eople might see that the e
conomy is expected to be 
weak for quite a while
; they might carry it out further into 2013 and get a bigger amount. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
For me, the obvious question to you, Mr. Chairman, at 
the press conference might be
, given the SEP and your views, wh
at does the SEP forecast imply 

in terms 
of ﬁi
mprove 
substantially
ﬂ?       
                
                              
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  My answer will be that 
we want to see
Šnot what we saw 
last 
Friday
.  We want to see increases in payrolls.  We want to see some progress
Šnot sh
arp 
progress, but some pro
gress
Šin the unemployment rate
.  And we want to have a sense that the 
economy is moving in a 
direction that will help labor markets get better. 
We used the word 
ﬁoutlook.ﬂ  So a pickup in GDP growth would certainly be a factor in the outlook for labor 
markets, for example. I think we have a fail
-safe here
, which is that if it doesn™t have any effect, 
then we have the efficacy clause here as well.
  But the idea would be that we want to see 
something different from the current 
waiting
-in-place kind of situation where there™s no 
progress, 
the 
unemployment rate stays about the same, and monthly payrolls are 100,000 and 

less. 
And I will emphasize that it
™s not a single indicator or a single trigger number; 
we™re 
looking holistically at the labor market indi
cators and, in fact, more broadly because it™
s the 
outlook for the labor market that matters, not just the current number. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you
™d have to see improvement in the labor market 
that you thought would be sustained in the future. 
CHAIRM
AN BERNANKE.  Right. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
For what it™s worth, the B
lue 
Chip forecasts 
for the 
unemployment rate going into the middle of 2013 are very flat
.  Then, in the second half of 2013, 
they™
re expecting to see a more noticeable downtilt in the unemp
loyment rate.  So that™s another 
way of 
looking at it. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So the market would presumably put in nine months 
or 
more
Šthat
 would be a reasonable guesstimate, 
I guess. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Again, it™s
 the outlook and not the actual. 
VICE CH
AIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Yes. 
                         
                    MR. PLOSSER.  I just want some interpretation of the word ﬁsubstantiallyﬂ here because 
the market is going to ask you that as well.  What constitutes substantial progress? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Substantial progress means that we are seei
ng ongoing 
progress in the direction of improved labor market conditions. 
MR. PLOSSER.  So it
™s not something about 
the magnitude of the rate of change. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It
™s not the magnitude, but really a 
movement in that 
direction 
that 
is, I m
ight 
say, persuasive or indicative that there is now progress in the right 
direction
, as opposed to simply remaining static or 
getting 
worse.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  This is on the same point. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  David Wilcox showed us employment in his forecast summary, and 
when they do all of the seasonal adjustment right, it looks as though half of the improvement we 

got in the labor markets this past winter or the winter before, was spurious, seasonal stuff.  

Would what we saw last w
inter suffice? Would we stop after that? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would think so.  It dropped 1 percentage point between 
August and 
April. 
MR. LACKER. I
™d be on board with that.  But his 
analysis suggests that 
that 
would be 
like another seasonal head fake. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we
™d look at a range of variables.  O
f course, there™s 
nothing that says if you stop, you can™t start again. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No
, but l
ast winter, though, it wasn™t really that 
convincing because, remember, payrolls were strong but GDP was weak, and we had this riddle. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We had this riddle.  Yes, that™s right. 
                    
          
     
             
     
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And so you could argue that you wouldn™t necessarily 
stop 
last winter
, because 
you didn™t have the GDP growth to support the 
labor market. 
MR. POTTER.  I don™t think our outlook changed that much.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We basically want to see progress in terms of the key macro 
labor market variables. 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  Well, let me ask Bill Dudley™s question again.  What do you 
want the 
USA 
Today
 headline to be? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
ﬁBernanke, 
the Hero
ﬂ? [Laughter] 
ﬁFederal Reserve 
Says 
It Will Support Economy.ﬂ 
MR. 
FISHER
.  That™s the 
sports section, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. 
PLOSSER
.  ﬁFederal Reserve All In.ﬂ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
ﬁFederal Reserve Will 
Provide Support to Labor M
arket.
ﬂ MR. 
LACKER
.  By buying 
MBS? 
MS. 
DUKE.  And housing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Housing.
  People understand that. 
MR. 
LACKER
.  Okay. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  D
id you have a question, 
President 
Pianalto? 
MS. PIANALTO.  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, you made some comments about the 
6½ percent unemployment trigger in 
alternative B, paragraph 5
. You said that some forecasters 
have slower progress on the unemployment rate, so they may view 
what is in alternative B 
as more accommodation than markets expect.  If you look at your page 1, 
ﬁAlternat
ive Monetary 
Policy 
Scenarios,
ﬂ that 6
½ percent rate, as you mentioned, is about mid-2015.  I know we™
re 
            
      
         
                      trying to get away from the date, but you made those points.  You didn™t say very much about the 
inflation rate, because here it says ﬁ
no more than a half percentage point above the Committee™s 

2 percent objective.ﬂ  When you look at those scenarios, with alternative B, we don™t get 

anywhere close to 2
½.  We™re just slightly above the 2.  At one point, we looked at some 
language that said ﬁclose to the Committee™s 2 
percent objective.ﬂ  And I see that 
alternative 
B, 
and even a
lternative A, is 
close to our objective.  What are some of your thoughts
?  J
ust as you 
had
 some thoughts about the 6½ percent being interpreted by some as being more aggressive, 
would that 2½ percent objective be viewed as, again, more aggressive, and is it necessary given 

the scenarios that you™ve laid out here? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLE
Y.  It™s not an objective, though, right? 
GOVERNOR YELLEN
.  It™s not an objective. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It™s not an objective.  
It™s just a tolerance level.  That™s 
quite different. 
MS. PIANALTO.  But it™s 
a matter of
 perceptions also.  We™
re talking 
about 
communications.  And we™ve made a lot of progress and laid out a 2 
percent objective.  What are 

the advantages? 
Using
 ﬁclose to 2 percentﬂ 
would still 
give
 us the 
flexibility that
™s laid out in 
these scenarios
, but we
™re not communicating to the pub
lic that we
™re throwing out ½ 
percentage 
point.  I
t seems 
as though 
we™re throwing out a number, 
whereas
, ﬁclose toﬂ gives us some of 
that flexibility. 
MR. ENGLISH.  I think the ½ percentage point buffer was intended just for clarity.  If 
you said ﬁclose t
o,ﬂ everybody would ask the Chairman at his press conference, ﬁWhat do you 
mean by 
‚close to
™?
ﬂ and t
ry to extract that information.
  People will be looking at the SEP, and 
the SEP shows inflation below 2 or at 2, roughly, but not going above.  So I don™t think they™d 
                                      
    misread the 
½ percentage point buffer as suggesting an intention to set out to push inflation 
above 2.  It would simply be seen as a buffer.  There could be transitory shocks that would 

change the inflation outlook for a time, and the Committee could look through those and say, 

ﬁOkay.  We™re going to go up as high as maybe 2½ 
for a little while, but after that
, we think 

inflation is going to come back.  In the end, we™re getting to our objective, and that™s okay.ﬂ 
But 
whether you want to say e
xplicitly ﬁ
½ percentage pointﬂ or ﬁclose toﬂ is a question of 
communications.  It™
s a little clearer to say the number and not use ﬁclose to.ﬂ  But this is a 
communications issue for the Committee. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Can I ask one more press conference 
question?  Suppose somebody says, ﬁWe get to the end of 2013, it™s December 2013, and we™
re 
exactly where we are today.
  So 
the 
unemployment rate, job growthŠeverything is pretty much 
exactly where we are today. 
Do you envision that we™
ll still be continuing asset purchases at that 
point?ﬂ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  As we go through time, as the balance sheet grows, as we 
observe the effects on the economy, we™
ll be 
continually reevaluating the efficacy of the program 
and the costs that it is imposing.  And if we feel that we
™ve 
reached that point and the program is 
not being effective, then we w
ill have to stop.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes. I
™ll just add on to what you said, Mr. Chairman.  This 
question is an important one, but I think there 
are 
just 
two ways you could end up being in the 
same place.  It could be that there were a lot of bad shocks and the asset purchases helped you 

stop that, or maybe not.  We™
ll have to make that call at that time. 
                                 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
We have overnight
.  If any genius around the table would 
like to come up with better language, I would be more than happy. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I counsel you against 
offering 
that
.  [L
aughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  Are we all set?  [No response] 
Bill, 
what do you want us to do with these handouts? Do you want us to take them home and bring 
them back? 
MR. ENGLISH.  You have lots of Class 
I informat
ion in your Tealbook, so you 
can 
keep 
them. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right. 

MR. ENGLISH.  But please don™t leave them on the subway.  [L
aughter]. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Don™t leave them on the subway.  So 8:30 tomorrow 
morning.  T
he reception is available at 5
:00 p.m. 
[Meeting recessed] 
        
    
           
     
      
           September 13 Session 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We should have a reasonable 
amount of time.  We need to get the statement in by 11:30 and close the meeting by noon.  But 
first
, to get started
, why don™t we begin our policy go-round
? I have President Williams first on 
the list. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B with the forward 
guidance on the funds rate in paragraph 5
.  The case for further action is clear. In the absence of 
significant additional monetary stimulus, progress toward our policy goals would remain stalled.  

Such an outcome is simply inconsistent with the notion of appropriate monetary policy and, in 

my view
, is unacceptable. 
We must aim for a
 path that brings us measurably closer to our goals 
over the forecast horizon, and we must take concrete actions that get us on that path.  
Open
-ended purchases of MBS represent a substantial step in that direction.  With this action, 

unemployment will fall more quickly and inflation will return toward 
2 percent faster than under 
the status quo. 
The flow-
oriented asset purchases in 
alternative B also provide flexibility that™s 
particularly valuable, given all the uncertainties of the economy, the fiscal cliff, and Europe.  

They serve as a useful automatic stabilizer as market expectations about the ultimate size of the 
program adjust in response to changes in economic conditions 
and
 the outlook.  
If the 
labor 
market shows signs of substantial improvement sooner than expected, the program can be 

curtailed.  In contrast, if the recovery falters, the program can provide additional needed support. 
There would be similar benefits from incorporating such an automatic stabilizer into our 
forward guidance of the future path of the funds rate.  The language in p
aragraph 5
 does just 
that.  Incorporating this language into our statement would allow us to finally get the calendar
-                   
                        
 date monkey off our back and provide better guidance on our policy reaction functionŠ 
importantly, at least, on economic conditionsŠ
for funds rate liftoff that 
is both clear and 
consistent with our dual-mandate objectives.  It™s also flexible enough to handle a variety of 

future paths for the economy and inflation.  Indeed, the beauty of this approach is it provides 

guidance for contingencies where our forecasts go wrong, which they inevitably do. 
Finally, I continue to favor lowering the interest on excess reserve
s rate, the IOER rate, to 
15 basis points.  We should be using all of our tools in the same direction.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
.  Thank you very much.  
President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support 
alternative 
B with the 
$40 billion per month mortgage purchase program and prefer option 5
 which moves us away 
from dates and fo
cuses on the economic outcomes we seek to achieve. 
Inflation is quite low, and 
unemployment is quite high, and most of our forecasts for the past nine months have 

overestimated how quickly we would see improvements in 
either element of our mandate. 
Altern
ative B embraces the sense of doing what it takes to move the economy at an 
acceptable pace toward full employment with stable prices. 
Alternative 
B continues to take out 
duration, provides some direct support to housing, which is just beginning to recover, and 

extends guidance on the funds rate liftoff, which, given our lack of progress toward our mandate, 

seems appropriate. 
I strongly support the $40 billion rather than the $30 billion monthly 
mortgage purchase program. 
I would also prefer to include economic targets rather than date targets in our guidance.  
Thus, I would prefer the conditionality language in 5
. The language has two advantages.  
First, 
the conditions for changing our policy stance are clear and observable to the general public.  

Second, 
date
-conditional language can be subsequently undercut by Committee members™ 
                 
                       
   
 comments that suggest a different date may be appropriate, thus altering the effect of policy 
relative to the intent of the consensus reached 
by the Committee. 
Because 5
 conditions the 
policy on observable outcomes, the public can adjust its expectations automatically to changing 

economic circumstances, and there is less likelihood of perhaps inadvertently diminishing our 

policies™ effectivene
ss due to Committee disagreement. 
There seem to be two arguments against taking action at least as strong as B at this 
meeting
.  F
irst, that it would be ineffective.  Estimates in Boston are that following 
option A 
would reduce unemployment by approximatel
y 0.8 percent by the end of 2015.  This is roughly 
in line with the Board staff memos and the consensus policy submissions from three other banks 

that reported a preferred policy that was close to A.  
If accurate, this implies creating more than 
1 million jobs relative to doing nothing at this meeting. I do not view that as de minimis. 
The second argument against more aggressive action is that it will cause inflation.  Again, 
the consensus forecast exercise is instructive.  Among banks that provided numeric submissions, 

those that assumed further easing assume underlying inflation will remain well anchored.  This 

assumption is consistent with the Boston forecasting model.  Two of the Banks that provided 

numbers and assumed earlier tightening than we do have 
virtually identical unemployment rates 
with and without tightening, but a dramatically higher inflation rate under the baseline policy.  

This is markedly different than the staff forecast, the DSG
E models that we have seen, 
and the 
models used by B
anks as
suming the need for easing.  It would be interesting to discuss the 
theoretical basis and empirical evidence for such an inflationary process, which I presume is tied 

to dislodging of inflation expectations.  However, absent a strong empirical basis for su
ch an 

inflation process and with inflation tracking below our target and roughly consistent with the 

staff forecast in models that assume expectations remain well anchored, I view the risks of 
                      
     
    
           
 inflation as being well contained through 2015, even with a more aggressive policy than in 
alternative 
B.  Thus, I support B but would strongly prefer the forward guidance in the language 
of 5
 and the larger mortgage purchase amount.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the Committee™s outlook 
and overall assessment of the economy, I would say that additional accommodation is 

appropriate.  I think the question then becomes what form that accommodation should take. 
Alternati
ve A and 
alternative 
B offer 
the Committee the opportunity to do large-
scale 
asset purchases.  As you said in your Jackson Hole speech, Mr. Chairman, and 
as the staff 

analysis indicates, the benefits of large-
scale asset purchases are still under study and 
still 
uncertain.
  And the question is, how do we deal with that?  How do we deal with the 
issue that 
we don™t know exactly how much the benefits are, even though we might feel confident about 

the sign?  Governor Yellen and the Vice Chair
man
 said the right things yesterday about this, 
which is to act forcefully 
and
 to enhance the benefits of our large-
scale asset purchases as much 
as possible. 
How do we enhance our purchases as much as possible?  Well, the stimulus from our 
purchases hinges critically on th
e forward guidance.  They work together.  If you buy assets and 
hold them for one day and then sell them the next day, they are providing no stimulus.  If you 

buy assets and hold them for 10 years, they™re providing a lot of stimulus.  T
he stimulus 
that 
the asset purchases are providing the economy depends on the timing of exit.  T
o enhance the benefit 
of our large-
scale asset purchase
s as much as possible, 
we need the best possible forward 
guidance, and I would say that B(5
) as opposed to B(5) provides that forward guidance. 
                 
  
              
       
  
      
         
 I talked yesterday about the ambiguities that come 
by trying to communicate our reaction 
function with a date.  Today I™ll focus only on the economic aspects of B(5
. One, 
it provides 
an automatic stabilizer against macro shocks.
  Two, 
it offers protection against inflation.
  And, 
three, I want to talk about the mechanism through which it™s offering stimulus. 
The automatic stabilizer feature of B(5
 is relatively clear.  We talk a lot about downside 
risks in this room.  We have a bad shockŠ
and there 
are 
many possibilities out there
, I won™t go 
through them all.  If unemployment goes up 
and we have B(5) in place, which is date guidance, 
people 
will
 wonder
:  What is the Fed going to do?  How are they going to respond to that shock? 
With B
(5
 in place, 
if 
unemployment goes up
, it means automatically it™s going to take us longer 
to get back to the 6½ percent.  That means that people know th
at interest rates are going to be 

low for longer, andŠ
this is important because the extra accommo
dation that™s going to be 
provided at this meeting is likely to take the form of asset purchasesŠ
the assets that are being 

bought are being held for longer.  So a bad shock automatically translates into more stimulus 

because of the explicit numerical marke
rs being provided in the guidance. 
I™ve painted this as an ex post story of why B(5
 is preferred, but it actually has an ex 
ante component to it.  Essentially we™re offering insurance to the economy against bad shocks, 

and that means that people have less need for saving 
to deal with those bad shocks, and that 
stimulates spending.
  We™ve talked a lot about uncertainty.  H
aving the Fed have a reaction 
function in place that 
it has 
communicated clearly helps reduce uncertainty because people know 
how the Fed is going to react to those disturbances.  That™s the kind of stabilizer property that™s 

in B(5. Let me talk a little bit about inflation protection.  It™s a part that matters a great deal to 
me.  I™ve been and remain concerned about the possibility tha
t the long
-run natural rate of 
            
     
   
                          unemployment may well exceed our current estimates.  Here™s how I™ve been thinking about this 
issue.
  Suppose we only had one mandateŠprice stability.  How would we go about 
operationalizing that goal?  Well, presumably we would choose monetary policy so as to keep 

the medium-term outlook for inflation close to 2 
percent. 
Now, we have to struggle a little about 
what ﬁclose toﬂ means, and I™ll talk a little bit more about this later, but for me I™m willing to say 

that 50 basis points is close enough.  I would say that if you had a price-
stability mandate, 
then 
promoting price stability means keeping the medium
-term outlook for inflation within 50 basis 

points of target, 50 basis points below or 50 basis points above.  
This is 
only the price-
stability 
mandate, and this is exactly the language about inflation in B.  In other words, the way I read 

alternative 
B(5
) is 
it™s saying that the Committee has the option of raising the fed funds rate if it 
ever perceives that it is not satisfying its price
-stability mandate because inflation exceeds 
2½ percent. 
Now, this is not a trigger, to be clear.  And we should be clear when we talk about this 
that it 
is not a trigger.  It™s a threshold, and it™s a threshold for conversation.  At that point, 
the 

forward
-guidance commitment is no longer operational.  In some sense, we™d be back to business 
as usual in this Committee.  The Committee would have to weigh the cost of violating its price
-stability mandate against whatever performance it™s ac
hieving on the employment mandate and 

decide what to do.  And those conversations would inevitably be interesting ones.  
I actually 
think that B slices through what might appear to be a very challenging problem.  It provides 

valuable accommodation while al
lowing the Committee to be able to protect its price
-stability 
mandate. 
Let me turn now to how it does that.  What™s the magic behind B(5
) that allows it to give 
us this protection against inflation as well as providing the accommodation? It comes from t
he 
                 
    
    
       
    
       
   
      
           fact that a lot of our estimated rules of past behavior, like a Taylor rule, have us raising interest 
rates just because unemployment is too low.  The mechanism behind B(5
 is to say we don™t 
want to raise interest rates just because unemployment is to
o low, w
e want to raise interest rates 
because we™re worried about inflation.  If it turns out that unemployment is low but inflation is 

under control in the sense that our medium-term outlook is within 50 basis points of 2 
percent
, there™s no reason to raise interest rates just because unemployment is too low.  The way B(5
) is 
providing stimulus is by saying 
the 
FOMC will tolerate low unemployment. 
There™s a lot of talk about how we should stimulate the economy by having high 
inflation.  That is not what™s going on in B(5
. What™s going on instead is 
that 
the FOMC is 
going to hold off on raising rates until unemployment is lower, and that provides stimulus 

because people know that we won™t be choking 
off 
the party
, as it were
, before it™s really under 
way.  This willingness to tolerate low unemployment is exactly how the optimal
 control 
exercise 
works in FRB/
US. 
If you look at 
the o
ptimal 
control exercise 
in 
FRB
/US, in the fourth quarter 
of 2015, unemployment is 5¼ 
percent
, the outlook for inflation is 2.3 percentŠthat™s not what™s 
providing the stimulusŠ
and you get liftoff at that time. The Committee in that FRB
/US simulation is holding off on raising rates, and that stimulates a faster return to low 

unemployment, 
to the natural rate. 
For those of you who are suspicious about FRB/
US, it™s 
obviously just one of many models, but you get exactly the same mechanism in a N
ew Keynesian model.  
Iván Werning 
has a great paper along these lines.  High future output after 
you leave the zero lower bound stimulates high output at the 
zero 
lower bound.  
There™s no extra 
inflation at all in 
Werning™s paper because actually prices are fixed. 
It™s all about the 
commitment to deliver on lower unemployment and higher output than you would otherwise 

think. 
               
       
        
                      
  If you™re liste
ning to me about the mechanism, you should be thinking
: If you™ve got 
such great inflation protection and low unemployment provides good stimulus, why not have a 
lower unemployment threshold than 6½?  I would agree with that.  I think we should be willing 

to consider that.  President Pianalto raised a concern that maybe 50 basis points was too large a 

spread.  As I said, I™m willing to go that far out, 50 basis points, but maybe one way of shaping a 

compromise along those lines is to have a lower unemployment threshold.  That™s a good thing
; it provides stimulus.  And then have a tighter inflationŠnot even tighter, j
ust say 
ﬁclose to
ﬂ 2 percent, which actually
 is vague enough 
that
 it could allow for 50 basis points.  But I put that 
on the table as possibly one way to shape a compromise.  I think B(5
 is very valuable in this 
context. 
Alternative 
B(5
 provides an economic stabilizer, it provides inflation protection, and 
it™s a credible mechanism. It™s a way to provide a credible mechanism to say we™re go
ing to be 
willing to tolerate low unemployment. 
Yesterday Governors Raskin and Stein talked about low expectations in the economy, 
that really what we have to be thinking about is ways to bolster expectations.  Communication 

along the lines of B(5
 is goi
ng to be very helpful 
in that regard
.  We often pay a lot of attention 
to the words in this room, and the words are important in what we say, but in something like 

B(5
 the numbers 
appropriately are 
going to be the main focus.  How do we explain these 
numbers to the public?  I certainly have thought about this.  I
t™s very easy to communicate the 
idea that we have a target, 
2 percent, but we need a tolerance around that target.  I think every 
businessperson, 
at least
, will understand you have targets for 
performance, but there™s some 
tolerance that you have around that as well.
  Some people are going to say 50 basis points is too 
large, but we should be able to make a case about why we feel 50 basis points is appropriate, 
                             
   
                   
 given the kinds of shocks that could hit the economy on an ongoing basis, but the idea of having 
a tolerance is a very reasonable one. 
Why 6
½ percent? 
As I™ve suggested, we could go lower, but I think 6½ 
percent says 
we™re trying to minimize the possibility of being in breach of our tole
rance range.  We have a 
tolerance range
Šit doesn™t mean we want to exceed it.  We™re very prudent about minimizing 

the possibility of any breach of that. 
I will wrap up at this point.  We™ll hear, I™m sure, from others that the LSAPs have costs, 
and 
I shar
e some of those concerns about those costs.  I think the response to that is to try to 
make the benefits as big as possible, and the language of B(5
 is the way to go along those lines.  
I offered a suggestion for changing B(5
 yesterday. I™ll offer tha
t up for the Committee™s 
consideration.  I do worry, 
as written in the draft statement that the staff circulated yesterday
, that t
he last sentence is a little confusing.  At least I found it so, but if we feel we could go out 

and explain it to people, I™m happy to live with that; however, I hope people are willing to 

consider my suggested alterations.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
We™re going through at a rapid pace. 
We™
re going to be done within the hour here, I think. 
MR. TARULLO.  Don™t bet on it.  [Laughter] 

MR. BULLARD.  I have just a few comments here on policy, so I just wanted to follow 
up on my comments from yesterday a little bit. I do not think that this is the right juncture to 

unveil a large and aggressive easing program.  I think the road ahead this fall and winter could be 

rocky.  We would be better served to take a more opportune time to take such an action.  
We are 

looking at economic data that 
are 
middli
ng.  We™ve got financial stress, which is relatively low, 
             
               
       
     
        
         
   at least for now.  Our counterparts in Europe, not us, are the ones in recession, and, in my view, 
should be the ones that are easing aggressively.  U.S. equity markets suggest continuing faith in 

U.S. expansion.  Long-
term rates are exceptionally low. 
We may also be playing down the costs around the table here of walking farther into the 
woods than we already have on balance sheet policy.  President Plosser has emphasized those 

costs, and I think rightly so, and he has done a good service to the Committee in emphasizing 

those costs.  One thing that hasn™t been mentioned very much 
is that there is a distinct possibility 

that we would be feeding into commodity price increases, which is part of what happened during 

the QE2 episode and was a bit counterproductive.  We could argue about that.  We haven™t 

talked about it a lot, but I am a little bit concerned about that based on the action that we are 

likely to take today. 
I am not one that buys into the critique that monetary policy has been a long ways off 
target in the 
past five years. It is true that the economy is not performing as well as we would 
like.  There is a clear hypothesis for that based on the fact that we are dealing with a collapsed 

housing bubble and the aftermath of a financial crisis.  
But the Committee, by all accounts, has 

done a lot.  Much of it has been quite innovative, and the call of the Committee and of the 

Chairman has been essentially correct during the 
past several years.  So 
I am not one that thinks 
that we are 90 degrees off from where we should be or could be at this juncture. 
For our action today, as encapsulated in option B, we can cite two things that do make 
some sense and that I am sympathetic with as a rationale.  One is that we do have a global 

slowdown.  I am concerned about it.  I think it is very legitimate to worry that that slowdown is 

going to 
affect the U
nited State more than it has so far, and that that is a compelling argument for 
getting ahead of that and tak
ing aggressive action here.  T
hat is one reasonable rationale. 
And I 
                           
     
                        also think we have some room to maneuver on the inflation front, but only some.  I think 
it is nothing like 2010 when all measures of expected inflation were down a lot and trending down 

further. 
We can cite these factors.  I don™t think we have as good a rationale as I would like to 
see for a move of this magnitude. 
Within alternative
 B, I do think it is a good moment to adopt a meeting-
by-meeting 
approach to balance sheet policy that I have been advocating for a long time.  I hope that this will 

put us more into a mode that is similar to the one we are in under normal interest rate policy 

where we
 can sensibly adjust the policy at each meeting, given the change in the outlook and the 

change in the economic situation.  T
his will likely serve the Committee pretty well going 
forward, and I appreciate that 
alternative B has that feature. I am satisfie
d with the formulation 
in B with respect to that dimension. 
On paragraph 5, I definitely support 5 and not 5
. As many of you know, I have argued 
that explicit mention of an unemployment number is a tactical mistake
 that may not serve the 
Committee very well.
  As Governor Yellen remarked yesterday, hysteresis in unemployment 
cannot be ruled out in the U.S.  And I might remind the Committee again that Europe has not 

seen 6
½ percent unemployment for a couple of decades.  Today it is over 11 percent in Europe, 
despite some major countries undergoing structural labor market reforms. 
I am concerned that 
we are telling the public that we can do more about unemployment than we really can.  It is more 

labor market policy than it is monetary policy, and it could possibly throw monetary policy off 

for a generation to tie explicitly to unemployment and to promise that monetary policy can do a 

lot about unemployment. 
The story in Europe is exactly that there are structural problems that 
developed over time.  Unemploym
ent 
has remained very high for a very long time, and the 
structural reforms have not been undertaken by the various governments across Europe.  It is one 
                 
      
                         
    thing to have bad labor market policy.  It is another thing to have bad monetary policy because 
you ha
ve bad
 labor market policy.  I am concerned about this, and I™d advise against going in 
that direction. 
In addition, I think there are hazards of tying to any particular measure of economic 
performance because all of our metrics have clear deficiencies, and many of them are mentioned 

around the table here.  One of the 
deficiencies 
for unemployment is that unemployment can fall 
for the wrong reasons.  W
e were just citing yesterday that the unemployment rate did fall, but it 
didn™t fall in a way that we thoug
ht was indicative of better labor market performance.  So you 
could have a situation where you feel like unemployment has gone down to 
a relatively low 
level, but you are not very satisfied with labor market outcomes, 
and you still feel like the 

Committee 
should be aggressive in that circumstance.  T
his is a problem that we have with all of 
the economic data that we look atŠ
that each piece of dat
a only tells a part of the story about the 
overall economic performance. 
We would be better off to preserve the 
Committee™s judgment 
on economic performance. 
Outside of the statement it™s fine for various members to say, ﬁI™d really like to see 
unemployment come to here,ﬂ or ﬁI™d like to see labor force participation come to here,ﬂ or 

whatever other metrics 
that you
™d like to see certain types of labor market measures hit certain 
thresholds.  But I™m not sure that you want to tie the Committee™s hands in making a judgment 

about overall economic performance.  So I™d have no problem beefing up the language on labor 

markets, if people feel like we maybe have been insufficiently attentive to this and saying that 

we are going to pay more attention.  That™s fine with me.  But I™m counseling against putting an 

explicit number on this or really any other data, to the extent w
e can avoid it, in the statement. 
         
                     
    
       
                   And, finally, on this paragraph 5
Šand then I have a few more comments
ŠI think 
thresholds or triggers like this draw lines in the sand that we may not want to be drawing.  W
e are all in agreement that if we are inside the 
boundsŠ
say, 2
½ percent and 6
½ percent
Šthat we 
are not going to raise rates.  But if you cross the bound, you are implicitly sending a signal that 
you are going to do something.  I™m not sure the Committee has really decided that we would 

actually do someth
ing in that circumstance.
  Putting on my dovish 
hat for a minute, you are 
creating this thing where you are saying you will act if the triggers are violated. I don™t think we 

have really discussed that or really think that that™s what we would do.  If inf
lation is at target, 
and unemployment comes downŠand President Kocherlakota was at least in part touching on 

this
Šthe Committee may not want to tighten at that juncture.  What if you don™t want to tighten 
at that juncture?  Then why are you giving that 
as the trigger? 
That part to me has not 
been 
formulated
 in a way that I can get my head around. 
Let me comment just for a few minutes on Mike Woodford™s Jackson Hole paper, which 
I do think was a seminal survey of monetary policy at the zero lower bound.  If you haven™t 

looked at itŠand I know many of you haveŠthe paper is divided into 
just 
two parts.  There is 

balance sheet polic
y, and there is policy 
to commit to stay at the zero interest rate for longer. 
If you know Mike, you know that he is very pessi
mistic about balance sheet policy, being an anti
-monetarist kind of guy.  He does not think balance sheet policy is very effective, except to the 

extent that it has a signaling effect and that the Committee is better served by doing something 

rather than j
ust promising to do something. 
I agree with the Chairman™s assessment that Professor Woodford is underestimating the 
effects of balance sheet policy.  I do think QE2 did have a significant influence on the United 

States and especially on expected inflation
 and actual inflation.  The effects to the real economy 
      
           
  
     
         
      
      
           
   are harder to trace out, but those are always hard to trace out.  So I think today™s 
alternative 
B action is a sensible way to manage the balance sheet policy going forward and that policy does 
have s
ome prospect of being effective, so I™m not going to argue against the efficacy of the 
policy. 
Professor Woodford thinks that the only way to provide accommodation, in large part, is 
to commit to stay at the zero lower bound for longer.  I agree also with 
the Chairman that the 

length of time that this Committee may be able to commit to stay at zero gets less and less 

credible as you go farther out in the future.  That is something that is not well captured by the 

model.  If you start going out many years, so many things can happen over that period, in reality, 

that it is not clear that you are communicating anything.
  But the main message I took from the 
paper, and an effective message, was this: 
If you are trying to make this commitment to stay 
lower for l
onger, it is a very subtle matter to get it right.  And he reviews a lot of central banks 
and a lot of central bank actions, some of which he characterized as counterproductive in terms 

of trying to get the right type of commitment from the perspective of 
the model on staying lower 
for longer.  
In fact, 
what 
I took away 
from it 
was
, the main danger is that continuing to commit 
to later and later liftoff could be sending this pessimistic signal
Šif we don™t do it correctlyŠ
that 

the reason we are staying lower
 for longer is not that we are trying to make up for the fact that 
we have been stuck at the zero lower bound, but instead it is that the outlook is deteriorating and 

is continuing to deteriorate in a very negative way.  And 
I think we have to be careful a
bout that, 
and that 
maybe
 we have sent that signal, unwittingly perhaps, in some of our actions. 
I am going to give a suggestion, not a policy suggestion, but a suggestion about the 
proper way to think about this from Professor Woodford™s perspective 
in my interpretation.  T
he 
whole point is you are constrained by the zero lower bound for a period of time.  Then, after you 
               
           
       
                    would otherwise raise interest rates, you stay at the zero lower bound for a time to make up for 
the fact that you were constrained duri
ng the earlier period of time.
  My example about how we 
should think about this is as follows.  Suppose the Committee was committed to a Taylor r
ule the 
way John Taylor likes to use itŠhis is a much more aggressive and 
hawkish 
Taylor 
rule, which 
would even 
call for raising rates today.
  And suppose everyone agreed on that.  This is just 
hypothetical, obviously.  And that rule would call for us to raise rates today, but we would say, 

ﬁWe are not raising rates today.  We are staying at zero today.ﬂ  The reason we are staying at 

zero today is exactly the Woodford reason, which is that we were constrained by the zero bound 

for a couple of years.  T
herefore, we have to stay at zero for a while
.  And it is exactly at that 
point that you gain credibility for the po
licy
.  You are trying to make up for the zero bound 
constraint by st
aying at zero
 even though the data are telling you, according to the standard 
Taylor rule or other Taylor
-type rules
, to be more aggressive at this juncture.  Y
ou are staying at 
zero 
because you need to make up for the fact that you were at the zero lower bound for some 
time. 
I do not agree with Professor Woodford that the nominal GDP targeting approach would 
do this.  My main complaint about nominal GDP targeting is that it ignores th
e possibility of 
what is likely an altered real GDP growth path.  And certainly, if you look at the data, as the 

Chairman was saying yesterday, on levels of real GDP or consumption, it looks like we are on a 

different path than we were. 
So to commit us to
 get back to the previous real GDP trend, which 
is partly driven by 
the 
bubble economy in the mid-2000s, I think would be a mistake. 
However
, for 
price
-level targeting
, I have looked at graphs and tried to get an analysis of 
where we are with respect to th
e price level.  If you look at the price-
level path established 
during the period from 1995 to 2005, which was a relatively successful monetary policy era for 
             
      
    
     
   
       
   
            
the Committee in terms of hitting our inflation target, we are actually very close 
to or right on 
that price
-level path.  And in that sense, that has been a great success of the Fed during this 
episode.  Unlike the U.S. in the 1930s, w
hen policymakers allowed the price
-level path to 
deviate from the previously established path, or Japan in the 1990s, in which, again, they allowed 
the price
-level path to deviate from the one that had been established, we did not do that.  We are 

right on the 1995 to 2005 price-
level path. 
In that sense, policy has been successful, and we have 
not committed the mistakes
 of the past.  That is also one reason why I think we have made 
essentially the right call over the 
past several years. 
I am going to stop there.  Those are my 
thoughts on monetary policy.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes, just a point of clarification.  I view the language of 5
 as a 
threshold, not a trigger.  Threshold language would be, 
ﬁlow rates appropriate, at least as long as 

the unemployment rate exceeds 6
½ percent.ﬂ  A tri
gger would be, ﬁA low rate is appropriate 
only as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6
½ percent.ﬂ  So I think it is written as a 
threshold, not a trigger. 
MR. BULLARD.  Can I respond to that?  I agree that that is the language in there, but I 
think mark
ets will interpret it as a 
trigger.  
Or let me say, as a fair
 way, I think there is a danger 
that markets will interpret that as 
a line in the sand or a t
rigger
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it™s pretty easy for the Chairman in the press 
conference
Šif we
 were to go this routeŠto explain what a threshold means.  I don™t think it is 
that complicated. 
MR BULLARD. If it™s not a t
rigger
, why put the number in? Put a lower number in. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s okay, too. 
       
                
           
               
     
   
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President 
Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to support 
alternative 
B. Having said that, I have some reservations about going down the path of a new LSAP, 
particularly the whole-hog approach that™s in a
lternative A. I am reticent on two
 counts. 
First, I remain unconvinced about the likely efficacy of expanding our asset purchases.  
As I said in the economy round, I think the conditions that made the first two LSAP programs 

successful
Ša lack of liquidity in MBS markets in the case of LSAP1 and elevated concerns 
about outright deflation in the case of LSAP2Šare not present in the current environment.  
This 

time around, it seems to me that we face a more conventional problem of inadequate demand, 

and I am not convinced that lowering general 
market rates will stimulate much credit expansion 
and spending.  
Furthermore, it is not clear to me that credit conditions in mortgage markets have 

eased quite enough to the point that more MBS purchases w
ill have a significant impact. 
Second, I have learn
ed to be humble as regards outlook certainty.  I have not completely 
abandoned the hypothesis that the willingness of businesses to hire and businesses and 

consumers to spend will improve on the other side of the election and fiscal cliff negotiations.  

As I commented yesterday, I believe there is some upside risk.  Though the European situation is 
not rapidly converging to a truly comprehensive resolution, I see some hope that the process of 

incremental steps may cumulatively lead to a large leap in overall confidence. 
I don™t have a 
whole lot of conviction that these optimistic outcome
s will be realized, so I accept the case for 
some policy response to current circumstances 
in the Committee™s outlook. That said, I will 
support 
alternative 
B™s modest pace 
of 
$30 billion per month.  That would be my preference 
for 
expansion of our MBS portfolio. 
      
     
                        
   
          
   
   With respect to the choice between paragraph 5 and 5
, I am sympathetic to the idea of 
replacing calendar dates with economic conditionality.  I have said that in e
arlier meetings. But I 
am not in favor of the formulation in 5
, at least today. 
I have views 
similar to 
President 
Bullard
™s.  The unemployment rate is a partial and potentially misleading indicator of labor 
market performance.  The pace of employment gr
owth needed to attain a given unemployment 
rate can be very sensitive to changes in the participation rate. For example, at current 
participation rates, it will take just over 200,000 jobs a month to get to a 7 percent 

unemployment rate by the end of next year.  I would consider 200,000 jobs a month over the 

next 16 months to be consistent with sustained significant improvement in the labor market. 
But the Board staff, and many on the Committee, have noted that labor force participation 
rates appear to be 
well below the levels that can be explained by demographic trends.  My own 
staff estimates that only 40 percent of the drop in participation rates since the beginning of the 

recession is due to labor force aging.  
If the participation rate were to revert t
o the level it was 
just last September, job gains of 200,000 per month would, everything else being equal, yield an 

unemployment rate that would be barely below 8 percent by the end of 2013.  And I would not 

be willing to say that such an outcome would con
stitute a lack of progress in meeting our 

employment mandate. 
Paragraph 5
, as it is written, contains no reference to broader labor market conditions.  I 
believe there was a reference in an earlier version, but it is has been removed.  I think that this i
s a significant omission, particularly with an unemployment threshold as ambitious as 6
½ percent
.  I™m not comfortable with a number that low, combined with a lack of any reference at all to our 

broader employment objectives.  T
here are enough facets of the 6
½ percent decision to consider 
that it feels a little rushed to me at this meeting. 
      
          
    
      
      
    
             
 As regards paragraph 4, I would include the reference to other policy tools. I think the 
meaning of this paragraph should be that if conditions don™t improve, the Commi
ttee will 
continue the MBS purchase program and may undertake additional asset purchases, 
employ 
other policy tools, or both.  If I misunderstand the meaning of that paragraph, then I would ask 
for a little bit more work on this paragraph and further clarification this morning.  
Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart, in 5
, the very last sentence does 
reference labor market conditions.  Did you note that? 
MR. LOCKHART.  Let me look at that.  I stand corrected.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Resource slack is large, labor market 
conditions lack momentum toward improvement, and the inflation profile in our projections is 

slightly below our long
er-run objective for the most 
part. 
I support strong and meaningful policy 
actions today to address these deficiencies. I accept that 
alternative 
B delivers on these 
requirements.  I think that the $40 billion of MBS and 5
 are very helpful in delivering 
that. I 
will simply note th
at the formulation of forward guidance in 5
 is not quite as strong as I have 
preferred in the past, but I do think that it is a good, careful approach that will in fact boost 

monetary policy accommodation, and I can certainly support that, if it is adopted. 
I think that the wording paragraph 2 is extremely important. It states the monetary policy 
concern 
as follows:  ﬁ
The Committee is concerned that
, without further policy accommodation, 
economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained improvement in labor market 

conditions.ﬂ  That is very important.  It follows through on the minutes from our July meeting, as 

well as your grave concerns
 and 
remarks expressed at Jackson Ho
le, so I favor that. 
                         
         
  
       
    I favor this combination of essentially open-
ended asset purchases, which are flexible 
when you put paragraphs 3 and 4 together, plus the enhanced 
state
-contingent 
forward guidance 
in paragraph 4.  
President Bullard went through this rationale a little bit. Let me just summarize 
and say I put a lot of weight on the research literature that Mike Woodford described.  I thought 

he did a terrific job.  In Woodford™s formulation, clear expectations of forward guidance are 

important and effe
ctive for delivering policy accommodation. 
In fact, I held my breath when I 
read the page where he described when I had talked about the 7
/3 thresholds, and I thought that 
Mike was kind and gentle in criticizing but saying that that type of forward guidan
ce did deliver 
more accommodation than what his best choice was.  In that sense, the language in 5
 would 
indeed be helpful.  The evidence for LSAPs that you mentioned yesterday, 
Mr. 
Chairman
, was 
very important.  The two reinforce each other very well. 
In paragraph 3, as I mentioned, I favor the stronger pace of MBS at $40 billion.  I think 
that paragraph 4 makes this essentially open-ended by conditioning further LSAPs on substantial 

improvement in labor conditions, joint with price stability, and 
with
 policy effectiveness, as you 
mentioned yesterday.  So there are important safeguards there.  It can be flexible and can turn 

around if in fact it is not working as best we would hope. 
In terms of labor market improvement, it would be unambiguously an improve
ment if we 
got something on the order of payroll employment increasing 200,000 per month for several 

months.  If the unemployment rate declined either with momentum or continuous improvement, 

and, indeed, we got 
GDP growth above trend, those would be all of the markers that we would 
expect for a strong recovery that would be associated with an 
improving labor market.  We may 
well not be lucky enough to see all three of those at the same time, so we will have to pay 

attention t
o that. 
       
   
                 
   
             
   
        
      
      
As you mentioned, the l
ast sen
tence
 in 
paragraph 
5 gets at this larger characterization of 
labor market improvement beyond just the unemployment rate, but the unemployment rate is a 
very important marker.  I think that 
the 
paragraph 5
 forward guidance is explicit
ly state 
contingent, and it allows us to remove the calendar date.  I
t is very easy for us to be against 
calendar dates.  I think that most of us are uncomfortable with this formulation, that policy can 

remain low until late 2014 or beyond.  But we are uncomfortable because of the ambiguous 

nature. Is it a forecast?  Is it commitment? It is easy to be against that, but you have to be in 

favor of something in order to actually take it out.  The state contingency in 5
 is very useful.  So 
the 6
½ unemployment rate marker, 
with the 2 plus ½ percentage point on inflation, is a useful 
safeguard.
  Presidents Williams, Rosengren, and Kocherlakota spoke well about how this works, 
and that it is critical to describe our attitudes about inflation above our goal of 2.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by saying something positive 
about alternative B.  [Laughter] I very much like the idea in paragraph 5
of replacing our 
problematic calendar
-based guidan
ce with language that is conditional on future economic 
conditions.  I think this is much needed change.  It focuses our communication, our forward 

guidance, on a reaction function, and reduces the danger that Michael Woodford very eloquently 

laid out that our forward guidance is actually just making people gloomier about the economic 

fundamentals. It™s a very real danger, and I think there is a very real possibility that that is 
the 
effect our forward guidance has been having over the course of the last y
ear. 
Okay.  That was my positive remark.  I would like to move on now to some improvement 
opportunities I see.  [Laughter] I think in 5
 that it would be better if we avoided using a specific 
numerical value for the unemployment rate as a threshold or tri
gger, whatever we are going to 
         
     
            
              
           
   
    do. I took a step back.  T
his is a large change in our statement.  This is a fairly dramatic change 
in the set of language we use 
to characterize our forward guidance. It™s an ambitious statement. 
In view of our experience with the forward guidance earlier this year, where we got 
boxed in for something that in hindsight we could have anticipated, I tried to think of ways in 
which this language could unexpectedly box us in or tie our hands in ways that we don™t 

anticipate now.  I think this numerical unemployment rate is one of them. 
President Lockhart 
was very eloquent about this.  This makes us hostage to labor force participation rates.  W
e would be vulnerable to a scenarioŠhe sketched it outŠin which employment picks up, and that 

starts drawing people into the labor force.  This is not an unfamiliar phenomenon historically, in 

which labor force growth that 
tails off 
and turns negative when the unemployment rate goes up, 
then picks up when employment growth starts rising.  Given the behavior of the labor force over 
the 
past several years, I don™t think we should have a lot of confidence in our ability to project 

how the unemployment rate would behave in a scenario in which employment growth picked up 

a lot.  I think this is a really serious risk.  I
t would be better to write the statement in terms of the 
qualitative language used earlier that President Lockhart was referring to. For example, we 

could say, 
ﬁThis exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least 
until the Committee has seen substantial ongoing improvement in labor market conditions.ﬂ 
I think that formulation would be preferable to the language that uses a specific numerical target. 
The s
econd opportunity I see has to do with the inflation language in the same statement.  
We used the phrase that 
ﬁthis 
exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate 
will be 
appropriate at least as long as
ﬂ blah, blah, blah, ﬁprovided that inflation at a one-
to two
-year 
horizon is projected to be no more than 
a half
 percentage point above the Committee™s 2 
percent 
objective and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.
ﬂ  So the logic is 
                
  
              
      
          
     clear, to give ourselves an out if the inflation picture deteriorates substantially.  Personally, I 
think the ﬁclose to 2 percentﬂ language would be better.  That™s more consistent with the kind of 

standard we described in our consensus statement.  Proliferating conditionality language can be 

confusing.  But there is a deeper problem with this language.  My sense is that it has been true 

for the 
past 20 years in which we have achieved price stability
ŠI believe it has been true
Šthat 
inflation over the medium term, the next couple of years, was projected to be close to 2 percent 

or below that.  I haven™t gone and checked, but I am virtually sure that™s true.  T
his was a period 
during which we achieved and maintained price stability.  I
t is essential to maintain that 
credibility because it can be co
stly to re
gain, but we started this period by moving preemptively, 
before the forecast of inflation moved away from that low rate.  And in the future, 
it is going to 

be important for us to be able to move preemptively. I
f this condition is violated, it is
 in some 
sense too late. 
It
™s not like we are going to go back to the 1970s right away if this condition is 
violated, but I think this sets too low a bar.  T
here is a way to word this that tightens this. 
We 
can say, instead of ﬁprovided that inflation at a one-
to two
-year horizon,ﬂ we could say, ﬁunless 
inflation, at a one-
to two
-year horizon, would be projected to be more than ½ percentage point 
above the Committee™s 2 percent objective.ﬂ  S
omething lik
e that makes clear that we would 
move to keep this condition true, that we are not going to wait until this condition is violated in 

order to move. 
The t
hird suggestion I have for improvement in B(5) 
concerns the last sentence. I suggest 
we delete it. I think it is quite confusing.  This represents the fifth different statement of 

conditionality on the second page, in two paragraphs. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Are you saying the last sentence in 5
?            
          
                                        MR. 
LACKER. 
Yes, , the last sentence. 
It is not clear if it only applies after we get to 
6½. Does it apply before or after that?  It is tempting to think, well, the second sentence is pretty 
strongŠthat must trump it.  But it™s not obvious.  And then, it
™s expressed in terms of the pace, 
and the rest of the conditionality is about the level of the unemployment rate.  So does this mean 

that if we get to 6
½ percent 
but unemployment is not continuing to fall rapidly enough, we are 
going to keep tightening po
licy
? I don™t think you mean that.  I
t just seems unnecessary and 
confusing to me. 
The f
inal suggestion I will make
 is, 
again, the lack of grammatical accuracy in the way 
inflation is referred to in 4 is unbecoming to 
the Committee.  We take a lot of care
 to 

communicate precisely. In something so critical, it is a little disturbing. It just seems like a limp 

and tepid sort of boilerplate reference to inflation.  ﬁ
In the context of price stability
ﬂ has always 
struck me as a little bit vague. 
Why not say 
ﬁunless doing so would compromise 
price stabilityﬂ? 
We are committed to price stability. It™s in the mandate. I would prefer to see something 
stronger like that. 
Let me take a step back here. 
If you look at this language, it™
s complicated.  The 
conditionality is expressed in four or five different ways in various parts of these two paragraphs.  

Just in terms of complexity, I think it™s going to be hard to boil it down and simplify.  
ﬁUntil 
labor market conditions get better
ﬂ is probably going to be the 
headline, but the nuances are 
going to be hard to parse out for people just reading it.  Your press conference is going to be 

really critical here. 
The broad thrust of the language of this thing is to very significantly intensify our focus 
on unemployment.  We have been moving in that direction for some time, but I view this as 

implicitly weakening our commitment to price stability
.  Taking this statement as a whole
, that™s 
        
              
                  
     how I view this.  I know the worry about price stability seems like a remote and distant concern 
right now.  I know that it looks like it is under control.  It looks like we have things covered, 

looks like we are far from breaking out, looks like we have gotten away with it 
the 
past couple of 
years.  We™ve seen inflation rise up and not have it trigger any erosion of expectations.  But the 

potential, if we lose it, is for far more costly effects on the economy than the incremental impact 

of the 1 
million jobs that the staff 
has shown might be associated with today™s actions.  I think 
that shift in focus represents a broad overconfidence about our models; a broad overfocus on 

point forecasts
, forecast means, mean forecast paths
, and their analytics as well as a lack of 
humilit
y that would be appropriate here. 
As for the deeper issues of the day, I cannot support a new asset purchase program.  W
e are fluctuating around a sluggish growth path, and I don™t think we should react to the downside 

wiggles that are of this magnitude.  F
urther stimulus at this time is unlikely to improve 
economic 
growth much without causing an unwanted increase in inflation.  I have talked about that before.  

This will complicate risks, 
creating 
greater complications in our exit strategy. 
The larger we 
make the balance sheet, the more vulnerable we are to small miscalculations in policy along the 

exit.  It just provides so much scope for expansion in bank lending and deposits that it makes us 

very vulnerable.  And the larger we make it, the more vulnerab
le 
we are
. I strongly oppose purchasing more mortgage-backed securities.  Central banks should not 
choose which economic sectors to support.  Doing so, if it has any effect at all, restricts credit 

access in other sectors. And I don™t see how we can defen
d that.  Such allocational initiatives go 
far beyond our mandate.  They undermine our claim to deserve independence for the conduct of 

monetary policy, and threats to our independence have been growing recently.  I think these are 
                                 
    
     
             just going to heighten th
ose threats. 
Buying MBS is bad policy and bad politics.  The only 
circumstance in which I
™d support it is if there weren™t enough T
reasuries out there to buy.
 One final comment.  T
here was some discussion at the last meeting of the slogan ﬁWe™ll 
do what it takes.ﬂ I think we haven™t given enough thought to the possibility that what it takes is 
patience.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I want to comment on one of your observations, 
President 
Lacker, about the last sentence of 5
. I read it slightly differently than you do, and I 
don™t know how 
other people read it. I read the sentence preceding it 
as saying 
that we currently 
anticipate that th
ese are 
the right metrics, but then the last sent
ence says that that current 
anticipation 
could be modified by what we see over time.
  You are basically saying that you are 
not completely locked into the first thing, regardless of what economic information you see in 

the future.  So I think the sentences 
actually do work together in a reasonable way. 
MR. LACKER
.  So the policy we™re adopting here is that an exceptionally low rate for 
the funds rate is going to be appropriate as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6½ percent, 

inflation is well contained,
 or we decide that some other indicator of labor market conditions 
is more appropriate. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We currently anticipate that this is the right range, but 
our view is going to be modified by future information about a broad range of indicators.  
That is 

how I read it.  T
hat seems to be more intelligent than saying we are locked into this, regardless of 
what happens, regardless of what we see, and we are not allowed to learn about anything as the 

economy evolves.  I
t creates a little nuance, 
which is reasonable in terms of how one would 
expect the Committee to operate. 
                 
    
    
     
    
       
         
        MR. LACKER.  Well, then, why not soften the 6½ and use 
more general 
labor market 
conditions. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Because 
you are trying to give guidance about what the 
Commit
tee
 thinks 
at the time, what we think today that might be modified 
or might not be 
modified by future information.  But clearly it would be unintelligent not to modify your view if 
the information strongly contradicted your prior view.  That™s how I read i
t. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Despite massive monetary policy 
accommodation over the past four years, a stronger recovery has not yet materialized, and last 

week™s labor market report was a frustrating remi
nder of this long slog.  Like others, my forecast 
accounts for any number of risks related to Europe, the U.S. fiscal cliff, and 
the 
regulatory 
environment, and does recognize that policy accommodation may need to remain in place for 

some time in order to 
support the recovery.  I understand the case for taking action in order to 
spur the recovery and bring down unemployment faster.  To that end, the Committee agreed to 

undertake additional balance sheet actions only a few months ago.  Today, we contemplate doing 

more.
  Certainly, the data flow since the last meeting was a bit softer than I had expected, but not 
sufficiently so to warrant a further expansion of our balance sheet.  In that regard, I note that the 

Tealbook had pulled forward the timing of the f
irst rate increase since our last meeting. 
As I weigh the cost of action versus 
the 
status quo, I have appreciated the thoughtful 
analysis of Board staff and a number of my colleagues around this table about the effects of 

another asset purchase.  Unfortun
ately, I find 
that the risk
s associated with further action carry 
less precise measurement, but, to the extent they are possible, pose significant cost if realized.  

Impairing market functioning in certain financial markets, the potential for the Federal R
eserve 
                 
             
               
      to experience financial losses in the future, and risk
s to financial stability 
due to the extended 
low rate environment all strike me as significant when weighed against potential benefits.  A 
larger balance sheet also has the potential to further c
omplicate an exit strategy. 
Another LSAP also may have near-term adverse consequences.  Given the recent rise in 
gasoline prices, additional asset purchases could generate a further rise in oil and gasoline prices, 

which would weigh on middle- and lower-
income households and, thus, partially offset 
estimated benefits. 
I also remain concerned that a balance sheet expansion could at some point raise inflation 
expectations.  Longer-
term measures of inflation expectations
, or breakeven inflation, 
appeared 
to re
spond strongly to past LSAP announcements.  Given that current longer-
term breakeven 
inflation measures are consistent with our stated goal, I am concerned that another LSAP 

program could push longer-term expectations above a level consistent with our obje
ctives. 
If this were to occur, we would face a difficult tradeoff between allowing longer
-term expectations 
to drift higher or reversing course by reducing the size of the balance sheet.  Either option strikes 

me as damaging to both the real economy and o
ur credibility. 
In terms of the forward guidance, I agree with those who note the time-contingent 
guidance has been problematic.  And so conceptually I agree that the state
-contingent guidance is 

preferable as long as we can articulate this guidance in a m
anner that is fully consistent with our 
January 2012 strategy statement, including our assessment of risk to the financial system.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 
         
    
  
                 
   
    
        
          MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I mentioned yesterday when I made very 
short comments about the economy, 
I would interlocutate today at greater length 
[laughter], 
so I 
ask you to bear with me. 
We seem to be mesmerized by the siren call of LSAPs. I can™t sing like Orpheus, and I 
know I will have no success in tying you to the mast or stuffing wax in our crew™s ears.  So what 
I am going to do is simply give my very best advice as a loyal officer on your ship.  I believe we 

are getting further off course. I believe we were misled by our navigati
on equipment.  
We have 
very sophisticated models, and we have a superb crew of analysts but, as you yourself said 

yesterday
Šand I quoteŠﬁnobody really knows what is holding back the economy, and nobody 
really knows what really works.ﬂ 
One thing I learned as a midshipman at the Naval Academy was that great battles at sea 
or on land are fought with modern tools, but they are decided ultimately by judgment.  AndŠ 

always
Šone listens to and respects the elements. I think everybody agrees at t
he table that 
inflation is not an immediate or presently foreseeable threat.
  Our desired port, given our 
mandate, is increased employment. I happen to believe personally we are way off course. I 

believe we are ignoring, at our peril, the elements. I ha
ve reported from my watch station again 

and again that the very people we wish to stoke consumption and follow demand by creating jobs 

and expanding business fixed investment are not influenced by our policy initiativesŠ
that is, by 

our LSAPs. 
Small and med
ium-sized businesses are job creators, and yet the soundings, as mentioned 
yesterday by President George, 
of the 
National 
Federation of Independent Business
™ s
urveys and 
others, tell us that over 90 percent of those businesses are either not interested in borrowing or, 

as I mentioned yesterday, 
have no problem accessing cheap financing.
  Monetary policy is not on 
           
            
  
     
    
   
   
        
      
        
 their radar as a concern, except that it raises fears among some 
of future inflationary 
consequences.  Their principal concern, as President Georg
e mentioned yesterday, is with fiscal 
and regulatory uncertainty. 
With regard to fixed investment and job creating 
cap
-ex, as I said yesterday, the math is 
pretty straightforward.  Big businesses dominate that theater, and again and again I have reported 
to this Committee that with some exception
ŠDisney, for example, being one led by a very 
clever contrarian CEO
Š90 percent or so of those I survey will simply not be motivated by 
further cuts in the cost of capital to invest in job-
creating cap
-ex beyond their maintenance needs.  
And 
this 
is 
due to 
the uncertainty of taxes and final deman
d and federal spending prospects. 
This time, as I mentioned yesterday, I asked my CEO contacts if 
their 
cost of borrowing 
were to decrease by some 25 basis points or more, how 
they would 
react. 
Would this induce 
them
 to spend more on expanding payroll or job-
creating cap
-ex?  And the answer 
from
 9 out of 
10 was, you could cut the cost of borrowing by 1 full percentage point 
and 
we™ll use it to buy 
back stock.  That™s what we™r
e being directed 
to do by our board.  Governor Stein mentioned the 
Duke™s Fuqua School survey yesterday, which is even more comprehensive. 
But one of my CEO contacts, by the way, reminded me of the work I used to do for him 
and the company he then managed 
going back to 1975, and our recommendations for strategic or 
green
 field investments.  We focused on ROI:  As long as you get paid back and as long as you 
earn a profit
, you can justify it to your shareholders.  And presentlyŠ
and perhaps because of 
what we 
have already initiated
Šthe cost of capital, as President Dudley mentioned earlier, 
unlike the conditions of 1975, 
is just not part of the calculation.  And if they are going to be 
buying 
back stock, as they are being directed 
to by their boards, there is, 
to be sure, a wealth 
effect.  But 
based on 
the people I talked to, it just does very little to result in
 job creation sooner 
        
        
  
   
   
                       
      rather than later. I™ll give you a specific example. 
This is inside information and off the record.  
A company that ordinarily h
as cap
-ex expenditures between $15 
billion 
and $20 billion a year 
and has the option presently to either lay cable and facilities that would expand their 4G network 
to 90 percent of the country or buy more stock has been directed by their b
oard of 
director
s to 
buy more stock because of the economics that these low interest rates make possible.  Even 

though it strengthens 
their balance sheet, it defers their 
job-
creation capacity. 
Again, I am suggesting, as one of your loyal crew, respectfully, that the effi
cacy of the 
course you are leading us upon is questionable.  M
y best guess is that we will end up this 
program, if we proceed with B, with excess reserves that exceed $2 trillion and money lying 

fallow, unused, and underutilized toward achieving our goal o
f increased employment. 
When we last talked, it was suggested that perhaps my interlocutors were unsophisticated 
and didn™t see the whole picture.  I note now that some sophisticates have come to question the 

efficacy of this LSAP cruise, among them Mr. Woodford, who has been talked about excessively 

at this meeting [
laughter], and my friend and respected economist Bill White, who has not been 
mentioned whatsoever.  Using monetary policy to overcome bad fiscal and regulatory policy is, 

to my mind, not only faulty but a 
pyrrhic
 strategy. It won™t work, and it may be used against us 
in a backlash and lead us onto the rocks. 
Now, all of that said, Mr. Chairman, you™re the captain of the ship.  It appears that you 
and many of our colleagues wish to now plot a course with coordinates outlined in B.  We have 

decided to proceed, and we have instructed our boiler room, 
as we say in the 
navy
, to pour out 
another $750 billion or so in steam, and the boiler room has replied, ﬁ
Aye
, aye.ﬂ
  This is doable, 
and 
the staff h
as indicated that 
ﬁt
he challenges posed by exit remain manageable
,ﬂ though I do 
sense some timidity in their confidence.  There are warnings in the 
memos on LSAPs that exit 
                
    
  
            
      
  
                 following an even larger pro
gram
 can probably not be accomplished without violating what the 
Committee has heretofore said is our exit strategy principle. 
The engine room has replied, ﬁYes, 
we can do it.ﬂ  But there are murmurs among the crew that their conclusions are subject to
Šand 
I am taking words out of the LSAP 
memos
Šﬁsubstantial uncertainty,ﬂ and they c
ouch their 
responses with qualifying phrases like ﬁcurrently judgesﬂ and ﬁwould likelyﬂ and ﬁseems 
plausible.ﬂ  And as I said, listening to Seth very carefully yesterday, his qualifications or his 

disclaimers sounded very much like an Allegra commercial.  But, again, you™re captain of the 

ship; you™ve decided to proceed on a course.  The course is outlined in B.  Bill tells us that it may 

aggregate to another $750 billion or so depending on how much time we let this run.  
I am a 
member of your loyal officer corps.  And even though I doubt the efficacy of what we wish to 

do, and in fact feel that this is most definitely not the right course, and feel that this course may, 

as President 
Lacker just said, compromise the Fed™s security with regard to its independence, m
y job is to give you the best advice I am capable of rendering.  Your decision is to steer us along a 

course outlined in B.  I would say that the least worse of the options in Tealbook 
B is alternative 

B, 
reg
ular B, the first paragraph 5. 
I sent around a memo earlier in preparation for this meeting, and I argued that one could 
make the case that this could help offset the drag from higher GSE fees, 
lower 

mortgage
Treasury spre
ads, even though they are quite low, and help one of the three positive 
durable goods sectors that is assisting the recovery, the others 
being aircraft and motor vehicles
.  It is still operating below long
-run potential, so there is very little danger, in my view, of 
inducing cyclical mal
-investment. 
In addition, the general effects of inducing more refinancing 
may aid housing and households in ways that we can™t quite quantify. 
          
       
          
    
         
  
            
   
 may be laudable in the minds of some at this table.  We™ve heard good 
arguments for it.  But I agree with President Lockhart, andŠ
I believe
ŠPresident Lacker, that it 
is going too far too fast, that we are rushing it, and I would recommend against it.  I am referring 
specifically to the 6
½ percent unemployment rate 
and 2½ percent inflation cap over the one- to 
two
-year horizon
.  You have the phrase that ﬁlong
er-term inflation expectations 
continue to 
remain well anchored
ﬂ attached to that, but my guess is just ooching the now commonly 
accepted medium
-term or longer
-term t
arget of 2 percent 
by o
ne-half percent
age point would 
raise eyebrows and doubts amongst our skeptics, and some question marks, no matter how we 

state it
, in the marketplace. 
If you wish to proceed on this course, Mr. Chairman, my advice is to go with 
the 
Tealbook™s alternative B, not B
. Specifically, I would go with $30 billion, the lesser number.  
As Bill English said yesterday, it allows some ramping up in case the Committee decides, against 

my adviceŠand others™ 
like me
Što do more.  A $30 billion program, if I understood the Desk 
yesterday, 
on a flow rate basis means we are already taking down 60 percent of supply. 
I would edit paragraph 4 to take out reference to ﬁadditional asset purchases.ﬂ I would 
leave it more vague by simply referring to employi
ng 
ﬁits other policy tools as appropriate.ﬂ 

And after the phrase ﬁin the context of price stability,ﬂ I would add ﬁand well anchored,ﬂ another 

great naval term, ﬁand well anchored inflation expectations.ﬂ We have it in B
. I don™t see why 
we don™t have 
it in B
.  This is enough, in my mind, to bind the hands for some time to come for 
all of those who are with you in the wheelhouse of the ship we™re steering.  It is going to make it 

very hard to raise short-
term rates, as I mentioned yesterday, even if we 
end up with a stronger 
recovery 
than we currently foresee or imagine. 
       
     
       
     
   
         
                    
   
      I would recommend, as I suggested in my memo of last week 
and 
discussed yesterday, 
that in your press conference you emphasize that this is to help along the recovery in housing.  I 
would advise that you say that the majority of the Committee concurs, but emphasize that the 

Committee, as you said yesterday you would, will be constantly scrutinizing the efficacy and 

costs of the program.  In other words, Mr. Chairman, I would take ownership of this issue.  It is 

one of the distinct areas of recovery. It is an area where I believe we have had impact. I did 

support the MBS program when it was originally announced.  I think it is vital for regular 

people, not just for economists. 
The headlin
e you should be seeking in 
USA Today
 should be ﬁBernanke Acts to Support 
Continued Housing Recovery.ﬂ  You mentioned yesterday you plan to speak in different terms 

than usual, making it more simple and directed to what you refer
red to as the ﬁaverage perso
n.ﬂ 
I think that™s good.  You™re a great teacher.  I saw you do that most forcefully and effectively 

when you visited Fort Bliss.  And as I mentioned in our phone conversations last week, your 

objective should not be to communicate to a few dozen sophisti
cated economists 
about 
this 
model or that model.  It should be to convinceŠ
what was referred to in the last meeting
Šthe 
unsophisticated interlocutors who run America™s businesses, and the consumers who buy the 

goods and services produced by those businesses, and the press, particularly 
what
 the consumers 
read as opposed to 
the reference literature. 
So, in summary, Mr. Chairman, I disagree with this course.  I think it is a mistake.  I
t steers us closer to the rocks.  But I have offered you my best advice un
der the circumstances. 
I wish you luck.  I will do my very, very best in my public appearances in the upcoming week to 

support what we are going to announce, even if I have to take Allegra to do it.  [Laughter] 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
         
            
   
        
     
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
  Thank you.  President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There are two policy actions under 
consideration today.  One is additional asset purchases, the other is an effort to extend and 
strengthen our forward guidance.  I would like to make 
a few comments about each of these. 
As I explained in the earlier go
-round, I am not in favor of undertaking a new round of 
asset purchases today.  In my view, the forecast has not changed enough to warrant further 

action.  Indeed, many of the Tealbook™s simple rules on page 2, Tealbook B, including the 

outcome-
based rule, suggest that policy is approximately well calibrated. 
Just like President 
Bullard, I do not see the urg
ency 
for large, aggressive actions at this time.  I™ll remind the 
Committee, we didn™t move earlier this year 
as the economy brightened and the outlook looked 
better
.  We did not take action.  We were patient.  
It t
urned out to be the right decision.  The 
econ
omy then weakened.  But we seem to be anxious to do further accommodation every time 
we see weakness and not do the reverse as the economy strengthens.  The message I take from 

that is that 
we 
need to be patient, that we need to not react to short-
run fluc
tuations. 
The recovery is frustratingly slow.  
The u
nemployment rate is uncomfortably and 
tragically high.  But, again, we have been told and we understand there is reason to expect this, 

given the size and nature of the economic shocks that have hit the economy.  The slow recovery, 

in my mind, is not evidence that our monetary policy stance is inappropriate.  The benefits of 

further asset purchase
s in curing what ails the economy are imprecise and tenuous at best.  
Indeed, the Board staff memo lays out numerous caveats and assumptions necessary in assessing 

the possible benefits of further asset purchases. 
While financial participants may be chomping at the bit for a new program, many 
economists throughout this country have raised doubts about the efficacy of such a policy 
       
                     
         
              strategy.  Despite sizable purchases and zero interest rates for four years, unemployment remains 
elevated.  But rather than question the efficacy of the policies, which would seem natural, our 

strategy seems to be to double down.  Now, th
e further sizable expansion of the balance sheet 

carries costs and will greatly exacerbate the challenges we face when it comes time to exit, as I 

talked about yesterday. 
In my view, embarking on another asset purchase program at this time is 
a highly risky strategy.  The consequences may prove very disruptive to the U.S. economy and 

harmful to the reputation and credibility of this institution for years to come.  We should not 

ignore these risks, even for the 
best
-guess outcomeŠa 50 basis point drop in the unemployment 
rate over two years. 
The proposal in 
alternative 
B is for a flow
-based program.  But to me, this seems to run 
counter to the theory of how such purchases are purported to work in the first place and the logic 

we have used in the past. If we 
believe that the effects of purchases are through a 
portfolio 
balance channel, then the public needs to understand the stock of securities the Fed intends to 

buy.
  The Board staff memo on the flow-
based balance sheet policy says
 that the conclusion of 
the 
simulation exercises
, and I quote, ﬁreflects the strong assumptions that investors, price-
setters, 
and 
wage
-setters all understand the Committee™s goals and its
 stopping rule for the flow 
LSAP
.ﬂ  How do we communicate that when we ourselves don™t even know what that stopping 
rule will be? It is remarkable to me that the Committee has not been able to communicate to the 

public our reaction function for setting the funds rate even in normal times.  And now it seems 

we expect the public to believe and unders
tand what our reaction function will be for LSAPs and 
balance sheet rules
.  LSAPs are not a nimble instrument.  If this program doesn™t produce the 
desired results or the predicted outcomes for 
the 
unemployment rate, what will we do? 
I would 
predict that with a 
flow
-based program, if we don™t get the results, we won™t stop.  We will 
            
                
   
        
     
   
   continue.  How will we know when to stop? W
e seem to have convinced ourselves that such a 
policy is effective and important.  Maybe so.  If it proves not to be, and we don™t g
et the desired 
results, will we just keep on buying assets, reevaluating, and say, ﬁOh, yes, it™s going to work.  
We just have to do some more.ﬂ I am not terribly confident of our ability to manage that 

effectiveness and give us a stopping rule. 
If we get
 the reaction function wrong, and we find ourselves with ever-
more larger 
balance sheets, the Fed may face balance sheet losses, no returns, no flows to the Treasury, or 

unacceptably large losses of some kind or another.  This could undermine our ability to 

implement an appropriate monetary policy in the future, to the detriment of both households and 

businesses.  Now, 
if the purpose of the balance sheet expansion 
is as a commitment 
device to 
keep rates low for longer precisely because it makes it harder to exit, then we need to be 

explaining this.  
We don™t tell this to the public.  We need to be more communicative about what 
we expect our policy to achieve and why 
we are 
doing it, and we™re not doing 
that
.  How do we 
expect the markets to understand this 
when we are reluctant to say so directly
 ourselves? 
This leads me to the issue of forward guidance, the other policy tool under consideration, 
either in conjunction or separately.  The intent of our forward guidance is for the Committee to 

commit to holdin
g interest rates lower longer than it normally would after the economy begins to 
recover.  The idea, as President Kocherlakota said, is 
that 
the commitment to do this is supposed 
to signal to households that the future is going to be brighter.  The future is going to be more 

economic 
growth, higher spending than they otherwise might anticipate.  And this helps 
stimulate less saving and more spending today.  The strategy works well in many of our models.  

Agents are completely forward
-looking.  Many of those 
have expectations that are right. 
But 
implementation, in my view, is very tricky. One needs to get the expectations right. 
                   
  
                   
                      We wouldn™t want the public to believe that we will let inflation run away from us, of 
course.  Michael Woodford has argued that t
here are 
way
s to implement this strategy
.  He has 
given us two examplesŠ
an earlier 
one is 
a price
-level
-targeting strateg
y and, of course, recently 
at Jackson Hole, 
nominal GDP targeting. I see the problem with this strategy in implementation, 
not the conceptual idea.  First, it presumes that households and businesses will correctly inter
pret 
our guidance and what it means, and that it means future growth will be higher.  
But it seems just 

as reasonable to assume, and perhaps so far that has been the react
ion, 
that 
they will read our 
actions as a signal that we believe the economic outlook is going to be a lot worse for longer.  

The public does not have that positive outlook, and if we don™t convey that to them in very 

strong language, the strategy won™t work.  It will not bring spending forward. 
This strategy requires us to manipulate the public™s expectations in a very particular way. 
That
™s the communication challenge with this strategy.  To follow th
e strategy requires placing a 
lot of weight on our abi
lity to communicate. You will recall that this Committee decided not to 
adopt price-level targeting not too long ago and did not adopt nominal GDP targeting when we 

had the opportunity to do so.  And we rejected those for a variety of reasons, one was 

com
munication and, of course, 
with nominal GDP targeting
, one of the major issues was 
defining what the right level of real GDP needed to be.  We found those both either risky or 

diff
icult communication strategies. 
What do we think that we have done now that will overcome those problems? Why do 
we think that the thresholds w
ill overcome those difficulties? We seem to be willing to 
implement the strategy in a half
-hearted way.  I™d note that I have been a strong advocate, and 
continue to be a strong advocate, 
for systematic reaction functions. It is very important to this 

Committee. 
But 5
 is not a reaction function.  

 says nothing about what happens, for 
              
          
      
       
   
        
                example, after we pass one of the thresholds.  And this is very important, 
because the 
public 
doesn™t understand what our reaction function is in normal timesŠor we don™t know what they 
perceive it to be necessarily
Šand we are not telling them what it is going to be afterwards
.  L
et™s 
suppose, for example, that the public believes that after 
we reach the 6
½ percent threshold, and 
we say nothing about what we will do after that, they presume we may go back to the Taylor 

rule.
  Well, if that™s what they expect to happen, it would lead perhaps to a view of 
very fast 
tightening of policy after we get to the 6
½ percent unemployment rate.  That would undo some 
of the positive effects that we are trying to gain by this forward guidance.  If that turned out to be 

the case, then this strategy won™t work.  How do we make that commitment?  The public has to 

believe, beyond just the thresholds, how we are going to conduct policy, and as 
of 
now we 
haven™t explained 
that. 
I don™t think we agree amongst ourselves enough about what our policy 
reaction function is, and as much as I desire a more contingent eco
nomic-
based reaction 
function, I don™t think the thresholds help us very much there.  
The language in 
alternative B
(5

 again, says nothing about 
how we will behave afterwards. 
In the end, I agree with Woodford that LSAPs are perhaps ineffective.  But if 
we are 
going to adopt forward guidance and use that as our powerful tool, we need a much more 

deliberate and extended communication strategy to lay the groundwork to explain how our 

reaction function and how our policy strategy 
are 
going to work, and a com
munication strategy 
that convinces the public that we are serious about it, so that they understand how it works, 
if we 

are to get the outcomes that we want. 
Obviously, I am not in favor of B.  But if I had to choose, at this point I would choose 
5 over 5, not because I don™t like the direction that 5
 is headed, I™m just not sure it is ready for 
prime time yet. 
I™ve never 
been in favor of the calendar date.  It has created many problems for 
      
   
          
           
           
           
   us over the last year, and I am anxious to get rid of it.  But we need to get rid of it not by a one-
time change in a statement. 
It is going to take more preparation and more analysis. 
Thank you, 
Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Unlike some of my colleagues, my policy 
statements have usually been on the shorter side because I have generally been supportive of the 

version of the policy alternative that the Committee has eventually adopted.  I™m finding today™s 

policy decision much more of a strug
gle.  So I™m going to take a little more time than usual to 

explain my policy position and to share my views on the benefits and risks of additional policy 

action
s. 
With the unemployment rate at 8.1 percent and the August employment report as 
disappointing as it was, I would like to see the expansion proceed at a faster pace.  I know that 

we all would.  So the question on the table is:  Can additional monetary policy accommodation 

spur economic growth and improve labor market conditions?  And if so, which actions would be 

most beneficial and pose the least risk? 
I agree with the staff assessment that large
-scale asset purchases have been effective. 
Our first LSAP program was effective at the early stages of the financial crisis when financial 

markets were i
n severe distress.
  Our second LSAP program was effective when it was launched 
in 2010, a time when financial stress was still significant, the risk of falling back into a recession 

was high, and the risk of an outright deflation was very real.  
Our LSAP p
rograms provided 
strong support to financial markets and helped to appropriately realign inflation expectations.  In 

today™s circumstances, I see the benefits of another LSAP program as being far more limited. 
                    
       
                       The circumstances that prevailed when we init
iated our previous LSAPs are not evident today.  
Financial markets are not in disarray, and deflation is not a serious risk. 
I also worry that another large
-scale asset purchase program carries the risk of 
complicating our ability to withdraw policy 
accommodation smoothly and in a timely manner, as 
well as the risk of exposing us to reputation risk in the event that we incur large financial losses. 
I commend the staff for doing yeoman™s work to develop exit tools, to identify some of 
the potential 
complications of operating with a very large balance sheet, and to simulate our 
balance sheet under various assumptions.  I know that we™ve taken precautions, but it is 

impossible to be fully prepared for the environment that we might actually face three y
ears from 
now.  So after putting together my thoughts about the benefits and risks associated with the 

available tools and considering my economic outlook, I was not in favor of launching another 

large round of asset purchases along the lines of 
alternativ
e B as it was originally proposed in the 
Tealbook.  That option called for the immediate launch of an asset purchase program until labor 

market conditions substantially improved, and the purchase program was committed to run at 

least through mid
-2013.  That option also called for an extension of the forward guidance on the 
fed funds rate through mid-2015. 
I recognize that the strategy behind this policy option is predicated on the theory that 
additional monetary policy accommodation will only reduce the une
mployment rate substantially 
if this Committee actually commits to act aggressively and persistently until that goal is 

achieved.  I understand why the commitment strategy works so well in theory, but we have not 

had much practical experience to learn from
.  I understand the value of commitment, but 
commitment can take many forms. I think there™s value in waiting a little while longer before 

deciding to initiate another large
-scale asset purchase program. 
The Committee™s better choice 
                  
           
      
   
  
    
           at this juncture is 
to find a way to commit through forward guidance about the federal funds rate 
liftoff and not to launch a significant asset purchase program.  
I™m of 
the 
view that easing 
monetary policy through forward guidance has also been a powerful tool for reducing long-
term 
interest rates. 
As I noted, I think that our first two LSAP programs were successful in countering 
financial market stress and deflationary pressure
s. We may yet encounter a crisis
Šeither from 
the fiscal cliff or from Europe
Šthat once again 
cause
s serious financial market distress or 
deflationary pressures.  We would be better served by using asset purchases in response to these 
kinds of threats or the threat of a recession than to try to eke out a little more 
economic 
growth in 
the current circumstance. 
In coming months we may know more about the prospects for fiscal 
policy and for Europe and about the outlook.  It™s valuable to have the option to respond directly 

to these situations
, and launching a full-blown LSAP program today reduces our flex
ibility. 
For all of th
ese reasons I have preferred to wait for the completion of our maturity 
extension program at the end of the year before deciding whether to purchase more long-
term 
assets.  However, it was clear at our last meeting that many other Com
mittee members judge that 
additional policy accommodation might likely be warranted even sooner, and last week™s 

disappointing employment report seems to have been the decisive piece of evidence for some 

members who have been waiting for more proof of the economy™s lethargic condition. 
While I still have reservations about some of the specifics of the proposal, the version of 
alternative 
B that is now under discussion offers the possibility of an acceptable way forward.  
For one thing, even though 
alternati
ve B does call for expanding our holdings of long-
term 
securities in the next several months, it does so through the acquisition of MBS
.  Because some 
research does suggest the MBS purchases can be more impactful than Treasury purchases, I like 
        
     
                     
    
     
           
this aspect 
of 
alternative B.
  But I would also prefer the smaller amount of MBS purchasesŠ
that 
is, the $30 billion per month. 
One option in 
alternative B also allows for the possibility that the Committee might 
deploy tools other than, 
or at least in addition to
, large
-scale asset purchases if in coming months 
we conclude that additional easing steps are warranted. I was going to suggest some changes to 
the second sentence in paragraph 4.  I preferred that we delete the mention of ﬁ
additional asset 
purchases
ﬂ and in
stead state that 
ﬁthe Committee will continue its purchase
s of agency 
mortgage-
backed securities
ﬂ and is prepared to ﬁemploy its other tools as appropriate until such 
improvement is achieved in a 
context of price stability.
ﬂ  But I do like President Lockha
rt™s 
suggestion that we insert ﬁmayﬂ in front of ﬁundertake additional 
asset purchases and employ 
its other policy tools.ﬂ I think this flexibility of phasing in more accommodation in various ways as 

needed could prove to be helpful. 
In addition to beginning MBS purchases, 
alternative
 B eases policy through forward 
guidance. I like, as many others have already indicated, the state
-contingent concept in 

paragraph 5
, but I regard the 6½ unemployment rate and the 2½ inflation rate to be much too 
aggressive and risky.  If 
the natural
 rate of unemployment turns out to be 6 
percent or larger, I 
think that not lifting the fed funds rate until the unemployment rate falls to 6
½ percent risks some 
build-up of unacceptable inflationary pressures.  I know there 
are safeguards built into the 
forward guidance to prevent 
an unacceptable increase in inflation expectations, but we should be 
more humble about our ability to forecast these conditions with much precision.  
Presidents 

Lockhart and Lacker both laid out so
me risk
s to
 using a number for the unemployment rate, and I 
agree with their thoughts.  But if we decide that we have to include a number, a better approach 

is to set the unemployment rate to 
ﬁat least as low as 
7 percent
ﬂ and to keep inflation at ﬁ
close t
o                                   
  
     
    
    2 percent.
ﬂ  T
hese settings give us more flexibility.  Without that extra flexibility, I do not 
support p
aragraph 5
 and instead I support the language in paragraph 5. 
In conclusion, even though my preference is to wait, I can support a
lternative B with 
paragraph 5 today.  Even though some MBS purchases would begin right away, expanding the 
scope of policy accommodation even further is going to require the Committee to vote once 

again in coming months on the size and the structure of the policy change.  This buys us some 

time to determine exactly what the Committee means when we say 
that we want 
ﬁthe outlook for 
labor market conditions to significantly improve.ﬂ It also buys us some time if the outlook does 

not significantly improve to decide whether additional asset purchases would then be the best 

course of action.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B.  My preference is for 
purchases of 
$40 billion MBS a month, and with respect to forward guidance, my preference is 
for 5
. The data we have received since our August meeting provides yet further confirmation 
that 
economic 
growth is proceeding near or slightly below the economy™s potential, and 
downside risks continue to be substantial.  For quite some time, the Committee has been in 

watch
-and
-wait mode.  We™ve patiently monitored the economy to see whether the MEP 
and
 our forward guidance would be sufficient to produce a stronger recovery.  The verdict now seems 

clear.  Absent further policy action, I see little chance that unemployment will decline in the 

foreseeable future.  We should not delay action any further.  Indeed, I hope we will send the 

message loud and clear that we intend to provide additional accommodation through new asset 
            
                                
   purchases until we observe substantial and sustained improvement in labor market conditions, 
and will maintain policy accommodation for an extended period as the recovery strengthens. 
I support the open-
ended 
and conditional nature of the asset purchase program in 
alternative B. I think it™s very helpful to spell out the goal of the program and to articulate the 
economic conditions we™ll need to observe before halting those purchases.  
In particular, we 
should promise to add accommodation through asset purchases until the outlook for labor market 

conditions has improved substantially, and we would stop doing so only if our outlook for 

inflation or assessment of the efficacy and costs of the program change
s sig
nificant
ly.  The 
challenge with such an open
-ended program is that its effectiveness will depend on market 
expectations of the ultimate size of our asset purchases, and we™re offering no clear guidance on 

how long we expect them to continue.  
In addition, 
we™ve included some escape clauses relating 
to efficacy and costs.  I, therefore, think it™s important that our public communications, including 

the Chairman™s press conference, emphasize our commitment to continue the program until we 

have seen ongoing and sustained improvement in labor market conditions. 
Even though the open-
ended nature of the program creates challenges in shaping 
expectations
, it also has the very desirable property that market participants should adjust their 
expectations about the size of the program in response to changing economic conditions.  And 

this means that the program should induce stabilizing movements in financial conditions as 

expectations adjust automatically to incoming data indicating a stronger or weaker economic 

outlook. 
There™s been quite a bit of debate both inside and outside the Fed about the likely 
economic impact of asset purchases, and there is sizable uncertainty about the effects of LSAPs. 

I appreciate ongoing staff e
fforts 
to refine our estimates of these effects.
  Nonetheless, in light of 
       
     
   
  
              
              the evidence that I™ve seen, I™m persuaded that this program can be a 
helpful 
tool 
for achieving 
our objectives.  And while I™m mindful of the implications of further asset purchases for capital 
losses and remittances down t
he road, these concerns pale in comparison to what I view 
as the 
potential economic and human costs of failing to reduce the unemployment rate as aggressively 

as we can. 
I™m hopeful that a determined commitment to continue providing accommodation 
until we
 achieve more rapid and durable progress in attaining our employment goal may bolster 
household and business confidence 
and
 spending.  Any stimulus provided through this channel 
will boost its 
effe
ct relative to the staff™s estimates. 
I think it makes sense to direct our new purchases to MBS to provide additional support 
to the housing market, and I support purchases at the higher rate of $40 billion per month, which 

is a rate that in the 
Desk™s assessment could be sustained for the next year or two.  Consi
stent 
with the open-ended approach, I™d be prepared to scale the flow of these purchases up or down as 

the economic outlook evolves.  If this flow of purchases is maintained through the middle of next 

year, our holdings of longer-
term securities would incr
ease by about 
$800 billion, which I think 
is large enough to have a substantial economic effect. 
Paragraph 4 of the statement spell
s out the conditions under which we will provide 
additional accommodation through asset purchases.  Paragraph 5, in contrast, 
concerns the 

conditions under which we will maintain the level of accommodation that™s reached when our 

asset purchases end. 
If we end up adopting 5 
rather than 5
, I consider it critical to make clear 
that an extension of the expected calendar date to m
id-2015 is intended as a policy shift to 
improve the economic outlook, and that it does not convey a downgrading 
of our outlook in the 
face of disappointing new data.  Whereas our previous language tied exceptionally low levels of 
               
    
   
      
          
    
 the funds rate to economic weakness, the new language incorporated into the beginning of B(5) 
is much more positive, and I think it™s a very significant improvement. 
As between the alternative versions of 
paragraph B
(5), while I can support B(5) today, 
I strongly 
prefer 
version 5
. We contemplated a formulation along these lines when we introduced 
calendar
-date guidance in August of last year, and we have discussed this formulation 
extensively for many months now.  President Evans, 
in his speeches
, and Presidents 
Kocherlakota, 
Williams
, and Rosengren have explained in detail and very persuasively why a 
formulation like this makes sense.  I don™t want to go over the arguments again that they have set 

before the Committee. I simply think that clarifying the economic conditionalit
y of the funds 
rate path is useful for precisely the same reasons that it™s useful to tie our asset purchases to 

economic conditions.  
And I also think
Ša point that President Kocherlakota emphasizedŠ
that 

the language has the possibility of bolstering household and business expectations about their 

future incomes, and this would be a very important mechanism potentially for supporting 

additional spending. 
In summary, I support the provision of additional monetary accommodation.  I anticipate 
that continuing our additional purchases w
ill be warranted
 well into 2013.  I also support 5
 today 
and hope that if we end up going with 5, 
we will make further progress in future meetings on 

refining our forward guidance. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I prefer 
alternative B.  As I™ve been saying for 
some time now, I believe it™s important for us to take stock of our remaining tools and make sure 

that they™re used to maximum effect.  I do not view reducing the IOER or any sort of discount 
         
    
   
     
           
        window program to promote lending to be viable options.  So for me, 
that leave
s us at asset 
purchases and future guidance about the fed funds rate. 
I find the idea 
that the MEP has just as much efficacy as the LSAPs to be plausible, an
d I 
supported both the original program as well as its extension through the end of this year as an 
accommodation move.  If the MEP does the job on long-
term rates
, without increasing the size of 
our balance sheet or drawing the same criticism as LSAP
s, so much the better.  But in not 
drawing criticism, the MEP might also be less visible and thus less likely to engender a 

confidence effect.  So it™s important to not only use the tool, but to be quite vocal about our 

estimates of its potency. 
In addition to continuing the MEP, I™m in favor of adding purchases of MBS.  There have 
been many discussions in this building about how LSAPs work and the extent to which long-

term rates affect equity prices.  I™m not, frankly, quite sure about the equity effect, but I™
m 100 percent certain that interest rates have a direct effect on real estate prices, and house prices 

are important components of household wealth.  They 
affect the 
number of households 
underwater on their mortgage, 
and, most important, rising prices help
 instill the confidence to 
buy a house either to live in or as an investment. 
Reductions in the yield on mortgage-
backed securities have not necessarily translated to a 
one-
for
-one reduction in home mortgage rates, 
as the primary
Œsecondary rate spread rema
ins 
unusually wide.  So our purchases of MBS could very well translate into additional profit to 

lenders rather than cost reductions to homeowners, but ultimately, 
that addition
al profit should 
entice additional capacity and competition into the market tha
t will reduce the cost and increase 
the availability of mortgage credit.
  And while much has been made of the benefit to the 
economy as homeowners refinance into lower payments and free up cash flow for spending, that 
          
   
          
             
   
       
       
   
 reduced payment for the homeowner translates into reduced income for an investor, and it takes 
some pretty heroic assumptions about the differences in propensity to spend for that channel to 

make a big impact on consumer spending.  Still, I think the confidence 
and wealth effects
, along 
with t
he incentive for increasing capacity
, make this a step worth taking.  I confess that I might 
have been on the fence with this if the employment numbers had been better, but given their 

weakness, it™s hard to argue that we™ve been watching closely and still haven™t seen any reason 

to take action. 
For m
y policy preference, 
I start with the desire to finish out the MEP rather than throw it 
overboard and replace it with something else.  Although it™s something of a coincidence that the 

MEP runs out as we approach the fiscal cliff, it™s also something of an advantage.  It gives us a 

logical point to take stock of 
the consequences of reaching the cliff and its resolution.
  To be 
clear, I don™t view it as a potential stopping point.  On the contrary, I think it hig
hly likely that it 
will need to be a point of escalation, 
and I want to make sure that we have some additional fire 

power left
.  I know this goes against the grain for those of you who believe we should launch 
everything we have as early as possible in ord
er to strengthen the economy enough so 
it can 
withstand potential shocks, but those who subscribe to that idea are probably a lot more 

convinced than I am about the actual power of our tools.  I, frankly, don™t believe these tools are 

powerful enough by themselves to strengthen the economy enough so that it will withstand those 

shocks, but I do believe that, 
in announcing their use, there™s a confidence effect that can change 

expectations and halt or slow a downward slide. 
I a
m willing to entertain the possibility that we are approaching the point where we 
resemble the wizard behind the curtain.  [L
aughter] 
If so, I want us to continue to appear great 
and powerful in the face of economic weakness for as long as possible.  
That
 is, I believe that our 
        
                   
   
     
               
 actions still have the potential to inspire confidence over and above any other possible channel 
through which they can work.  But if confidence is the most potent channel, 
the when
 and how of 
new announcements becomes a tool in its
elf. 
The Chairman was telling us at dinner last night that he had the opportunity to go and 
visit the Washington Nationals
™ batting practice and meet the players, and one of the players 
came up and
, upon finding that he was the Chairman of the Fed, said, ﬁHey, how about that QE3, 
man?ﬂ  [Laughter] 
I think this is evidence that there™s a whole world of people out there who 
have no idea what QE3 actually means or what monetary policy is.  They don™t know the Taylor 

rule, and they haven™t spent much time thinking about the Woodford paper.  [Laughter]  They 

won™t read the whole statement or tune into the press conference, but they will likely know that 

the Fed did something and that that something should help the economy. 
In the spirit of conserving some fire p
ower for what I view as a potential two
-step action, 
I prefer to add only $30 billion per month in MBS purchases.  It establishes the 60Œ
40 split that 

was assumed in the capacity memos and leaves room to escalate the amount of MBS, add 

Treasury purchases, 
or commit to a $1 trillion program as levers to be pulled if conditions 
deteriorate, as I fear they might in coming months. 
My own judgment is that a commitment to a 
large program will prove to be a stronger action, but that we can always change from open
-ended 
to a stock commitment.  It would be much tougher to try to go in the other direction. 
In paragraph 4, I prefer to exclude the mention of other policy tools, as those other policy 
tools could be interpreted as an intent to use the IOER or a lending p
rogram, 
neither of which I 
support. 
I prefer 
paragraph 5 over 5
, especially at this meeting.
  The action of adding MBS 
purchases to the MEP is already going to be a little complicated to communicate.  Have we or 
         
     
     
      
                  
  have we not launched QE3?  So our communication focus should certainly be on that action in 
this meeting. 
Use of a date 
in the forward guidance is familiar and it™s expected.  While I™m sure 
there™s going to be an ongoing discussion, I would still continue to use the date, but over time, 

explain t
hat it represents a departure from our standard policy rules and our own historic reaction 
function.  I found the memos about delaying liftoff until there was a greater certainty about the 

likelihood of return to the zero bound to be very reasonable and explainable, and it would be 

helpful to convey that we are also anxious to get back into a more normal environment. 
I have real concerns about expressing our policy in terms of specific triggers.  We worked 
hard on the statement that put the 2 
percent target out there, and I™d hate to create an impression 

that we™re now raising it. I™m especially reluctant to specify the unemployment rate 
as the single 
employment data point guiding our actions.  First, there™s always the risk that it™s perceiv
ed as 
too high or too low, and one has only to look at the most recent employment report that clearly 

showed weakness, even though the unemployment rate dropped 
two
-tenths, 
to get a little nervous 
about tying fed funds expectations to that single number.  
Indeed, last year as we saw a full 
percentage point decline in the unemployment rate, we were only kind of pleased about it, 

because it didn™t happen in the way we expected. 
Someone commented yesterday that we should begin to focus on how the general publi
c receives our messages, and this is a really important point.  I question whether the public will use 

this guidance formulation to adjust their expectations about policy.  I think they™ll hear these 

numbers as our targets.  But if the consensus is to move to conditioning on economic outcomes, 

we should, 
at a minimum
, take some time to set the table for its introduction. In addition, we 

should agree to leave this set-up task to the Chairman, and the rest of us should refrain from 

taking our own disagreements on the finer points public.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
                 
   
    
   
         
   
                  
  
   
      
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and I™d like to point out 
that 
the 
player™s 
financial portfolio is probably bigger than anybody at this table.  
[Laughter]
  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My reaction when you told me about the 
player in question was he has an awfully good financial advisor.  [Laughter] L
et me begin by 
saying that some people have basically asked the question, why act now? For my own 
perspective, I don™t think there is a particularly compelling reason to act at this moment, but that 

is only because I would have thought that action at any of the p
ast several meetings would have 

been equally appropriate.
  Charlie, in response to your questions, why wasn™t I or why weren™t 
others inclined to act earlier in the year when there was a trio of pretty good employment 

numbers? 
The answer 
is that
 they didn™t seem sustainable, 
just as the little bursts in the last 
couple of years hadn™t 
seemed sustainable. 
If they had been sustainable, that would have called 
for some action.  But here I think we are all seeing that the basic diagnosis of a bogged-
down 
economy over the p
ast few years has become a pretty persuasive one. 
The second thing I would say is I don™t think it is reasonable to oppose further action on 
the grounds that action taken in the past has not produced the complete, 
fast recovery that 

everyone would like to see.  T
he real question is the counterfactual one
: In the absence o
f action, 
in the absence of the LSAPs, what would be the situation now?  And there I think, 

notwithstanding 
the efforts of some to deny that there has been any effect
ŠI am not talking 
about people in this roomŠ
while one can debate reasonably and at length 
the actual amount of 
effect of the last couple of LSAP exercises, it is really hard not to see that there has been an 

effect
, and the 
disagreement seems to be 
over how much. 
Of course, we would all be happier if there had been a more aggressive set of poli
cies to 
deal with underwater mortgages and housing a couple of years ago.  I think in retrospect, as 
         
          
      
   
              
  
           people write the history of the Great Recession following the financial crisis, the failure to 
move 
more aggressively on housing is going to be seen as the biggest of the policy mistakes, even 
bigger than maybe not going for a larger stimulus package.  
But
 it is not up to us to determine 
what everybody else does.  We have to take the world as it is presented to us, and then balance 

the costs and benefits of the actions we can take in light of the good and bad decisions that other 

parts of the government and consumers and firms are themselves taking. 
As Jeremy was suggesting yesterday, there is in any set of LSAP proposals an anticipated 
combination of what he 
termed the ﬁhydraulic
ﬂ effects and some confidence or quasi
-commitment effect. 
I think it is hard to disentangle the two, even as we look retrospectively at 
the first couple of LSAPs.  T
here is some case to be made, as some of the skeptics have 
suggested
, that the conditions 
that obtained at the times of the LSAPs made what I have termed a 
confidence or quasi-
commitment effect particularly salient at those moments.  And th
at may not 
be quite as powerful right now. 
But, again, in the face of all of this uncertainty, which the Chairman alluded to yesterday, 
we do have to make a choice.  And it does seem to me that the costs suggested to date, while 

nontrivial, don™t seem overwhelming.  That is, they are a little bit more speculative than they are 

concrete. 
People are saying
, ﬁwe worry that there may be some effect on market functioning
,ﬂ without specifying exactly what that effect would be, or 
ﬁwe worry that there may at some point 
be some effect on inflation or on our exit capacities,ﬂ 
without telling a somewhat more filled
-out 
story as to what they think those might be.  While I would be shocked if there are not some 

unintended consequences, even of the LSAPs we™ve done to date, that is part of policymaking.  

There are always going to be some unanticipated 
consequences, and the best you can do is try to 
dig in as deeply as possible to spin out as many plausible outcomes as possible, and then make 
         
   
                
      
            
   
  
           that balance. 
Obviously, from what I™ve said here, that balance is in favor of taking further 
action
, as it has been before
.  And so I support 
alternative B.  But I just want to make clear to 
those who have questionsŠSandy and Dennis and othersŠthat I share a lot of the uncertainty, 
and I don™t have enormous conviction that anything we do now is going to be, as Eric put it, a 

game
-changer. 
It is going to be something 
that
 helps, not something 
that
 resolves all problems. 
On the 5 versus 5
 issue, Narayana laid out the two key considerations extremely well.  
First, that the use of the more-
specified forward guidance could maximize the effect of LSAPs. 
That is a very important consideration.  Second, and this was an extremely important point, he 

pointed out that 2½ 
could easily be consistent with a price
-stability
-only mandate just because of 
having toleranc
e around any goal that one is ever trying to achieve.
  To me, that might have 
suggested that perhaps, 
because we do have a dual mandate, there might be a different set of 

targets that would be adopted.  But it seems to me, 
at the very least
, Narayana™s rea
soning 
suggests why 
2½ shouldn™t be problematic. 
I don™t find the potential h
yste
resis argument or the potential rise in labor 
force 
participation to be dispositive here.  I don™t think Janet actually disagreed with me yesterday 

when I said that I had been
 surprised that we haven™t seen h
yster
esis.  And given that we haven™t, 
it™s probably less likely than we all thought.  But even if you thought it was, how would it 

manifest itself? Presumably, it would manifest itself in tightness in the labor market and rising 

wages, which are going to pass through into our inflation projections.  At that point, you™d say, 

ﬁOkay.  We are now seeing that the trigger or threshold has been breached.ﬂ 
There is something to what Charlie Plosser said about the market™s anticip
ation of what 
happens as we approach the thresholds.  When Charlie Evans was talking about this publicly, a 

very acute market observer commented offhandedly to me that he was somewhat sympathetic to 
              
                  
            this approach, but his concern was that there may be some expectation of pent-up and rapid 
increases, which markets would think would be coming depending on 
the circumstances as we 

approached
ŠI think, 
at that time
, Charlie™s numbers w
ere
 7 and 3.  I don™t think that is 
something to disregard.  It is probably something to take into account. 
These are all good arguments piled onto the ﬁwhy we all hate the dateﬂ argument for 
trying to develop something like what is in 5
. Having said that, I would remind all of you of the 
fact that I was initially
Šlate last year an
d early this past year
Šhesitant to move in that direction 
for a couple of reasons.  One, the communications issues, which severalŠ
most recently Betsy
Š have alluded to, are significant here.  But I thought they were significant last spring, even in the 

absence of an LSAP initiative
, which is going to take a little nimbleness to explain. 
The 
confusion with the policy statementŠ
what do these numbers actually mean
Šis a real 
consideration.  T
hough I should say
, at the time, I had some hopes that a revised S
EP could fill a 
good bit of the role of these thresholds or targets.  Those hopes have subsequently been dashed.  

[Laughter] I now see the costŒbenefit calculus somewhat differently, which is to say that the 

available alternative may not be as much of a s
ubstitute as I had hoped.  I would say that, 
notwithstanding my strong 
sense that 
this 
is 
the right direction for us to goŠfor the reasons 
Narayana stated
Šand that optimally we would have been prepared to go that way right now, 
I don™t really think the groundwork has been laid.  C
ertainly not externally
ŠI do think some 
underestimate the communications challenge that will exist. 
Second, I™m not totally positive that we have laid the groundwork internally
.  Maybe we 
did eight months ago, but all of those memos and things are in the archives instead of right in the 

front of our computer screens.  It would be a tougher case for me if everybody had converged 

around 6½ and 2½ 
because in those circumstances I might be inclined to say, ﬁAll right. 
         
       
    
         
           
          Communications ch
allenge
ŠMichelle is going to have a tough week, but let™s take the 6½, 2½, 
which is probably, in the end, right, but that™s not where we are.  I would say that not taking an 

employment number means that you are not actually communicating very effectively a
t all 
because otherwise it is just qualitative verbiage. 
You don™t really achieve what you are trying to 
achieve. 
In addition, 
saying a little bit over 2 is going to create even more communication 
problems because everybody is going to 
ask
,  ﬁWell, how much over?ﬂ I
t doesn™t really solve 
much, if anything at all. 
There is not agreement on these propositions right now.  
It is clear that we don™t have a 
consensus even among those who are going to vote in favor of a
lternative 
B on the numbers 
themselves
, so we are probably not prepared to move in that direction.  But I don™t think that 
should dissuade us from doing a lot of memo writing and communicating over the course of the 

next couple of meetings to see if we can move in that direction together.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Incoming data have been consistent with my 
expectations, reinforcing my view that additional policy stimulus is needed.  The inflation 

outlook is subdued, and the employment outlook is unsatisfactory, so a balanced approach 

requires the providing of significant additional stimulus. 
My comments will, again, focus on the communication channel.  First, I think that some 
marginal monetary stimulus could be 
delivered
, without incurring the costs associated with an 
LSAP
, through the use of forward guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook.  
While I 
appreciate the fact that an asset purchase program and forward guidance are not perfect 

substitutes, I 
like 5
 because it is close to a costless way of providing some accommodation. 
          
      
                    
   But even if we were not in agreement that more accommodation is necessary, I see little 
downside in shedding our adherence to a calendar date.  The calendar date, as we have heard, is 
working against us.  It is communicating that we are continuously downgrading our assessment 

of the future.  Why not, instead, show households, businesses, and markets what we are looking 

for in terms of particular economic outcomes?  Why not offer 
a sneak preview of what we need 
to see before we begin contracting?
  With such a preview and credible delivery, households and 
businesses and markets figure out how we are going to react.  Providing that window, and 

keeping the panes of that window clean, 
reduces volatility and pessimism about our commitment 
to support a recovery.  I
n mitigating this volatility and pessimism, as argued by President 
Kocherlakota and others, we maximize the effectiveness of the oth
er actions being contemplated. 
But we have be
en down this road before, so we ask, why now?  Why move to forward 
guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later? We should 

consider forward guidance 
that is 
dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later 
because 
there could be costs to putting this off.  The primary cost is the permanent downward 

shift in expectations that becomes more probable the longer we wait.  The longer we put off 

these contentious decisions, the greater the probability that we let stand the 
perception that there 
is a new
, lower, slower trajectory of economic growth that we are comfortable with; the greater 
the probability we let stand the perception that the FOMC doesn™t adhere to the statutory 

directive of a dual mandate; the greater the pr
obability we let stand the perception that we act 
forcefully when we are off the price
-stability mandate but not when we are off the 
maximum
-employment 
mandate; and the greater the probability we let stand the perception that 2 percent is 

a ceiling. 
      
           
                               Forwar
d guidance that is dependent on an economic outlook counters these otherwise 
pervasive and erroneous interpretations and perceptions.  The longer we postpone correcting 
such interpretations and perceptions, the more pervasive, credible, and intractable the
y become. 
In short, we want to oxygenate the forward guidance before households and businesses 

permanently harden their expectations about both the future path of the economy and our future 

reaction to it.  All of this argues for moving away from a calend
ar date sooner rather than later. 
We still may not know what the right numbers are for insertion into a formulation like 5
, but we have all seen that in optimal control simulations under commitment in the FRB
/US model, the unemployment rate is around 6 pe
rcent at the time of liftoff, and inflation never rises 
above 2½ percent.  We have seen justification for these particular thresholds.  Moreover, 

6½ percent is still above the Committee™s view of the long
-run rate of unemployment.  The 
forward guidance in 5
 has come a long way since we discussed it in August of 2011.  It now 
contains a firm, definitive, non-vague inflation proviso.  A problem 
we 
debated in the August 
2011 meeting was the risk that moving the forward guidance from a calendar date to one bas
ed on economic conditions would dislodge inflationary expectations.  In the current version of 5
, that possibility seems extremely unlikely. Instead, if inflation at a one
-to two
-year horizon were 
above the small 
½ percentage point threshold of 2 percent, the Committee would be required to 
reengage on the federal funds rate debate, even if unemployment still exceeds 6
½ percent. 
It is, 
to use President Kocherlakota™s phrase, a threshold for conversation.  These are hardly putting in 

place conditions by which inflation can brew silently, unchecked, and unaddressed. 
At the end of this round, there are still some who say that the egg hasn™t been cooked 
long enough.  I might have to disagree, noting that I am not sure what we are waiting for.  


 could be in a form close enough to convince the public that the FOMC is following 
                
       
     
      
      
  
    
  
       
 a different strategy; one that tries to achieve its employment mandate more forcefully than the 
public has perceived thus far; one that more credibly delivers accommodation and, at the right 

time, contraction, than the markets have understood thus far; one that has none, if any, of the 

costs associated with an LSAP; and one that may be necessary now to make the MBS purchases 

in 
alternative 
B more effective. 
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B. I will just comment on 
a few of the specifics.  First of all, in terms of the flow rate of purchases of MBS, I would go 

with 
$40 billion per month, though I can™t say I have a particularly strong view on this. 
With respect to the trigger
- or threshold-
base
d policy described in paragraph 5
, I am 
quite sympathetic to the strategy. 
It has the potential to be of significant help.  I appreciate and 
find quite compelling the arguments that President Kocherlakota and a number of others have 

made. 
There is really quite an appealing intellectual case to be made. 
Now, having said this, I find myself in very close agreement with Governor Tarullo in 
terms 
of whether now is the right time to move forward.  As he pointed out, there 
are
 two issues.  
There is the internal issue.  We have to get this right internally.  We have to really agree on the 

design and on the parameters.  T
he numbers really matter here. 
If we don™t coalesce around a 
reasonably strong version, one in which we make it clear that we have, as President 

Kocherlakota suggested, an ambitious unemployment threshold and some tolerance for a 

symmetric loss function on inflation, the intellectual c
ase for it in some sense starts to disappear.  
That™s one issueŠwe have to get that right. 
Second, the external issue is also challenging, and the communication here is crucial. 
To 
give one example, something that is not clear in
 my own mind is, how would we respond to the 
                       
     
            
     following question?  Have we really deviated from our previous forward guidance in the sense 
that now we are making more of what is really a commitment
, in the spirit of optimal control
, to 

do something that we would stick with, even if 
it™s, in a sense, time inconsistent?  Or
, is it just a 
statement, well, that we™ve introspected, we have thought about our reaction function, and we 

have discovered in our souls that we have a different reaction function than we previously knew 

ourselves to have? 
These are challenging things to explain, and it™s absolutely important to get it right. 
The 
concern, then, would be that if we throw something this consequential and tricky into what is 

already a hard
-to-parse statement in other areas,
 it could end up being somewhat 
counterproductive.  Again, I very much have sympathy for the underlying idea and the 

principles, and I would hope that we could further develop and do more work on it.  My own 

preference would be not to push it out the door in the next hour or two. 
With respect to paragraph 4, this is the part I had in mind when I said it was already a 
little bit hard to parse. 
You get a flavor of this in some of the comments that have already gone 
around.  In other words, it seems like it is really open to different interpretations.  Some of you 

have, as I hear it, read paragraph 4 as a quite strong and open-ended commitment to continue 

doing asset purchases as long as it takes until the labor market improves.  
At the other extreme, 
the way I heard Pres
ident Bullard reading the paragraph was, ﬁWell, it doesn™t really say much 
more than that we will do this for several months and then reassess where we are.ﬂ  Y
ou can 
certainly point to various forms of wiggle room in the phrasing.  I suppose the truth is sort of in 

between and a little b
it in the eye of the beholder. 
For my part, I would align myself quite closely with President Pianalto.  I appreciate the 
commitment arguments. I like the idea of having wiggle room, and that is 
because of
 my own 
        
         
        
    
                    understanding of the costs and the benefits, and that in spite of the fact that I do believe the 
benefits of past programs have been significant, I sense that we are verging into diminishing 

returns territory. 
Moreover, flexibility may be particularly warranted with MBS because there is 
a particular kind of market feedback that we might get reasonably quickly, which is to sayŠand 

Governor Duke mentioned thisŠthere is this issue about the pass-through from MBS spreads to 

primary mortgage rates. 
We will see
, presumably in a few months, whether that pass-through i
s weak or strong
, and one might want to update one™s policy based on that. 
In any event, as we talked about yesterday, given the language in paragraph 4, this makes 
the press conference important.  F
or what it™s worth, Mr. Chairman, I thought that the trial 
balloon answers that you were floating yesterday struck a good balance here, so I was certainly 

comfortable in that dimension. 
Given these two 
earlier
 points, one being that I think it is worth giving serious further 
thought to 5
, and the second being that there is some virtue to not getting overly locked in on 
asset purchases, I also
Švery similar to President Lockhart and to President Pianalto
Šwas 
thinking about whether 
there 
is 
an alternative fra
ming that would work here?  And my thought 
was maybe we can lean just as far forward, or even a little bit further, on the general principle of 

giving accommodation if the economy doesn™t strengthen but be more open as to whether that 

accommodation would t
ake the form of asset purchases or a change in our guidance. 
This could be done, in principle, either by rewording paragraph 4 of the statement or 
simply by
 the way the press conference is handled.  In the former case, if it™s done via the 
statement, you c
ould rewrite the two key sentencesŠ
it™s just a suggestion
Šas follows: 
ﬁIf the 
outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue to add 

further accommodation as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a 
context of price 
               
      
                       
   stability. In determining the nature of such accommodation, the Committee will, as always, take 
appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of the tools at its disposal.ﬂ I
t is less precise
, and I take that to be in the spirit 
of what you 
all 
were thinking as well.
  The intent is not to back 
away from being supportive but to be a little bit more flexible in the tools that are used to 

provide that support.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will vote in favor of 
alternative 
B.  My 
support for 
alternative
 B leans heavily on the language in paragraph 4 requiring us to consider 
the likely efficacy and cost of further actions when and if they are proposed and considered, and 

I join strongly Governor Stein and Presidents Pianalto and Lockhart in an editing of paragraph 4 

that moves very much in the direction that Governor Stein just read. 
I am a supporter of paragraph 5.  I think that the arguments that have already been 
raised 
and vetted about 5
 are dispositive at this time.  I will say that the two things that need to be 
doneŠthe good news is there are only two things.  The bad news is those two things are, first, 

the Committee has got to reach agreement on the desirab
ility of moving to a state
-contingent 
forward guidance. I™m very open to the intellectual appeal of that, but going around the table, 

it™s quite obvious that we don™t fully have that, particularly around the levels in the language and 

the conditionality. 
The second is clearly the public communication aspect.  There™s nothing about it in the 
Jackson Hole speech.  There really hasn™t been any supportive discussion of it by the Chairman 

lately that I™ve seen. 
We could get ourselves to a place where this could be announced.  I
t would 
be the work of some months both internally and externally, in particular explaining how it does 
          
         
     
   
   
  
                   
 fit in with the principles that we adopted in January
.  I
t™s 
not something that 
can happen in the 
next 45 minutes. 
I will also vote in
 favor of extending the guidance to mid-2015 as proposed.  My own 
view of this is that the market moves the estimate of the liftoff date every day, and our proposed 
guidance doesn™t contain any surprise element. 
The idea that the date can contain a negati
ve, 
contractionary aspect is certainly
 plausible in a different setting, but not on the facts we face 
today. 
Let me say a couple of comments
 about LSAPs.  As I look back on the use of LSAPs so 
far, I too believe that the evidence supports the view that the 
effects of any LSAP are highly 
dependent not only on some mechanics, but also on the setting in which it is launched.  The main 

driver of real effects is probably that of enhancing confidence, confidence that bad outcomes will 

be avoided, and that there is reason to hope for good outcomes. 
In this view, it is really our credibility, the design of the program, 
and the setting that 
make it work.  For me, an argument in favor of 
alternative 
B is that it is limited to MBS at a time 
when the housing market is consistently surprising on the upside.  This alternative can be well 

explained and understood by the public as welcome support for housing as well as for the 

broader economy.  
So presented, it stands a decent chance 
to actually be noticed and appreciated 
by people who are neither Fed watchers nor professional market participants nor economics 
bloggers.  I encourage an emphasis on support for housing in our public communications around 

this action. 
My view is that alternative 
B can have positive effects on the 
economy but 
that these 
effects are likely to be quite modest, and I do come to that view without a great deal of certainty.  

It does seem clear to me that LSAPs have affected asset prices, and to deny that does call for
Šas          
                   
                 
   was done in a certain well
-ment
ioned Jackson Hole paperŠ
that most hackneyed of all economist 
jokes that while it may be observed in reality, it will simply never work in theory.  [Laughter] 
But of course, affecting MBS and Treasury prices is just the beginning.  We need translation to 

rates that actually matter for private economic activity and then translation to the real economy. 
Looking at the channels through which we believe our policies operate and 
the caveats, 
confidence intervals, headwinds, 
and multiple uncertainties that surround the estimates so well 

addressed in yesterday™s meeting, my strong sense is that the 
real effects will be quite modest, 
and it is all too easy these days to find credible private forecasts that agree. 
The last two 
forecasts that I™ve seen both from well known, credible sources who happened to be broadly 

supportive of accommodation, point to estimates of unemployment effects of around 20 or 

30 basis points for a program the size of QE2Šuse that as a rough proxy for this.  That would be 

300,000 to 450,000 jobs under those forecasts.  That might be equivalent to bringing the 

recovery forward by a couple of months. 
As far as the costs, I certainly agree that they appear manageable in the near term. 
There™s enough risk and uncertainty about the medium and long term that if the view of the 

likely benefits is right, one 
would have to believe further that the likely costs are close to nil to 
want to proceed with a large LSAP.  I also agree with President Bullard™s point earl
ier in the 
meeting that the problem has not been the lack of aggressive monetary policy.  As a separate 

matter, taking the Chairman™s points from yesterday, I do not feel that additional aggressive 

monetary policy is likely to provide much of a solution. 
I know that every member of the Committee struggles to balance these highly uncertain 
costs and benefits.  I™m supporting 
alternative 
B with a certain lack of enthusiasm, and I am 
somewhat uncomfortable with the road that we are on.  As others have mentioned, this is not 
      
            
          
       
        
  
   
   
          2008, 2009, or 
2010.  We™re now using LSAPs as a straightforward jobs program.  There is no 
credible threat of deflation, recession
, or financial crisis
, any of which could present a 
compelling case for action and the use of all of our tools, including LSAPs if appropriate.  Again, 

these are concerns about the medium and the long term, not the next six months.  My concern is 

that for very modest benefits, we are piling up risks for the future and that it could become habit-

forming. 
Thank you
, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  My preference would be to act forcefully at 
this meeting.  I™d favor a
lternative B, 
paragraph 4 as written, p
aragraph 5
, and $40 billion per 
month of agency 
MBS.  Let me just talk about each of these a little bit. 
With respect to the thresholds, what I hear around the table is that there™s really a strong 
sentiment that thresholds can trump date guidance, and the thresholds that we even have today in 

5 in my 
mind
, trump date guidance. But I do accept the view that maybe we can even do better, 
and so in my mind the tradeoff is really between is it better to do something today to have a 

bigger package or is it better to keep working on 5
 to try to improve the communication and 
have it come later
? I would prefer to do it all today as a pack
age
 because if you do it as a package, it™s going 
to have more force in terms of its impact, but I accept the fact that the Committee is not really 

quite there yet.  I would 
hope that at least that the Committee would commit that we™re going to 

bring 5
 home in the next one or two meetings.  It would be very disappointing if we didn™t do 
that because I think most people around the table view the date as really quite problemati
c. The thresholds, 
as President
s Williams and Kocherlakota pointed out, 
are 
more powerful 
than a date.  The date creates a lot of uncertainty. When are we going to move it?  Why are we 
                     
                             
           
going to move it? When we move it, why did we move it?  Thresholds provide more 
information.  The date implicitly rests on some unobserved variables, and so people essentially 

have to look at the date and then infer what the things 
are 
that lie behind the date.  Why not just 
tell them what those variables are? 
Some of the problem 
with
 the thresholds 
is the limits of the statement.  The statement can 
only carry so much water, and we can™t specify all the parameters that would go into our 

decisionmaking as the economy actually evolves.  W
e have to recognize we™re not going to 
get 
to a perfect 5
 because the statement just can™t carry that water. 
We need to do the best we can 
and see what we can come up with.
  Then lastly, the dynamic nature of the thresholds far trumps 
the date guidance.  The market will adjust automatically, 
and as people have said, that™s an 
automatic stabilizer.
  So I™m reluctant to abandon 5
 at this meeting because it would make the 
action more forceful, but I do accept the pretty strong sense that a lot of people who don™t want 

to do it this meeting would
 actually be pretty inclined to do it subsequently once the work on the 
communication was complete and once they were convinced that they got the best 5
 version that 
they could possibly get.  I think we should keep going on that. 
With respect to the rest of the statement, I would not want to alter 
paragraph 4 because 
it™s critical to 
ensure the paragraph is forward leaning and implies the 
commencement of a new 
LSAP program should the economic situation not improve in a meaningful way. 
As I see it, we need 
to decide now what we will do if the economy continues to 
disappoint.  We™ll do more and how we™ll do more, and communicate this decision now because 

that will reduce uncertainty and support confidence, and that will support the recovery.  In my 

view, if we postpone those decisions about what we™ll do in the future if the economy 

disappoints, we just create more uncertainty about what our future policy actions are going to be, 
                  
   
         
       
            
   
   
   
  and that really undercuts the efficacy of the policy choices.  Deciding today so that people know 
that there™s more coming will actually create greater confidence about the Fed™s willingness to 

support the economy.  That reduces the downside risk and actually means, at the end of the day, 

the prospect i
s that 
we™ll
 have to do less rather than more because we™ll be acting today and 
supporting confidence today by communicating what our future actions will be. 
All that said, I am very sympathetic with a number of people™s remarks that don™t put a 
very high weight on the power of additional LSAPs.  I think L
SAPs have modest effects o
n the 
level of long-term rates, and the drop in long-term rates does feed through partially to the equity 

market and the foreign exchange market but not one-
for
-one as in the staff projections because 
that would contradict the whole portfolio balance framework, which is the basis for LSAPs. 
In assessing the 
effe
ct of past LSAPs, I™m not particularly a big fan of event studies.  I 
think the event studies are too focused on the reaction on 
particular days
.  T
he expe
ctation of 
LSAPs evolves more slowly, and it™s very hard to disentangle all the factors that affect financial 

asset prices.
  When we say that we™re going to do an LSAP, that not only affects people™s views 
of what™s going to happen in terms of financial 
markets,
 but also signals a view about our view 
of the economy, and both 
of 
those things affect financial asset prices.  So trying to disentangle 
what the effect 
is 
of the LSAP from what the effect is of our judgment that we need an LSAP is 
very difficult to determine. 
I also agree with Governor Stein and others that probably one of the more powerful 
aspects of LSAPs is the confidence channel and the signal that we™re willing to do as much as it 

takes.  During the heat of the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009 when we were rolling out all of 

these special liquidity facilities, I was very impressed by how much our policy actions supported 

confidence in market function just because we were showing up, just because the fire trucks were 
       
        
                 
  
    
            
    rolling.
  People, as I think Governor Duke noted, don™t necessarily understand exactly why we™re 
doing what we™re doing, but they feel more confident when they know that we™re acting. 
Some around the table have argued that our tools are not very effective and the core 
problems lie el
sewhere
Šin fiscal, the household balance sheet, housing problemsŠand so we 
shouldn™t act because by acting we™re somehow removing responsibility from others where the 

responsibility more rightly sits, and I think there is some truth to 
that argument. 
In an ideal 
world, other things that are outside our purview would happen that would help the economy.  But 

I don™t think that argument carries the day for arguing against action for two reasons. 
First, nothing in our mandate says that if our tools aren™t powerful, don™t use them; defer 
to others.  There™s nothing in our mandate that says that.  It just says this is your mandate.  Use 

your tools to try to achieve your mandate the best you can.  And second, if we don™t act, it™s not 

as if
 that somehow is going to cause others to act. I really don™t accept the premise that 
somehow our inaction would spur action by others.  If you really believe that, then maybe you 

could actually advance this argument.  But I don™t think many people around the table believe 

that our inaction will somehow spur action by others that will improve the economic outlook. 
On the agency MBS, I strongly favor the $40 billion per month over the $30 billion.  
Being more forceful makes sense. 
At the end of the day the staff has concluded that we have the 
room to do $40 billion rather than $30 billion without i
mpairing market function
, so I don™t 
really see the reason for holding back.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you, and thank you all very much, as always, 
for your good advice. 
Let me make a couple
 of comments.  I think that action is needed.  I don™t think we™re 
being precipitous.  We extended the guidance in January.  In June, we extended the MEP.  Both 
       
                     
     
              
    of those things were viewed essentially as temporizing moves and were discussed in that way 
around 
this table.
  The evidence is that while we are not necessarily facing recession or crisis, it™s 
also true that we seem to have stalled
, and that very serious problems with unemployment are not 
improving.  Given our mandate, I think that requires at least a consideration of action. 
The action that
 is proposed here, and it should be very clear, is a cautious action.  
Governor Duke was very helpful in helping me think about this.  What this a
lternative B actually 
does is make a down payment of X per month of MBS for the rest of the year, and then three or 

four job market reports from now we will consider at that point what the job market outlook 

looks like, and then respond appropriately.  
So it is
, in that respect, emphasizing the 
conditionality of the progra
m and the fact that we will be looking
Šin a way that wasn™t 
conveyed adequately by our fixed-
size LSAP programs
Šat what™s happening in the data and 
what™s happening in the economy.  But I do think there is a basis for expressing our support for 

the economy at this point, to help support confidence and to help give the economy a bit more 

strength in case we do face shocks from Europe or from the fiscal cliff. 
So, again, obviously I propose a
lternative B. I™ll come back to the body of it in a 
moment.
  On 5 v
ersus 5
, there was a pretty clear consensus around the table that there™s a lot of 
hunger for moving away from the date toward some kind of state-contingent guidance.  I think 

one of the lessons of the paper whose author™s name will not be mentioned was t
hat clarity about 
future rate policy is a very powerful tool and one that we should make use of.  I would advocate 

that we continue to work on this because the other part of the consensus today was that we™re not 

quite ready for prime time on this issue. 
So I would propose for now that we retain paragraph 5, 
but with a very strong injunction to the staff and to colleagues that we work to figure out how we 

can put language like 5
 in soon. 
        
              
       
              
              In paragraph 3, I™d like to make the following proposal.  I™d like to propose that we do 
$40 billion a month, but I™d like to add the words ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ 
where it says 
$85 billion a month three lines from the bottom.  T
he 
$85 billion, which is the MEP plus the 
$40 billion
Šof course the MEP runs out at the end of the year, and that™s about the time we™ll be 
looking at how we™re going to proceed from here. The advantage of doing $40 
billion
 is, 
first of 
all, that 
$30 billion 
feels a little underwhelming to me in terms of what we announce today, but 
also it s
eems to me that one of the options we might have in January, 
if we are looking at it
, would be just to continue the $40 
billion
.  To me, $40 
billion 
seems like a more plausible number 
there.
  And we have talked about it with the D
esk
, and the
ir view is that it™s consistent with both 
our operational capacity and with market functioning even if extended for a long period, longer 
than I expect 
that
 we would actually do it. 
In paragraph 4, I would proposeŠand there were views on different sid
es here
Šwe use 
the 
second language, ﬁundertake additional asset purchases and employ its other policy tools.ﬂ 

Governor Duke spoke against this because she mentioned IOER and discount window lending.  

Of course, those are Board tools, but the other tools 
that the FOMC has 
are the statement 
language and the guidance, and certainly that could be part of additional steps that we take in 

January or whenever it is that we begin to review the situation.  If no one has too strong an 

objection, I™d like to use that second phrase 
with
 the understanding, which I will make clear if 
asked, that what we mean by that is communicationŠwhich is the other topic I talked about in 

Jackson Hole.  I don™t want to make any other changes.  We do have the phrase ﬁas appropriate.ﬂ 

That already convey
s the notion of conditionality, the fact that we may or may not take action.  It 
depends on what the economic outlook is, and I think that™s very important. 
           
                
          
         I forgot to say, by the way, on 5Ša point that Governor Raskin madeŠ
that I think the 
reason that there has been in the SEP, as well as in th
e guidance, a fairly sharp movement into 
the future of the expected takeoff date is not really because there™s been a massive deterioration 
in the outlook, but 
that 
the Committee has come to the view that a somewhat 
more extended 
period of low ratesŠfor reasons articulated by the artist formerly known as Michael Woodford 

[l
aughter]
Šcan be helpful in a zero lower bound situation, and I will try to make that point also 
in the press conference. 
To summarize
Šand I look 
around the table, if there are any voters who are extremely 
bothered, please let me knowŠI would propose to choose $40 billion and $85 billion from the 

third line from the bottom, propose to insert the phrase ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ after ﬁeach 

month,ﬂ and then in paragraph 4, I propose to take the second option, ﬁunder
take additional asset 
purchases, 
and employ its other policy tools as appropriate.ﬂ 
Are there any comments? 
President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  May I just ask a question? When we say ﬁin a 
context of price stability,
ﬂ we also mean well
-anchored inflation expectations
, is that correct? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We do.  That™s the phrase.  I recognize it™s not completely 
grammatical as President Lacker pointed out, but the implication is that, of course, at all times 

we™ll maintain that conditionality as we undertake our policy. 
MR. FISHER.  And you will work that into your press conference if it™s appropriate. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, yes.  Absolutely. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  P
resident Lockhart. 
                      
   
                          
         MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
In paragraph 4, just a thought to throw 
on the table, and that is take the last sentence of 5
, inject it after the word
s ﬁprice stability,ﬂ so 
that the effect of the last two sentences would be t
o frame this whole question of continuing 
accommodation
Šin effect, framing the way we™re going to deliberate over this over the next few 
weeks. 
It seems to me comprehensive.  It refers to improvement in labor market conditions 
generally, and also of cours
e, efficacy and cost and all of that.  I can see combining those two 
sentences.  Each begins, for what it™s worth, with ﬁIn determining, –
ﬂ and that might make that 
paragraph a good set-up. I
™ll
 also point out that in all likelihood, the 
minutes 
are going
 to portray 
that we have given some consideration to threshold thinking, and so this would serve to frame 

that for the market reaction over the next few weeks.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Because 
it refers to the time horizon, wouldn™t th
at kind of 
language be more appropriate as we look toward the language of 
5?  In other words, I thought for 
a moment you were suggesting taking that and putting it at the end of 5. 
MR. LOCKHART. I™m actually thinking it might fit in 
4.  I put this on the 
table a little 
bit off the top of my head.  T
he Committee will continue its purchases, undertake additional asset 
purchases
, and employ its other tools until such improvement is achieved in the context of price 
stability.  In determining how long we™re going to do that, we™d take into account the pace of 

labor market conditions and so forth.  In determining the size, pace, and composition, as always, 

we™d 
take into account efficacy and cost.  I just saw that as a boxing of all of the things we would 
take in
to consideration if we go to essentially an open-ended kind of approach. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
In my press conference I™m going to be very clear that 
obviously this is not a numeric objective, and we™ll be looking at a range of employment and 

output indicato
rs, which all bear on the outlook for sustained improvement in labor market 
       
         
  
           
     
     
        conditions and declining unemployment, and I™d rather convey that breadth verbally.  I™m afraid 
we™re getting a little complicated. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Fair enough. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Ye
s, I had the same reaction that you had. I didn™t see 
how it would fit in 4 because you hadn™t really explained the forward guidance yet.  One could 

take the last sentence 
of 
4 and the last sentence
 of 5
 and make a new 
paragraph 6 and sum up.  
Then you™d have the statement about asset purchases, the statement about forward guidance, and 

a summary paragraph that said
, ﬁin determining both these things.ﬂ  That would be more logical. 
MR. LACKER.  A paragraph full of escape clauses, in other words. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Essentially. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I was going to ask a question about something else. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead. 

MR. LACKER. 
In the forward
-guidance lan
guage, we deleted the economic conditions 
clause there.  We™ve had a lot of discussion of Professor Woodford™s paper.  We™ve talked  a lot 

about that in the context of 5
 and that language, but I™m thinking that what you had in mind by 
deleting the economi
c conditions clause was in part motivated by his critique as well, the idea 
that by saying it™s conditions that are pushing the time horizon out, we were focusing on how bad 

things 
are
.  The intention, as I read you, is for us to be communicating more about our reaction 
function. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s right. 
      
    
      
          
         
        
    
     MR. LACKER.  I want to re-
ask a question I asked earlier this year.  When
 we adopted 
this 
language
, we never really got clear on whether it™s a commitment or not.  W
e wrestled with 
different versio
ns of what that meant.  Is this signaling that we™re going to pursue an action that 
later on we would not want to pursue then? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it™s still conditional because it obviously depends on 
the timing of the recovery and so on. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  So it™s contingent. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I mentioned the SEP changes and so on
.  I think we 
around this table have moved to the view that communicating low rates for longer 
in a way that 
may require some credibility is an approach to dealing with the zero lower bound, not in an 

extreme way, but I think there is some of that now in the statement. 
MR. LACKER. 
We have a statement
, and we can walk away from this and each interpret 
it in our own way, 
or we can have a Committee sense of what 
we™re doing. Is policy in the 
future to be conditioned on this?  In other words, as Woodford suggests, is policy going to be 

history-dependent? 
Is t
he fact that we said 
this going to alter future policy
? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In my Jackson Hole remarks, 
I talked about the guidance.  I 
said it was conditional, dependent on the state of the economy.  B
ut in explaining the time, I said 
we look at rules and optimal control and those sorts of things, but we also take into account some 
other factors such as downs
ide risks, the effects of the 
zero lower bound, and implicitly I said the 
possibility that the equilibrium real rate of interest is lower than normal
Šthat is,
 headwinds.  So 
I am conveying, I think, some sense that in order to achieve more stimulus today, 
there™s a bit of 

a commitment element there
ŠI don™t think we™ve gone too far out on a limb on this. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 
              
   
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
                      
                                                              CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Can we go ahead? 
MS. DANKER.  This vote is on alternative B, as amended by the Chairman, and the 
associated 
directive. 
Chairman Bernanke 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
Governor Duke 
Yes 
President Lacker 
No President Lockhart 
Yes 
President Pianalto 
Yes 
Governor Powell 
Yes 
Governor Raskin 
Yes 
Governor Stein 
Yes 
Governor Tarullo 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
Governor Yellen 
Yes 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
We have a few other items
.  We™re going to 
hear a little bit about the implementation
, we™re going to do very quickly the forecast, but if 
everybody is okay, why don™t we just go ahead and tak
e a 15 minute coffee break? 
[Coffee 
break] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don™t we 
recommence
? Let me turn the floor 
over to L
orie 
Logan, who will talk a bit about the operational aspect. 
MS. LOGAN.
8  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I will offer a brief descrip
tion of how 
the Desk plans to implement the Committee™s decision regarding the 
SOMA 
portfolio.  
Consistent with recent practices, the Desk intends to release a statement 
with operational details on this initiative at the same time as the release of the FOM
C statement.  A draft of the Desk statement is provided in the handout for your 

reference, with the exception that we will add the clause ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ 

into the second sentence of the second paragraph. 
Based on the directive, the Desk inten
ds to expand the SOMA™s holdings of 
agency MBS by 
$40 billion per month and maintain the existing policy for 

reinvesting agency principal payments.  Our current projections indicate that through 

the end of the year, paydowns on the agency debt and MBS port
folios will result in 
average monthly reinvestment purchases of roughly $30 billion.  Thus, combined 
8 The materials used by Ms. 
Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 8). 
                                   
  
       
    
        purchases will initially total around 
$70 billion per month and constitute about three-
fourths of monthly TBA gross issuance. 
Should the purchases extend for 10 months, as was considered in Tealbook B, we 
anticipate that the SOMA™s ownership share of the outstanding fixed-
rate agency 
MBS market would grow from about 18 percent to 27 percent, and that™s over a 

10-month horizon. 
In line with the current practice for reinvestment operations, the Desk plans to 
conduct the additional purchases 
in the newly issued securities in the to
-be-announced market, or TBA market.  These securities represent the most liquid sector 

of the MBS market, allowing purchases to be made in large size and are most closely 

tied with the primary mortgage rate. 
The Desk may purchase other agency MBS if 
market conditions warrant. 
The Desk intends to conduct these additional purchases internally as we™ve been 
doing for some time rather than relying on an investment manager to conduct the 

trades on our behalf.  We expect to be active almost every day
, and purchase 
operations will continue to be conducted in a competitive auction format with the 

primary dealers.
  Further, the Desk will continue the practice established at the end of 
last year of margining the unsettled MBS transactions with the primary dealers. 
Given the substantial portion of issuance being purchased and the uncertainty 
associated with MBS supply, the Desk will continue to conduct dollar roll 

transactions when necessary to facilitate the settlement of our purchases. 
Dollar rolls 
can be used to postpone or accelerate the delivery of purchases based on indications 

of the availability of agency MBS for settlement. 
In the reinvestment operations to 
date, the size of dollar rolls needed to postpone settlement have been fairly small, at 

about 5 percent of purchases, though this amount is likely to increase with the 

additional asset purchases. 
We will al
so use coupon swaps, 
if needed
, to facilitate settlement, as was the case 
in 2010.  A coupon swap would allow the Desk to exchange unsettled purchases in a 

given agency MBS coupon for other coupons more readily available for settlement.  

However, we do not envision needing to conduct such transactions, except in very 

rare cases where persistent supply problems suggest that settlement of purchases
, even over several months, is unlikely. 
The purchases of agency MBS securities under this new asset purchase pro
gram 
will begin tomorrow.  We plan to have two separate announcements for MBS 

operations going forward, one for the new purchases and one for the continued 

reinvestments.  The Desk will publish the monthly asset purchase amounts along with 

the announcement of the Treasury MEP operations around the last business day of 

each month.  Given there are only 17 calendar days remaining in September, we will 

purchase a pro rata share of the monthly pace in September of about $23 billion. 
           
   
                    
      
          In addition, we will continue to publish around the eighth business day of each 
month the planned amount of reinvestment purchases for the next month.  Thus, there 

will also be a new reinvestment purchase amount target posted today at the same time 

as the Desk™s operating statement is released.
  That concludes my comments.  Thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
Any questions?  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. 
Help us interpret financial market data going forward.  What do you 
expect?  Because
 our purchases don™t include TIPS, should we factor something in about TIPS 

yields?
  Are they in the habitat, out of the habitat? 
MS. LOGAN.  In our MEP purchases, we purchase TIPS today. 

MR. LACKER.  You do? 

MS. LOGAN.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  O
kay. 
MR. POTTER.  The MEP is still ongoing. 

MR. LACKER.  But we weren™t proposing to do it in the overall asset purchase program, 
were we? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Sorry? 
MR. LACKER.  Include TIPS. 

MS. LOGAN. If we 
had added purchases under a new asset purchase 
program for 
Treasuries, we would have done so. 
MR. LACKER. 
Okay.  You would.  Sorry.  I misread something then.  I apologize.  
Let 
me ask another question.  How linked is the private-
label MBS market to agency MBS yields? 
Do you anticipate this pushing that spread apart? 
MS. LOGAN.  I think 
the way we™ve been estimating these effects is that the MBS 
purchases would affect the Treasury term premium, and to the extent that the 
pass
-through from 
the lowering of interest rates moves other asset markets, equities
, or the private-
label market
Š                
      
   
                  
  we t
alked about what that pass-through is.  There™s some uncertainty, but we would expect the 
channel to be through that form.  I guess there could be some other form because it is MBS, and 
private label is a little bit more closely connected than maybe from T
reasuries to private label, 
but overall we have been expecting the pass
-through to happen through lowering interest rates 
more broadly. 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  R
elative to buying Treasuries, we™re tilting credit from the 
private-
label market to the agency market.  Thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  I™d just like to say something about the private label 
because there has been 
almost no issuance of private label in a number of years because there™s just not much supply out 

there.  There is 
a little bit of jumbo issuance.
  Again, in the spirit of things that are cooking out 
there, the Federal Home 
Loan Banks, particularly I think the H
ome 
Loan Bank of Chicago 
is 
now looking at consolidating jumbo securities from banks across the country, not 
just that are in 
the Chicago 
district
, and feeding them through Redwood to try to generate some more broader 
private-
label issuance
, for
 jumbo and more broadly. 
I would expect that to the extent that that 
happens, it certainly wouldn™t be unhelpful.  It 
might be helpful. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, but what they™re saying is that compared 
with 
buying Treasuries 
only, this is reducing agency MBS yields by moreŠTreasury yields will fall, but not as much as 

what they would fall if we bought Treasuries only.  T
hey™re 
tilting the playing field away from 
everything priced on Treasuries toward agency MBS. 
MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we™re still buying $45 billion of long-
term Treasuries 
in the MEP right now. 
                                                                                                     MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, I know that, but the apples-
to-apples thing 
is 
$40 billion agency 
MBS versus 
$40 billion Treasuries in this setting, and comparing those two, private-
label MBS 
yields are going to be higher, given that we™re buying agency MBS, than they would be if we 
were buying Treasuries only. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDL
EY.  They™re not going to be higher.  They™re not going to 
drop as much, presumably. 
MR. LACKER.  Exactly.  They™re going to be higher than they would in the alternative. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In that respect we don™t care because they™re not being 
created. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, they would be even less created now. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I don™t actually think we know very much about what would happen to 
private-
label MBS yields because there™s so little issuance; there™s so little pricing information. 
It™s conceivable 
that pushing down agency MBS would also push down private-
label MBS 
yields, but I don™t think we know because there hasn™t been much issuance there and we don™t 

have information. 
MR. POTTER.  The stronger the housing market is, the more it should support t
he 
private-
label market coming back and having more capacity. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
9 Let™s go on to the consensus forecast.  This, of course, is 
still an exercise.  We™re still working to figure out what we™re going to do. 
You have in front of 
you the consensus forecast.  If you turn to page 3, and we look at the forecast inclusive of the 

policy action today, that would be best approximated, I guess, by the line 
that 
says, ﬁPlus 
$750 billion LSAP program.ﬂ  That™s the post-
action
 policy forecast, and note th
at it includes the 
jointly determined federal funds rate at the bottom.  What I™d like to do is ask each person to say 
9 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 
6).       
   
                           
            one of three things.  Either you broadly agree with the forecast as given or you agree with 
reservations
Šlet me go back a second.
  As part of our exercise 
the staff, I believe, is intending to 
write up our discussion as if it were a quarterly monetary policy report, and what they will do is 

if you agree but with reservations, they will write up your reservations in minutes 
style 
descri
bing without attribution what the concerns were that people raised about the forecast.  
The 
other possibility is if you just disagree with the forecast, you should say so and explain why, and 

then they™ll write up the monetary policy report with attributio
nŠthat™s the plan
Šand say, 
again, what it is that you disagree about.  Y
es, President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  I don™t understand.  Are these two different plans or are these two 
different options for us? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Two different options. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
  You have three choices.  When I go around the table, you 
have three choices. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  We 
can disagree anonymously or 
with attribution? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree modestly and anonymously. 

MR. LACKER. 
Mod
estly and anonymously. 
CHAIR
MAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree violently and for attribution.  [Laughter] 
MR. 
LACKER
.  And there™s a threshold.  
[Laughter] 
Or is it a 
trigger? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Can I bring up just one more thing? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  For those people who strongly disagree, we™re also asking 
them to submit in the next few daysŠby MondayŠa paragraph or so explaining why, and we 

will eventually put this into a document and then circulate it back to the Committee. 
                           
  
      
  
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is everybody o
kay? 
MS. DUKE.  Can I just ask one question about agreeing with reservation?  I
f we™re 
comparing it with 
the 
$750 billion 
LSAP program
, and in voting for alternative B, I didn™t 
assume that the purchases went past the
 end of the year, w
ould that be a reser
vation? 
I just want 
to know how to characterize 
it.  What does ﬁwith reservationﬂ mean? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
I think you assume
 that you should take the Tealbook 
assumption here, the $750 billion, and say:  Would the economic path shown here be a 
reasonabl
e approximation of what you would anticipate, given the policy action taken?  And if 
not, why not? 
MS. DUKE.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay?
  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Am I agreeing that this is a consensus forecast or am I agreeing that 
this is ac
tually my forecast?  Because I submitted my forecast
. And you can see point for point, 
you know, where they™re different and where they™re not. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We™re trying to determine if it is a consensus, and therefore, 
we™re asking if you yourself find itŠ 
MR. EVANS
.  Is it close enough? 
MR. BULLARD.  I think it™s a good consensus.  It™s not as accurate asŠ 

MR. 
FISHER
.  I™m trying to remember my specific numbers.  All I remember is that 
I was in the central tendency. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So why don™t 
you just report what you reported and say if 
you think it™s broadly consistent with this or not? 
            
            
             
     MR. WILCOX.  This is an effort to ascertain the extent to which participants can affiliate 
themselves with the consensus forecast. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Preside
nt Fisher. 
MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry. 

MR. TARULLO.  I think it™s not unlike what we do with policy statements, which is to 
say everybody would have written it somewhat differently, but in the end can you kind of go 

along with 
it? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Ye
s, that™s what it is.  That™s right. 
MR. FISHER.  You said there were three questions.  Do we agree with the forecast?  Do 
we have reservations?  If so, what are they?
  What™s the third? 
MS. 
DUKE.  Do you disagree? 
MS. YELLEN. Do 
you have a fundamentally different view? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you fundamentally disagree with the forecast?  And 
remember it™s not about whether you agree with the policy action or not.  This is conditional on 

the policy action.  Conditional on the policy action, do you agree more or less with the forecast 

that™s been presented? 
MR. FISHER.  And if we have reservations, we should submit them.  Is that what you 
were saying earlier? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, Janet, would you like to 
comment? 

MS. YELLEN. I
f you broadly agree but have some reservationŠyou™re slightly more 
optimistic about the forecast
, you have a different view on oil prices, but aside from that you 

basically agree this is a reasonable forecast contingent on the policy path
Šthen say you agre
e                  
                   
         with reservations.  And 
the write
-up, as in the minutes, 
will say 
people have expressed some 
reservations, but nevertheless associate themselves overall with the view. 
The staff will write up 
the discussion of what the reservations were.  But those who 
just have a basically different view 
of the forecast should say so, and then there will be a few paragraphs they™ll submit, 
and that will 

be included in the document 
with attribution
.  This would be a portion of a monetary policy 
report where there would be a discussion of the diversity of views.  Think of this as a diversity of 

views and say 10 people supported the forecast without reservation.  Several people had 

reservations of the following sort, and four had essentially different views.  Here are the 

submissions.  In your paragraph, 
you™d describe 
and 
explain why your views are essentially 
different. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Let me just make sure I understand.  We™re assuming the 
policy path, this policy action? 
MS. YELLEN. Yes. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes, tha
t™s what we are doing today. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  So we™re not having individual ﬁappropriate 
monetary policy.ﬂ 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
No.  It™s just given what we passed today, is this a reasonable 
forecast
? MR. LACKER.  Wait.  That™s different than a policy path. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I™m going to suggest something slightly different from what 
Chairman Bernanke said, which is:  Given the policy decision today, if you look at the numbers 

that go along with that 
$750 billion LSAP programŠforget about whet
her the 
$750 billion is 
correct or not because you may think it will end up being $500 b
illion or 
some 
other numberŠ 
                              
     
    
              
 do you think that™s a reasonable forecast? I
s it close enough for talking purposes?  But if you 
think this is the wrong model of the world, the economy is just going to look a lot different, so 
much so that you want to, in effect, dissent, then you™re in the third category.  The middle 

category is a little tougher, but I think the two ends are very clear. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Everybody, this is a trial run.  [Laughter]  W
e™re trying to 
find out what works and what doesn™t work.  We may have already found out what doesn™t work. 

President Fisher, did you have a comment or question or you™re okay? 
MR. FISHER.  I™m fine. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You™re 
fine.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
My question was would it be better to try to have a little 
bit better understanding about what ﬁclose toﬂ is or would 
it be everyone™s personal view of what 

ﬁclose toﬂ is? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It™s your judgment of whether you 
sufficiently disagree that 
you want to have your name 
identified. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it does matter if people disagree
 or have different 
parameters in terms of how close is ﬁclose to.ﬂ  
We can do it either way, but you could argue th
at 
if you think the standard error is more than X, then you should disagree, or you could be a 

perfectionist and you disagree for very minute changes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So all of this is about reporting.  We™re trying to report the 
sense of the Committee
, and so how you would 
like the sense of the Committee reported 
is 
basically the question. 
MS. YELLEN. 
Right.  I
f we were really doing this
, the Chairman would be 
wal
king out 
into a press conference
 with these numbers, explaining the policy action, and pu
tting these 
      
     
                        
             
   
      numbers out to the public and saying, ﬁThis gives you a description of how we envision the 
economy unfolding with the policy decisions.
ﬂ  And the question is:  Would you be comfortable 

with these numbers as what he walks out into a press confer
ence 
with
? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I understand all of that, but let™s imagine that there™s half 
the people on the Committee who disagree for very small tolerances and
 half the people 
have 
very large tolerances. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Then no.  It should be 
meaningful tolerances. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It would be better if we had a more common metric 
about what 
the tolerances are. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, put it this way
:  Are you willing to write two paragraphs for Dave 
Reifschneider?  [Laughter]  That™s it, right? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, no, that™s different.  That™s 
a fundamental 
dis
agreement. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
The way I would put it is this.  I
f the consensus forecast came 
out like this
, and you were the sort of person who 
in a speech 
would say, ﬁI want to make an 
important point that my 
personal 
unemployment rate forecast at the end of 2015 would be one-
tenth lower,ﬂ then you should say you have reservations.  [Laughter]  But if you perhaps feel 

uncomfortable about making a big distinction abou
t one-tenth or so, thenŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There™s a standard error
, though, 
implicit in that. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I think there 
are
 two things.  One, there™s obviously a huge 
confidence interval around this, and so one way to look at 
it is 
that 
many 
differences just blur. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course. 
There will 
always b
e fan 
charts
.          
   
      
             
             
   
  MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  But does it make it a material difference f
or monetary policy, 
and the question might be if it™s 
one-tenth or so off on inflation or unemployment, you would say 
probably not. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s a good way of phrasing it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans, did you have a comment? 

MR. EVANS.  I was just thinking we should probably start [l
aughter]
, and then we™ll 
figure outŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNAN
KE.  Excellent suggestion.  All right.  Who would like to go 
first?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART. I endorse it.
  [Laughter and applause] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Very good.
  Anyone? President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Is it a good consensus?  I do think it™s a good consensus.  T
here are 
issues here about the mix between the forecast and the policy assumptions.  The way I did it was 

I had more inflation coming in the out years, and then I applied the outcome-based policy rule, 

which would then have the funds rate moving in a different way from here, and so the policy 

assumption then starts to also look different.  So I™m not quite sure what to make of this exercise.  

It™s fine as a statement of where the Committee is, and I would endorse it in that sense
.  As a general rule on this whole process, I don™t think 
that it
™s a good thing to get into 
the 
business of 

trying to dissent on a forecast because there are
 zillions of points here and a lot of subtleties here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
This is why we™re having a tr
ial run. 
MR. BULLARD.  Mildly different, I guess. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Broadly endorse. 
       
   
          
    
  
           
      
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Conditional on the policy path, I broadly endorse. 

CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Duk
e. 
MS. DUKE.  I actually normally would endorse, except that the reservation I would 
express at this point is that I think 2013 will be significantly lower because of the fiscal cliff. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MS. DUKE. 
That would be a reservation. 
CHAIR
MAN BERNANKE.  That™s a good example of a reservation.  Very good.  
Anyone else?  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Broadly endorse, but I have a weaker outlook.  So that™s my only 
reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor 
Yellen
. MS. YELLEN.  Broadly endorse. 

CHAIRMAN BE
RNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I see what I would term modestly more inflationary pressures 
than what are in this forecast, maybe one-tenth or two-tenths or three-
tenths more in inflation. 
With that said
, it comes 
back to what the Vice Chairman
 was talking about, that the choices of 
the Committee seem to be averse to those kinds of upticks in inflation.  For my own view, I think 

I would say I see modestly more inflationary pressures than what are in this. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fine.
  Governor Stein. 
MR. STEIN.  
I broadly endorse the baseline.  I™m not sure if I would be a weak deviator 
on the conditional effect of policy in the sense that I think that the incremental effect of the 
          
   
           
               LSAP is going to be roughly half of what it™s projected to be.  I™m not quite sure where that puts 
me. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  You sound like a ﬁ
two
ﬂ to me. 
MR. STEIN.  That feels like a 
ﬁtwo
ﬂ to you? 
PARTICIPANT
.  Do you want to write two paragraphs? 
MR. 
STEIN
.  No, I don™t want to write 
any para
graphs.  I want to hide in the weeds.  
[Laughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren said he broadly endorses.  President 
Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  I modestly endorse it.  It might scare people in terms of my forecasting.  I 
was within the central tendency.  They might want to change their forecast based on where I 

would be, with the exception of the funds rate, and I™d have to think about that.  But generally, 
I endorse.  
I will say this, Mr. Chairman
: Fiscal cliff, no fiscal cliff, et cetera
Šand I said this in 
my write
-upŠgoing beyond the first part of 2013 is largely pure guesswork. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In some positive sense, that™s true.  In a normative sense, 
we do need to find some kind of plan. 
MR. FISHER.  I understand that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We h
ave to have some kind of projection to base our 
thinking on. 
MR. FISHER.  With that caveat, it™s a wonderful exercise. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Obviously, yes.  O
ne of the benefits of this exercise
, I hope, 
is that we will be able to show fan charts that will g
ive some sense of the uncertainty. 
President 
Pianalto. 
        
             
  
       
   
  
               
   MS. PIANALTO.  I broadly endorse the forecast, although my forecast is slightly weaker 
for 
GDP growth and unemployment in the later years 
partly because
, like Governor Stein, 
the 
effectiveness of poli
cy is just a little weaker in my forecast. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good.  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  I broadly endorse, but two things about the process as opposed to th
e substance
.  One, the issue that arose at the outset that Betsy mentioned is somethin
g that people 
are going to have to think about, which is, what if we emerge from a meeting with a policy 

action that really isn™t any of the ones that are listed there?
  And, secondly, this 
category 
two
ŠI have a feeling
Šis going to be problematic in the fo
llowing respect. I have heard several people 
already who might have fit themselves into 
category 
two, a
nd if you end up saying, ﬁWe™ve got a 
consensus forecast
Š14 of the 17 members of the FOMC had qualifications on it,ﬂ I™m not sure 
how powerful 
it becomes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, the interesting question is whether or not a number of 
them had the same qualification. If they™re all nitpicks, 
that™s one thing, but if everybody said, 
ﬁThis doesn™t take enough account of the fiscal cliff,ﬂ then that would be something that should 

be communicated I think. 
MR. TARULLO.  Fair enough.  T
here may be some utility in thinking about moving to a 
binary 
system 
as we do with the statement.  You are either endorsing or you are not, but giving 
people a chance 
to comment, so if they say something like Betsy said a minute ago, it could be 

included in the explanation of the consensus. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s fine. 

MR. TARULLO.  But that™s just something to think about. 
                 
    
     
                  
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  Thank you.  We are looking for suggestions.  Anyone 
else?  Vice Chairman
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I agree with Governor Tarullo.  You don™t have to frame 
it as a reservation.  You can just frame it as where people would prefer to tilt the forecast.  I™m 
with Betsy on the f
iscal restraint. I am assuming that 
we will get some fiscal restraint 
next year
, and it will be more problematic to the outlook, so we have somewhat weaker growth in 2013.  

That said, I think this is a pretty good forecast.  T
hat is why I was getting at t
he point of, how 
much do you disagree? I am pretty confident that the economy will be weaker in 2013 than this 

forecast, but if I take this whole thing in its entirety, I wouldn™t really quibble about it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I 
have a tiny reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, the question is, would you object to my 
hypothetically taking this, putting this on the screen, and saying, ﬁThis is the Committee™s 

consensus forecast of what the economy is going to look likeﬂ? 
VICE CH
AIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it would also be good, though, to say, ﬁA few people 
thought that 2013 could be a little weaker becauseﬂ blah, blah, blah.  But I would do it in 

Governor Tarullo™s two-
bucket camp
 rather than three-
bucket camp. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agr
ee. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thanks.  Anyone else? 

MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 
               
  
    
             
       
               
     MR. PLOSSER.  I would say my forecast differs from this, obviously, and I think it is 
likely to show up 
in the assumption about current policy.  We are going to see more inflationary 
pressures and less positive outlooks on output and employment. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 
MR. LACKER.  I still don™t have a clear, coherent sense of what policy I am supposed to 
be conditioning on.  Am I foreca
sting the Committee?  I think I am.  So on that basis, I might 
provide a good test case here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MR. LACKER.  First of all, coming into this, on appropriate policy, I was weaker in 
2013 by a couple of tenths.  And I saw inflation a couple of tenths stronger, closer to 2 
percent 

over the next 
year 
or two, getting to 2 
percent 
next year. 
So I would have put policy to 
rais
e rates earlier. 
Modifying that in terms of making it a forecast of the Committee™s action, I would 
mark up inflation in 2014. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sounds right.  Anyone else? 

MR. FISHER.  Can I ask a question on that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Forgive me.  I™m slower than everybody else at the table.  In releasing 
this, we would be releasing the funds path? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Releasing what? 

MR. FISHER.  The funds path, 
the fed funds rate forecast as well
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes
. MR. BULLARD. If you are a year earlier, is that a significant reservation?  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I™m sor
ry. 
                       
  
                
   
         MR. BULLARD.  A year earlier on the funds rate, is that a significant reservation? 
MS. DUKE.  But is that a difference in the policy path?  Because the policy path assumes 
2015 liftoff. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
  You could have 
a different reaction functio
n. MR. 
BULLARD
.  But then you™ve got to do your presumably out
come
-based
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
Based on the original line of comments where we asked you to 
condition on the forecast, and you submitted something 
that
 had higher inflation, I would have 
said t
hat you were a 
ﬁthree
ﬂ because you showed that, conditioned on sticking with the August 
statement
-type policy, you had much higher inflation than this forecast, and that should be 
exaggerated more based on the policy.  So I would have said that you™re a 
three. 
MR. BULLARD.  But I don™t think I am outside of these confidence bands. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I don™t think that is relevant.  It goes back to the question of, 
do you think that your forecast, from a policy perspective, would be materially different? 
MR. BULLARD. 
Again, I just don™t think getting into dissenting on a forecast is a 
sensible thing to do.  Has the Chairman done a good job of characterizing the center of the 

Committee?  Yes. I think yes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Lockhart. 

MR. 
LOCKHART.  I want to make sure I understand.  The next step is to write up a 
mock quarterly monetary policy report or something like that? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  I™m sorry.  Just a description of this discussion. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Right.  But we see how 
it is going to be communicated, how it is 
going to be implemented, is that right? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  That™s 
the purpose. 
                        
      
            MR. WILCOX.  Just the diversity of views portion. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  Okay. 

MS. DUKE.  For the mock exercise, in addition to my own fiscal cliff reservation, can I 
sign up to Sandy and Jeremy™s reservation about the effectiveness? 
MR. 
REIFSCHNEIDER
.  Oh, sure. 
MS. DUKE.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else?  [No response]  All right.  Yes? 

MR. POWELL.  I™m on that line b
etween the one and the two for exactly the same 
reason
.  I went with the one, but of course I do have the same reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
A question to be thinking about here is
:  What would 
Governor Powell do if he thought that the policy action is 
weaker than we anticipate, but the 
underlying economy is stronger, so that the outlook looks okay for him? 
MR. POWELL.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Because we are not showing a comparison, right?  We are 
just showing the ex post. 
MR.
STEIN
.  Oh, you™re just showing the ex post. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that™s the question.  T
hat™s what we™re discussing 
here.  We haven™t asked the question whether or not you think the baseline is adequate. 
MR. FISHER.  You might 
have to prepare for your press conference. 
CHAI
RMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Do you have a question or a comment? 
MR. FISHER.  Well, the plan is, once we get this nailed down, that you would then refer 
to it in your press conference. Is that correct? 
                             
   
     
            CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And then, we are hoping at some point t
o have a monetary 
policy report. 
MR. FISHER.  Which you would still refer to the consensus forecast in. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nothing is nailed down.  One possibility, which Governor 
Tarullo alluded to, is that we can™t do this in a timely way because we don™t know what the 

policy action is going to be soon enough, in which case it might be something that only appears 

in publication with the minutes, for example, three weeks later. 
MR. FISHER.  I agree with Governor Tarullo, by the way.  H
e makes an excellent
 point.  
My next question would be:  Could you summarize what we just discussed as though we were at 

a press conference? It probably would be difficult at this juncture. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would say that this is the forecast 
of the Committee.
 A few 
people disagreed, thinking that these policies would lead to higher inflation.  Most people 
agreed with the broad contours, except they pointed out a few issues related to the fiscal cliff and 

the efficacy of policy.  
President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. I™m a lit
tle confused.  Someone used the phrase ﬁa diversity section.ﬂ 
But you, at the beginning, describedŠI think you did in this contextŠ
a minutes
-like document, 
and in the minutes, of course, when they discuss participants™ views, the different views are sort 

of woven into the main narrative.  I wasn™t quite clear on what you guysŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I just learned about this five minutes ago myself. 

MR. LACKER.  Okay. Great. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I think the plan is to have a document that describes the 
consensus forecast, gives its main feature, 
and shows 
it in 
a minutes
-type discussion: ﬁ
The 
Committee discussed it. Most agreed with it
 but raised the following points anonymously.  
            
          
 President Lacker thought that it was
 a bunch of garbage.ﬂ  [Laughter]  And that would be the 
content. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay
, we will just have to start. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I hope this was helpful to you 
all
.  [Laughter]  Just 
so you have something to look forward to, our current plan is to talk about this exercise in 
October, so be sure and make your plane reservations now.  [Laughter] 
The next meeting is 
TuesdayŒWednesday, October 23Œ24.  
The press conference 
is 
at 2:15.  There will be a 
TV in 
the Special Library
, and lunch is available if you would like to stay.  No presentations are 
planned.  Thank you very much. 
END OF MEETING 
             
                                                
  Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
 on September
 12Œ13, 2012 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, September 12, 

2012, at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Thursday, September 13, 2012, at 8:30 a.m.  Those present 

were the following: 
Ben Bernanke, Chairman 

William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 

Elizabeth Duke 

Jeffrey M. Lacker 

Dennis P. Lockhart 

Sandra Pianalto 

Jerome H. Powell 

Sarah B
loom Raskin 
Jeremy C. Stein 

Daniel K. Tarullo 

John C. Williams 

Janet L. Yellen 
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, and Eric 
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Ko
cherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively 

William B. English, Secretary and Economist 
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary 

Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 

David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 

Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, Wil
liam Nelson, David 
Reifschneider, Glenn D. Rudebusch, William Wascher, and John A. Weinberg, Associate 
Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Govern
ors 
                                                                                                              Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; 
Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, 

Board of Governors 
Andreas Lehnert,
1 Deputy Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, 
Board of Governors 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Di
rector, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
Brian
 J. Gross,
2 Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 

Eric M. Engen, Michael G. Palumbo, and Wayne Passmore, Associate Directors, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Fabio M. Natalucci, Deputy 
Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Edward Nelson, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
Kelly J. Dubber
t, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, respectively 
Cletus C. Coughlin, Troy Davig, 
Mark E. Schweitzer, and Kei
-Mu Yi, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Cleveland, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 
1 Attended Wednesday™s session only. 
2 Attended Thursday™s session only. 
                                                               Lorie K. Logan, Jonathan P. McCarthy, Giovanni Olivei, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,
3 Vice 
Presidents, Federal R
eserve Banks of New York, New York, Boston, and New York, 
respectively 
Michelle Ezer,
4 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
3 Attended after the discussion o
n potential effects of a large
-scale asset purchase program. 
4 Attended the discussion on potential effects of a large
-scale asset purchase program. 
                           
                   
            
                                                          Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
September 12
Œ13, 2012 September 12 Session 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  Our first item is 
a staff report 
on the potential effects of large-
scale asset purchases.  Seth Carpenter will lead, but Vice 
Chairman 
Dudley would like to introduce the other presenter. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would like to introduce Michelle Ezer from the 
Markets Group.  Michelle and I actually had the interesting experience of writing a paper on the 
case for TIPS
, right in the heart of 
the financial crisis, along with Jennifer Roush
. I am not really 
sure how I managed to do that during that period, but, obviously, Jennifer and Michelle did most 

of the work.  So she is a coauthor. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay
, thank you.  Seth. 
MR. 
CARPENTER.
1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the 
material that™s 
labeled ﬁPotential Effects of a Large
-Scale Asset Purchase Program
.ﬂ  The Committee received three memos from the staff discussing various aspects of 
potential new large
-scal
e asset purchase (LSAP) programs.  I will discuss some 
considerations about how LSAP programs might be structured, and Michelle will 

discuss the balance sheet and income implications, along with the associated exit 

issues. 
When considering the financial and economic effects of LSAPs, the staff analysis 
starts from 
a term 
structure 
model that embeds Treasury and MBS supply factors as 
determinants of 
the yield 
curve.  
These effects depend on market participants™ beliefs 
about the entire trajectory of the SOMA
 portfolio™s holdings of securities and the 
types of those securities.  The FRB/US model assumes that declines in the 
10-year 
Treasury yield pass through roughly one-
for
-one to 
other market rates. 
In addition, 
the lower Treasury rate reduces the discount 
factor in pricing equities, boosting stock 
prices.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar falls as well.  For LSAPs that 

include purchases of MBS, there is an additional assumed reduction in MBS and 

mortgage rates.  Finally, the changes in these market 
variables are 
used to simulate 
the macroeconomic effects of these 
purchases using the FRB/US model. 
Of course, the results depend critically on the models used and a wide set of 
assumptions, any of which could be challenged.  First, in the staff models, the one-
1 The materials used by Mr. Carpenter and Ms. Ezer are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 
                   
             
                    
  
                     
      for
-one pass
-through from the 10-
year Treasury yield to other market rates could 
misstate the connection 
among 
these rates
.  For example, frictions like 
capacity 
restrictions 
for originations may prevent mortgage rates from fully adjusting
, at least 
in the short run.  Another source of uncertainty concerns the embedded effects on 

equity prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar.  Some event studies of 

previous unconventional balance sheet actions point to smaller effects than 

incorporated in
to staff analysis.  Finally, the macroeconomic effects of the changes in 

asset prices are calculated using the FRB/US model, and other models would 
of 

course 
yield results that could be larger or smaller. In short, while the projections 
represent the staff™s best assessment, the effects are clearly subject to considerable 

uncertainty. 
Buying either longer
-term Treasury securities or MBS should, in principle, put 
downward pressure on longer-
term interest rates and
, so, stimulate the economy. 
Although staff models suggest that purchases of MBS have 
a somewhat smaller effect 
than Treasury purchases on most longer-
term interest rates, they have somewhat 
larger effects on mortgage rates, and when translated into estimated macroeconomic 

outcomes, the differences 
are fairly small, especially relative to the substantial 
uncertainty that surrounds such estimates.  As a result, the staff memos did not 

provide clear guidance regarding the allocation of LSAPs between purchases of 

longer-
term Treasury securities and purchases of MBS. 
Looking at your first exhibit, to illustrate the macroeconomic effects that are 
implied by the staff models, we compare a projection in which the MEP, the Maturity 

Extension Program, is continued as plannedŠ
the solid
, dark blue lineŠ
to a 
projection that assumes 
that 
the Committee instead ends the MEP and purchases $600 
billion in Treasury securities and $400 
billion in MBS by late next year
.  That™s 
labeled 
option 1 
as in the staff memo
 and it™s the dotted blue line.  In addition to 
lowering term premiums from LSAPs, this option is also assumed to put downward 

pressure on longer-
term rates by pushing off the first increase in the federal funds rate 
by about six months.  This LSAP program is projected to boost real GDP, 
lower the 

unemployment rate, and increase the inflation rate somewhat.  As a consequence, 

more rapid progress toward both of the Committee™s goals is made.  The staff 

memorandum provided prior to your last meeting concluded that the purchases under 

such a 
program would not likely lead to a deterioration in market functioning.  

Michelle will 
later 
discuss some of 
the anticipated effects of the program on the 
Federal Reserve™s balance sheet and income. 
As I noted 
before
, the estimated interest rate effect of 
an LSAP depends on the 
public™s understanding of the FOMC™s intended plans for purchases and exit.  This 

consideration is particularly important for a flow
-based
 or open-
ended program that 
continues until a certain economic outcome is achieved.  If the public understands the 

FOMC™s stopping rule and has the same forecast for the economy as the Committee, 

and the economy evolves according to those projections, then our models would 

suggest that the flow-
based LSAP is 
roughly equivalent to a stock-
based LSAP 
of the 
same ultimate size.  Of course, the economy would likely not proceed exactly in line 

with expectations, so under a flow-
based LSAP, the anticipated total amount of asset 
             
      
        
         
          
                                 purchases would 
likely 
be more state dependent and evolve as the economy evolves.  
Option 4 in the memo entitled ﬁOptions for an Additional LSAP ProgramﬂŠ 

presented here 
as the dashed red lineŠwas intended to correspond roughly to such a 
program when the economy faces an adverse shock, and, as a result, purchases end up 

at a level tha
t is higher than originally assumed. If the ultimate size of purchases in 

this case is $2 trillion, our models suggest that the net effect would be somewhat 

smaller than if, from the beginning, a $2 trillion LSAP had been implemented.  

However, a flow-
bas
ed approach, if communicated clearly to the public, also could 
boost business and consumer confidence by reducing the odds of adverse tail 

outcomes and limiting the expected variance of economic outcomes.  This confidence 

effect is not captured in the staf
f projections but could be important
.  Alternatively, if 
the 
stopping rule is not clear, and the public believed that the Committee might stop 

purchases somewhat earlier than the Committee actually intended, then the interest 

rate effect 
could be reduced relative to what our models suggest.  
However, a
s the 
public came to understand the Committee™s stopping rule, the expected size of the 

SOMA portfolio would revise up, and the interest rate effects would become larger.  

Michelle is now going to discuss the 
balance sheet projections and some of the issues 
related to the exit. 
MS. EZER. 
Thanks, Seth.  As Seth mentioned, I will be discussing the balance 
sheet and income projections described in the LSAP options memo and associated 

exit issues.
  I plan to focus on the same two LSAP options Seth discussed, though the 
memo presented several options.  Turning to the top-left panel of exhibit 2, you can 

see the path of the portfolio under a baseline scenario in which MEP is completed and 

options 1 and 4 from the memo.  Under the latter two options, the portfolio grows 

significantly as a result of the asset purchases. 
Consistent with the exit principles, we 
assume that 
6 months prior to the first increase in the target federal funds rate, 
securities are allowed to ma
ture without reinvestment, and 6 
months after that first 

increase, sales of agency securities begin. These actions normalize the size of the 

portfolio through time.  The addition of a new LSAP program extends the period of 

time between the start of asset sales and when the portfolio normalizes in size. 
For 
example, under option 1 it takes 41 months for the portfolio size to normalize after 

the initiation of MBS sales.
  This is 6 months longer compared 
with 
the MEP 
scenario. 
In terms of Federal Reserve income, cumulative remittances to the Treasury over 
the projection period are lower than in a scenario with no additional LSAP.  
The 

lower remittances reflect higher inte
rest expense and the larger capital losses from 
MBS sales. 
Looking at the top-right panel, until 2016, remittances are higher under 
the LSAP scenarios, because of the higher interest income from the larger portfolio 

and minim
al additional interest expense
.  Thereafter, income is lower as a result of 
higher interest expense and larger capital losses. 
Under option 
1, annual remittances 
are projected to bottom out near zero.  By contrast, under option 
4, remittances fall to 

zero for more than 5 years, and a 
deferred asset is created. 
Of course, income and balance sheet projections can be sensitive to interest rate 
projections, and those projections are subject to uncertainty.  
One gauge of the 
               
          
       
   
              
       
    
  
           
              interest rate risk in the portfolio is presented in the middle
-left panel. Here, we 
present the projections of Federal Reserve remittances under an assumption that 

1 year after federal funds liftoff, the federal funds rate and 10
-year Treasury yield are 
100 basis points above the baseline levels, and these higher levels 
persist for the 
remainder of the projection period.  Under all of the LSAP options shown, the higher 

interest rate paths result in a period of no remittances to the Treasury and the creation 

of a deferred asset, as shown in the middle-right panel.  Under option 4, 
remittances 

to the Treasury would cease for a considerable number of years, and a substantial 

deferred asset would be created. 
The portfolio projections highlight two implications that an LSAP may have on 
the exit strategy.
 First, as shown in the bottom panel, the level of reserves would be 
higher at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate.
 Second, in order to 
remain consistent with the existing exit principles, MBS sales would need to take 

place over a shorter period than 5 
yea
rsŠthe period currently assumed in the 
projections.  
Absent a shorter MBS sales period, or other changes to the exit strategy, 

the size of the portfolio would not normalize within 2 to 3 years of the initiation of 

asset sales as anticipated by the exit strategy principles. 
Starting with the first point, under option 
1, reserve balances will be about 
$2.3 trillion at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate
Šabout $1 
trillion 
larger than expected under the current policy
, and also $1 trillion
 larger than assumed 
in June 2011.  
While increasing the IOER rate will raise short
-term market rates by 
itself, reserve
-draining tools can help to ensure a closer connection between the rates, 

and greater use of these tools may be needed
, given the increased quantity of reserves.  
The memo entitled ﬁThe 
Effect of an 
Additional $1 Trillion LSAP on the E
xit 
Strategyﬂ discussed the status of each of the different draining tools.  However, it is 

too early to provide specific details of a drain
ing plan
, because such a plan will 
depend on how markets evolve and the lessons learned once these tools are used in 

large scale. 
Turning to the second point, the exit strategy principles themselves will not have 
to change as a result of a new LSAP. The e
xpectation
, however, 
that the size of the 
balance sheet would be normalized within 2 to 3 years of assets sales might not hold, 

depending on the size of the 
asset purchase
 program.  Under option 1, by reducing the 
period of asset sales to 
3½ years from the
 5 years assumed in making the projections, 
the portfolio size would normalize within the assumed 2 to 3 
years. 
The s
taff 
currently believes that the faster average pace of MBS sales would likely be 

manageable from a market
-functioning perspective.  
That said, reducing the sales 
period would concentrate capital losses and result in Federal Reserve remittances 

declining to zero for a few years and create a deferred asset. 
In contrast, assumptions 
associated with the exit strategy principles would need to b
e altered under a $2 trillion 
LSAP like that under option 4.  Agency sales alone would not be enough to normalize 

the size of the balance sheet within 
2 to 3 
years of the initiati
on of asset sales in this 
case. 
Moreover, sales of securities in the volume envisioned under option 4 over a 
three
-year perio
d may cause market disruptions. 
          
                       
                  
In any event, the Committee may wish to review its exit principles periodically, 
particularly if the Committee implemented a flow
-based LSAP program, where the 
ultimate size o
f purchases would be unknown.  Adjustments to the principles could 
include more heavily relying on asset sales as a tool to drain reserves, for example, by 

expanding it to include a moderate pace of Treasury security sales. Asset sales could 

also occur so
oner.  
On balance, although the current exit strategy principles remain 
valid, additional analysis will be useful to determine 
whether alternate strategies 
might prove more helpful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Seth and I will be happy to 

answer any question
s. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Of course, this is just a summary of 
a lot of work that the staff has 
been doing on all aspects of asset purchases. You have received a 
number of memos.  Also, let me just mention that a little bit later this morning we will talk about 
the consensus forecast, which gives, in more detail, the staff projections of the effect
s of 
programs of different sizes on the economy.  
Let me now open the floor in case there are any 
questions 
for staff.  President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  I appreciate all of the 
work that went into this.  It has been quite helpful to me in thinking about what is going on.  Seth 

has made 
a good summary of the uncertainties and the range and assumptions that are needed to 

get the po
int estimates. 
I want to focus on two things. 
One has to do with the assumptions about market segmentation and 
pass
-through.  In 
some sense, the FRB
/US assumes
Šas you mentioned, SethŠ
that the 
pass
-through from the 
reduction of Treasuries to corporate and mortgage-
backed securities is one
-for
-one, which 
suggests, as you alluded to, that there is more segmentation across duration than there is across 

asset classes
, in the case of the models.  So one question I have would be, suppose that actually 
there was more segmentation across asset classes than across the term structure?  In other w
ords, 
if 
5-year 
Treasuries
 were a better substitute for 10-
year 
Treasuries
 than mortgage-
backed 
securities or corporate bonds are for 10
-year securities
Šwhich is the way it is kind of structured 
in the modelŠhow would that change your analysis of these e
ffects?  That is one question. 
                           
   
       
      
          
             
  
 And the second question is, you talked about the assumptions that are made and 
the 
uncertainties, and yet what we really got
, at the end of the day, w
ere 
some point estimates. 
So if 
I had to push you and I wanted to think about standard errors on these point estimates, how big 
do you think they are truly likely to be
?  Can we tell the difference, given the uncertainties 
among these different strategies
?  W
hat 
is 
your assessment of 
that? 
So those are the two 
questions I have. 
MR. CARPENTER.  Okay. 
The first question, what if there were more segmentation 
across asset types than across 
maturit
ies
? I think pretty clearly what you would see in that case 
is that we might have an effect on Treasury yields if we are buying 
Treasurie
s, and that would 
tend to push down 
Treasury 
yields and widen the spread relative to other asset types.  And to the 
extent that it™s other interest rates that have a direct effect on economic activity, you would get a 

smaller effect.
  So I think, in principle, that™s the way it would go. 
The hard part there
, I think, 
is there has clearly got to be a little bit of that going on.  And 
the previous memo about market functioning that we sent around said we might get to the point 

where you are buying so much that you are dislocating the 
Treasury 
curve from the rest of 
market interest rates. I think we are very sensitive to that possibility, and I think the staff 

conclusion so far is that we haven™t gotten to that point.  And I think some of the other studies of 

LSAPs and how they work also point to pretty substantial spillovers to other asset classesŠ
some 

Fed studies and some academic studies.
  So I think that™s a reasonable hypothesis to maintainŠ
I think 
it™s something that we will want to worry a lot about, esp
ecially if the purchases were so 
large that they were to somehow disrupt market functioning.  But my reading so far is that we are 

not there yet
, for some of those reasons. 
             
               
      
      
             
    
   Another reason isŠespecially if you go back to some of the previous LSAPsŠ
as the 
Desk has made clear what segment of the market we are buying
, there ha
ve been some pretty 
clear adjustments in interest rates at different points along the curve
.  This
 suggests 
that the 
maintained hypothesis that we have
, that the maturity matters a lot
, is coming through in some of 
the event studies.  W
hen the Desk helped the market understand exactly what the maturity 
distribution of purchases 
was 
going to be, we saw some movements of yields at the long end 
relative to the belly of the curve that suggest t
hat people see this sort of segmentation across 
maturities.  In addition, I think some of the reaction 
to the MEP caused us to feel 
a little bit better 
about that assumption.  The movement in the short rate relative to the long rate, once you control 
for e
xpectations, seemed 
to conform reasonably well with some of the inte
rest rate models that 
we have. 
So I think the short answer is you would get a widening of spreads, and to the extent that 
Treasuries are
n™t 
the thing that matter
s for economic activity, you would get less of an effect.  
On the other hand, if you were to do mortgage-
backed securities purchases, and the same 
hypothesis came up, then presumably you™d get a bigger effect just on the MBS rate, and 

presumably mortgages a
s well.
  And so the scenario you bring up might be an argument for 
having both asset classes
Šan argument
 that we didn™t cover in the memo.  I
f there is 
this 
segmentation across asset types, then buying both 
Treasuries
 and MBS may be a good thing to 
do, because then you will be able to affect both of those 
rates
, instead of relying on the purchases 
of 
Treasuries
 to also push down mortgage and MBS yields along with it. 
MR. PLOSSER.  To interrupt just a second on that point, though, that begs the question 
about 
buying MBS
Šlet™s say, 
even if it might help the mortgage market
.  You don™t have any 
evidence on whether that pass
-through 
to corporate and other asset classes is either differential or 
            
      
      
                 
the same or less than it would be with 
Treasuries
? Are you assuming 
that other asset classes 
would follow the same amount then, in that kind of story? 
MR. CARPENTER.  Right.  So I was trying to go into the counterfactual world where we 
are assuming this asset segmentation
.  And so there, 
there are 
lots of other hypotheses.  O
ur 
models sort ofŠ
and they are empirical models, where we get the results based on actual data
Š suggest that the purchases of MBS do have the same general effect on longer-
term interest rates 
by pulling out the longer-term assets and pushing things down.  I
f we had a different model, we 
would have to confront all of those same questions that you asked, including
, if there is a 
segmentation, what sort of 
pass
-through would there be?  But the models that we have, and the 
estimation that we have done, sugge
st that we are getting more or less the same effect on longer
-term rates of MBS and Treasuries
.  I was just saying, in the alternate version of the world, 
where 
there is a segmentation, 
it might be an argument for buying two different types of assets that 
we 
didn™t discuss in the memo. 
Your second question about standard errors is a really good one, and it is hard.  There are 
lots of different models that we have coming together, and I think Dave can probably speak 

really knowledgeably about the standard errors, especially from the FRB/US model.  But there is 

layering
, model upon model, 
to try to get these effects. 
I think we feel pretty good that we know 
for sure the sign of the first derivative, which is in what direction these things would happen.  

We pr
esented a lot of results, though, for different-
sized LSAPs in the memos, as Michelle 
pointed outŠ$750 
billion
, $1 trillion, 
$2 trillion. 
I think we can™t say with any confidence that 
we know the difference between a $750 billion LSAP and a $1 trillion LS
AP.  We are pretty sure 
we know that the 
$1 trillion
 one does more, but those are so close to each other that I don™t have 
       
              
      
                      
     
     
   
         much confidence in being able to differentiate.  
It™s t
hat sort of uncertainty 
I see, b
ut I don™t 
know if you want to talk about the 
macro effects. 
MR. PLOSSER.  I™m sorry.  Just to push it just a little bit.  So rather than the difference 
between 
$750 billion 
and 
$1 trillion, let™s just take one of them, the 
$1 trillion
 one.  And you 
estimate, what was it, 62 basis points on the unempl
oyment rate after two years?  Was that it? I 
can™t remember the exact number.  Whatever that number was, can you give me a standard 
error 
on that point estimate? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I™m going to come to that directly.  
First
, just to reiterate what 
Seth s
aid, your logic is correct.  To the extent that you think 
that the 
pass
-through 
from buying 
Treasuries 
into corporate 
bond yields
, stock market prices
, the exchange rate, 
and 
things like 
that
, are 
less than in the model simulations
, you are going to get smaller results. 
Second, I agree with Seth that the 
pass
-through 
effects 
that 
we have in there
Šas we have 
been saying right from the start back in 2008, early 2009Š
are
 highly uncertain.  And as time has 
gone on, I think the one source of uncertainty that has gone down is the 
concern
 about whether 
purchases 
would have any effect
.  At least we 
now 
think they ha
ve an effect. 
But having said 
that, 
there is 
still 
much uncertainty around these estimates. 
In terms of actually coming up with a confidence interval, I can™t do that, but I c
an say 
the following qualitative things that 
I think 
are helpful. 
First, take the model that Min We
i and 
Canlin 
Li 
developed that we are mainly using for pricing the effects on Treasuries
 and MBS.  
Now, that model kicks out a standard error.  I don™t know what it is, but it does not 
have 
tight 
error bands.  There is considerable width 
to the confidence intervals.  That said, we think the 
number is reasonable.  But could the number 
be somewhat smaller or somewhat bigger?  Yes. 
One point on why 
it could be bigger is, if you go back to the first LSAP, the event studies 
                                        
          
           suggested 
the LSAP
 might have lowered 
Treasury 
yields by 100 basis points.  
In the analysis that 
Min and 
Canlin
 are doing, it™s 50.  So that™s an example, 
where they are not necessarily taking 
the highest-
side estimates. 
There are other studies that suggest that we could be getting lower effects on financial 
markets than in the FRB/US analysis.  On the other hand, 
FRB
/US ignores some things, 
such as 
the 
potential 
pass
-through to house prices
; it has no effect 
in the simulations
.  And, there 
are 
confidence effects
 that Seth alluded to.  Even if you knew what the financial effects would be, 
there would still be a subs
tantial confidence interval for the economic effects
.  I don™t have them 
off the top of my head, but we have generated confidence bands for FRB/
US 
impulse responses 
over the years.  They are a lot like 
those in other models.  They are fairly significant 
around what 
the unemployment rate 
effect 
would be.  
The effect
 could be considerably closer to zero, or it 
could be bigger.  L
et™s say that
, for 
a given LSAP, the point estimate is a half a percentage point 
on the unemployment rate after three years
Šthat™s t
rue 
for the way we are scoring 
alternative 
B. Could it be a quarter?  Yes.  A quarter 
is certainly inside the 
70 percent 
confidence interval
.  Could it be three-quarters of a percentage point? Yes.  That would be inside the 70 
percent
.  So 
that™s just sa
ying what
, I think
, everyone agrees upon: there are v
ery wide confiden
ce intervals 
on these effects. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  While I was listening to Seth™s disclaimers at the beginning, it sort of 
sounds like an Allegra ad on television [l
aughter]
: These are the risks, et cetera.  And the papers 
actually were quite good.  The paper you particularly referenced had a lot of disclaimers in it.  

And what I am interested in seeing vetted more thoroughly is the degree to which this 

compounds the complexi
ty of a
n exit when we decide to exit. 
          
          
                        
    
     It seems to me one of the virtues of, 
particularly
, ﬁThe 
Effect of an 
Additional $1 T
rillion 
LSAP 
on the E
xit 
Strategy
ﬂ was the discussion of substantial uncertainty.  There are lots of 
quotes in there that are qualified. 
It seems to me that the proponents of 
an extended LSAP would 
take a view from a signaling channel perspective that one of its benefits is that 
it is effective 
precisely because it makes it more difficult to either raise short
-term interest rates or sh
rink the 
balance sheet for some time.
  And in a way, what I am concerned aboutŠand I am interested in 
learning more
Šis the degree to which we tie the hands of our successors, or if not tieŠ
maybe 
that is too strong a wordŠwe tangle their hands, and how much 
more difficult the exit strategy 
becomes. 
It strikes me that the stronger the recovery
Šthat is, the more rapidly we achieve 
equilibrium interest rates
Šthe harder it is going to be for us to exit.  And I would like to see that 
vetted a little bit more. 
I thought the papers touched on that, particularly the paper you referred 
to, but I think it would be helpful, Mr. Chairman, if we got a better sense of what complexities 
this imposes upon exit at the right time. Just a comment. 
MR. CARPENTER.  No, that™s 
really helpful. 
MR. FISHER.  I don™t know what your take is on this. 

MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely.  We clearly have a lot of details to write down.  So if 
the Committee wanted to exit 
next week
, or something like that, we would have lots and lots and 
lots an
d lots of details to write down, none of which are we prepared to give you right now, 
because the world presumably, between now and exit, is going to change.  And so it is going to 

take some time. 
That said, I just want to leave you with one thought.  When 
we were writing these 
memos, one of the first points that we wanted to have clear in our heads before writing themŠ
all 

of the staff who were working on this, including staff at the Desk who are experts on both 
      
  
                            
      
    
           
  
financial markets as well as 
the execution of things and the staff 
at the Board
Šwas
, does 
anybody think that if we were to do another LSAP as envisioned in these memos, that when the 
Committee wants to tighten monetary policy
, the staff would not be able to follow through on 
that
?  Because I wanted to make sure that everybody was able to look in their heart of hearts and 
say, ﬁWe think that the Committee will be able to tighten policy appropriately to hit its
 dual 
mandate,ﬂ and everybody said, ﬁYes, we think we are in that situation.ﬂ How we do it is not 

perfectly clear yet
, for a variety of reasons
.  But we would have had to write a very, very 
different memo
, I think, if we really thought there was some risk to the conduct of monetary 
policy in terms of our ability to execute the exit strategy. 
MR. FISHER.  You point out in the memo that there is a learning process here, 
in terms 
of the different tools that might be used.  But I still think we should press this in our discussion 

before proceeding. 
MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely. 

MR. FISHE
R.  Yes, sir. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I 
want to follow up on one point b
ecause it also relates to what 
President Plosser was talking about.  I think, 
whether it is connected to fear that we won™t be able 

to exit or whether it is a signaling that the Committee is willing to be more accommodative 

persistently out in the future, those policy expectations 
can have a big effect 
on some of the 
results
.  Ofte
n, the way we score thingsŠand I think I threw out a half a percentage point a 
second agoŠ
doesn™t take 
into account this additional signaling effect
 about the future path of the 

funds rate t
hat 
you potentially can get.  T
here is some evidence from the even
t studies that you 
did get 
it with the first two LSAP programs
Šthat by announcing 
a program
, you are also 
sending the signal that you are going to be more willing to keep rates lower for longer. 
      
           
               
        
           
    MR. FISHER.  That™s what I was
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right. 
At least as far as the model scores it, if that™s fully 
credible, if the expected funds rate path the market has really flattens out, in principle, you get a 
nontrivial kick from that. 
MR. CARPENTER. 
The only thing to highlight, though, is the difference 
between a 
willingness to keep the interest rate lower
 for longer versus an ability 
to raise them
.  And we 
don™t currently worry about the second partŠwe don™t worry about the ability to raise interest 

rates.  But what the Committee decides to do, obviously, is about the willingness to keep interest 

rates lower
. MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Does the FRB/US model allow you to 
isolate the kind of intermediate estimates
Šthat might be credit aggregates or asset price index 
levels
Šthat fit between lower interest rates and GDP growth, so that you could actually get a 
sense of the transmission mechanism working through the model? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
You can snip cer
tain transmission mechanisms and see what it 
does to the total effect 
if you
 just zero it out.  We have done experiments like that, and what it 
shows is, roughly speaking, changing 
Treasury 
yields, if it doesn™t go out into any other asset 
prices, doesn™t do anything in the model, to a first approximation.  
What matters is that it goes 

into private long-term interest rates, like MBS and corporates; second, that it goes into 
the 
stock 

market; and, third, that it goes into exchange rates.  So you can think of 
it as 
three channels
: cost 
of capital, wealth effects, and exchange rate.
  The model says each of those is worth 
roughly a 
third of the overall effect.  So if you didn™t believe one of the channels was operating, or you 
      
                                  
  thought it was operating only half 
as effectively as it usually does, you could then scale the 
numbers down with that rough math.  And that would be approximately correct.  
But in terms of 
what it implies for bank lending, or something like that, no, the model doesn™tŠ 
MR. LOCKHART. 
It doesn™t explicitly estimate the
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It doesn™t have any explicit predictions about what happens to 
bank lending or anything like that. 
MR. LOCKHART.  So to simplify, for my purposes, the exercise assumes some kind of 
historic
al correlation between lower interest rates and economic activity. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Which may or may not prevail in this current situation. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Which may or may not prevail, with one very important 
caveat.  Because housing is at such an extraordinarily low percentage of GDP, in essence, 
that 

historical correlation has been marked down in these analyses.  Ordinarily housing is a big 

source of a kick.  In these scenarios, the direct channel on housing construction activity is worth 

hard
ly anything.  It™s a little bit, but it™s very small.  That could be right or wrong, but in the 
results that Seth was showing and 
that 
were in all the other analys
is we™ve sent you, 
there is,
 in 
that very important sense, 
an attenuation of the effectivenes
s of monetary policy, whether it™s 
conventional or unconventional right now. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to follow up on this issue 
about confidence intervals.  In 
figure
 1, there would be data uncertainty; there would be 
uncertainty about transmission channels; there would be uncertainty about models.  If you 

layered all of that together, you are going to get very wide confidence intervals.  But on 
              
          
    
   
          
              exhibit 
2, where we are
 looking at the SOMA holdings, there we can sort of mechanically map 
out, more or less, what is going to happen.  There is some uncertainty based on interest rates
, and 
so on, but 
I just want to be clear on this
: This is
 much more solid, I would say, than page 1, 
which is very uncertain and very speculative about 
what the effects might be. Is that a fair 
assessment? 
MS. EZER. 
Our portfolio projections depend importantly on the interest rate 
assumptions that were provided, so those confidence intervals will feed through into our 
projections when it comes to things like Federal Reserve income over time.
  When it comes to, 
say, the top-
left
 panel, the path of the portfolio over time, the confidence interval is probably a 
little bit smaller
, provided that the 
assumptions that we made about the timing of liftoff and the 
strategy used for exit remain constant.
  There the confidence band would be in your projections 
for prepayments on your MBS portfolio.  But since you are assuming that you are going to get 

rid o
f your holdings of agency securities over a set period of time, it is just going to change kind 
of the wiggles in how MBS declines over that period.  But we would still eliminate it over a 
five
-year period with confidence. 
MR. BULLARD.  Just one other comment, Mr. Chairman.  On exhibit 2, 
panel
 4, ﬁD
eferred 
Asset.
ﬂ  T
hat is kind of a nice term
, ﬁdeferred asset.
ﬂ As far as I know, the Committee 
has never used the deferred asset.  It strikes me as a possible political firefight to bring that into 

play.  
All 
of the scenarios here, other than 
option 1, if I™m reading this correctly, would bring the 
deferred asset into play
, with possible repercussions, I think, 
for the Federal Reserve. 
MR. CARPENTER. 
Just a small bit of clarification:  I
t has never been the case that we 
have had
, for the Federal Reserve 
System as a whole
, a deferred asset
.  It has 
been the case on 
several occasions that there has been a deferred asset for a given Reserve Bank. 
        
       
                     
     
        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think the defense in that case would be that 
the total, 
which was including the very high 
remittances
 early in the period, still would be higher than 
historical norms. 
MR. POTTER.  That™s correct. 
MR. BULLARD.  That might be a hard story to tell when the time comes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair
man
, you have a two-hander? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
  Yes.  I think the confidence intervals on interest rates are 
going to be almost proportionate to the confidence intervals on the real economy variables, 

because you are not going to know what the trajectory o
f short
-term rates is going to be or the 
shape of the yield curve. And, in fact, you are probably even more uncertain about the shape of 

the yield curve because you have never gone from purchasing all of these assets to selling all of 

these assets.  So we
 don™t really know how the market is going to react to that. 
The second thing I just want to note very briefly is a lot of this also depends on what 
monetary framework you are actually going back to.  And the presumption of the staff memo is 

that we are going back to a 
corridor system.  But you might decide, as you go through this, that 

maybe IOER works pretty well. 
And 
you might actually want to go back to a floor system that 
would allow you quite a bit more discretion in terms of how your exit actually works.  And that 

would feed into a lot of these projections.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Again, I want to thank the staff for all of the work 
you 
did to help prepare us for this meeting, including the work on LSAPs, but also work on other 
tools like IOER.  So we appreciate it very much.  
Let me turn to item 
2 and cal
l on Simon Potter 
to discuss financial developments. 
                 
                             
    
                                                                             MR. POTTER.
2 Thank you
, Mr. Chairman.  Over the course of the 
intermeeting 
period, global financial markets were dominated by three areas of focus: 
the ECB™s 
new Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) pr
ogram, fluctuating expectations for 
further policy accommodation from the FOMC, and continuing concerns over global 

growth prospects.  By the end of the 
intermeeting
 period, market perceptions of the 
effectiveness of policy measures to at least attenuate t
ail risks facing the global 
economy contributed to improved risk sentiment in financial markets, as seen in 

higher advanced economy sovereign yields and stock markets. 
I will begin with developments in U.S. interest rates, which in the Treasury 
market were moderately higher over the 
intermeeting
 period.  The upper-
left panel 
shows the decomposition of changes in nominal yields for 5- and 10-
year securities 
during key portions of the intermeeting period.  
Nominal 
Treasury yields increased 
significantly early in the period, with the 10-year yield up by more than 35 basis 

points at one point.  Most of the 
initial increase in yields was driven by improved risk 
sentiment on expectations of a forceful ECB policy respons
e, as well as by stronger
-than
-expected U.S. economic data
.  The rise in yields partially reversed following the 
release of the August FOMC minutes and continued somewhat after the Jackson Hole 

symposium.  The move lower in the 5-
year real component was co
nsistent with 
growing expectations for policy easing.  
To date, there is little evidence of worries 
of the fiscal cliff affecting pricing in the Treasury or other markets. 
At the same time, inflation compensation
, as derived from inflation
-indexed 
securities
, rose at the 5
- and 10-
year tenors
.  Higher energy prices contributed to the 
increase in inflation breakevens, particularly at shorter maturities
.  However, spot and 
forward 5
-year breakeven inflation rates remain well within recent historical ranges, 
as seen in the upper-right panel. 
As shown in the middle-left panel, dealers continue to assign the highest 
probability of a first increase in the 
target
 rate to the second half of 2015.  However, 
the distribution has continued to shift from earlier liftoff
 dates and into 2015 and 
beyond.  The survey results are broadly consistent with market-
implied measures of 
liftoff, as market prices indicate significant odds that the target rate will not be 

incre
ased until the middle of 2015. 
Immediately following the F
OMC statement on August 1, interest rates increased
, as markets had been pricing in close to even odds of an extension of the forward 

guidance
.  The middle-right panel shows an event study based on the small sample of 

forward
-guidance surprises.  Reading from left to right, the blue dots represent the 
three events in our study: 
first, the decision to maintain the late
-2014 forward 
guidance at the 
most recent 
meeting; second, the extension of the forward guidance to 

late
 2014 at the January meeting; and third, the introduction of the original mid-2013 
language in August 2011.  
The 
x-
axis measures the surprise component of these 
decisions, which we measure in months and derive from the difference between the 

announced 
forward
-guidance date and the ex
pected month of liftoff calculated from 
2 The mate
rials used by Mr. Potter are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 
      
               
  
    
       
      
                 
          
   our d
ealer surveys
.  The 
y-axis measures the change in the 10
-year Treasury yield 
after the FOMC announcement
.  Alternative methods of measuring the surprise in 
months yield broadly similar results
.  Averaging across 
these measures suggests a 
rule of thumb of roughly a 1 basis point change in the 10-
year Treasury yield for each 
month of 
forward
-guidance 
surprise
.  Of course, measuring announcement effects is 
complicated by the interaction between forward guidance and 
expectations for the 
balance sheet
, including exit, which this analysis does not consider.  In the three 
events examined
, there were no explicit changes to the balance sheet or exit 
principles. 
Turning to other domestic assets, MBS spreads to Treasuries ar
e narrower over 
the 
intermeeting
 period, as seen in your lower-
left panel
.  Investors attributed much of 
the fluctuation in MBS spreads over the period to shifting expectations for Federal 

Reserve purchases, especially in the last few days.  By contrast, t
wo other 
intermeeting developments may serve to tighten mortgage market conditions on the 

margin
.  First, the FHFA announced that it will raise guarantee fees on GSE loans by 
10 basis points starting in the fourth quarter of this year, a fee that lenders w
ill likely 
pass on to borrowers.  Second, the Treasury announced that the wind-down of the two 

GSEs™ portfolios will accelerate to a 15 percent yearly rate, from 10 percent at 

present
.  Much of the wind-down is expected to occur through paydowns, 
necessita
ting only a small portion of sales from the portfolio over the next year.  

Given this, investors do not expect the accelerated wind-downs to be disruptive to the 

MBS market, and spreads to Treasuries were little changed following the 

announcement. 
The final panel looks at how recent developments have affected 
U.S. 
risk assets
.  Overall, the stabilization in European financial markets and heightened expectations 

for domestic policy easing have supported both equity and debt markets.  
The 

S&P
 500 index rose over the intermeeting period by more than 4 percent and is 
currently at its highest level since the beginning of 2008.  
Near
-term uncertainty, as 
measured by the VIX, is near multiyear lows
.  High
-yield bond spreads have 
tightened to levels last observed in
 2011:Q3, and corporate bond issuance in July and 
August has been higher than 
over the same period last year. 
Your second exhibit turns to developments in Europe and global asset prices more 
broadly.  
The most important 
development 
in global financial markets was the 
steadily growing expectation that the ECB would announce an effective new program 

to purchase shorter-
dated peripheral sovereign debt
.  As seen in the top-
left panel, 
these expectations led to a significant narrowing of
 peripheral sovereign debt spreads 
to German yields, particularly at shorter maturities wi
thin the scope of the program. 
Many of the uncertainties regarding the new program were resolved by the ECB 
announcements last week, leading to a further narrowing of peripheral spreads, 

additional gains in European equities, and appreciation of the euro against the 
U.S. 
dollar and the Swiss franc.  
Indeed, euro
-area financial markets have exhibited a 
greater degree of stability over the 
intermeeting
 period, and investors do not appear to 
be seeking significant protection 
against 
large swings in asset prices
, as seen in the 
                                       
    
  
  
               upper-
right panel
, ﬁImplied Volatility on 
Euro
pean Equities and on the Euro-
Dollar 
Currency 
Pair
.ﬂ 
As Steve Kamin will note in his briefing, the OMT
 program has the potential to 
ease financial stresses but must be accompanied by fundamental reform measures at 

the national level
.  Changes in forward peripheral spreads to Germany appear 
consistent with this view
.  Your middle-left panel shows Spanish an
d Italian 
five
-year 
debt spreads 
relative to Germany on a 
five
-year
-forward basis
.  These forward 
five
-year spreads have come down much less than spot spreads on instruments that are 

within the maturity range
 of the ECB™s purchase program. 
In the near 
term, financial markets will face a number of uncertainties, including 
the ongoing EU and IMF review of Greek compliance with the terms of its aid 

program.  In addition, for those countries 
not already in a program, the ECB will not 
activate the OMT unless
 there is agreement on conditions for accessing fiscal support 
facilities
.  It is unclear whether Spain will take this step w
ithout renewed market 
pressure. 
Looking forward, both Spain and Italy need to ramp up debt issuance over the 
remainder of the year
, after issuing at a somewhat tepid pace in recent months
.  This 
can be seen in the middle-
right panel
.  Spanish and Italian banks have historically 
been a significant source of demand for their own sovereign™s debt.  
However, that 

source of demand has drop
ped
 off in recent months.  As shown in the bottom-
left 
panel, since the ECB™s last three
-year LTRO, Italian banks have added to their 

sovereign debt holdings at a greatly reduced pace
.  Spanish banks have actually 
brought down their holdings of sovereign debt since the first quarter, given their own 

funding difficulties.  On a more positive note, anecdotal reports suggest that asset 

managers are reducing their underweight positions on Spanish and Italian debt, and 

access to primary debt markets has improved 
for Spanish and Italian banks. 
The last panel of this exhibit focuses on global risk assets 
more 
broadly.  
The 
accommodative policy stance of many central banks has been supportive of equity 

markets in recent months, particularly in the 
United States
 and Europe.  
In contrast, 
emerging market equities have generally underperformed, reflecting investors™ views 

that th
ese regions may be experiencing a slowdown in economic activity.  China™s 
Shanghai Composite I
ndex remains at levels last seen in early 2009. 
Your final exhibit focuses on recent Desk operations and market expectations for 
additional policy actions as reported in the d
ealer 
survey.  
Over the intermeeting 
period, the Desk purchased $60 billion in longer-term Treasury securities and sold or 

allowed
 to mature without reinvestment $58.5 billion of shorter-
dated securities under 
the maturity extension program (MEP).  These operations continue to proceed 

smoothly.  In particular, the Treasury security purchase operations have recently met 

with better de
mand.  As shown in the upper-left panel, the previous trend toward 
lower coverage ratios and less favorable prices for the purchase
 operations reversed 

somewhat. 
       
              
             
  
                          
           As shown in the upper-right panel, the MEP transactions have been lengthening 
the average dura
tion of the SOMA™s Treasury holdings in line with the policy intent.  

This measure is expected to reach about 
eight 
years if the program continues through 
the end of the year, far longer than the historical range of two to three 
years.  This has 
pulled the average duration of the overall portfolio higher as well, given that the 

duration of the MBS portfolio has recently remained steady at around 
two 
years. 
The next two panels focus on the reinvestment of principal payments on the 
SOMA™s holdings of agency debt and MBS.  Over the intermeeting period, the Desk 

purchased $33 billion of MBS.  These reinvestment purchases have generally 

proceeded smoothly, with market trading volumes remaining steady and only some 

instances of specialness in the coupons being pur
chased. 
The middle-left panel shows the monthly pace of paydowns, which has 
averaged 
about $26 billion since October of last year.  Given continued low interest rates, we 

expect the paydowns to run at roughly $31 billion per month through the end of the 

year.  Such a pace would suggest that 
the 
MBS purchases resulting from the 
reinvestments of the agency paydowns would constitute about one-third of the gross 

issuance of TBA
-eligible securities. 
The middle-right panel shows the distribution for the 30-
year sector of principal 
paydowns to the MBS portfolio, as well as the coupons in which the Desk has 

reinvested.  The portfolio continues to shift into lower-coupon securities, reflecting 

the overall decline in 
rates and the decision to concentrate purchases in newly
 issued 
TBA securities that are more liquid and more directly linked to the primary rate
.  Since June, low interest rates have led to paydowns of holdings of lower-coupons 

MBS, including the 3.5 and 4 percent coupons.  
Newly issued securities also have 

longer duration than those paying down, so these purchases have extended the 

duration of the MBS portfolio. 
Your final two panels of this exhibit show results from the most recent 
dealer 
survey.  
We use
d a phone poll this Monday to update some of the answers, following 

the significant developments in Europe and the e
mployment 
report.  As seen in the 
lower
-left panel, dealers assign a 90 percent probability to any easing action being 
announced at this mee
ting
.  More specifically, dealers place very high odds of 
80 percent on a change to the rate guidance.  The median respondent also saw a 

65 percent chance of an announced increase in the size of the SOMA portfolio.  

Expectations for these policy actions fi
rmed somewhat following last Friday™s 
employment report.  The derived joint probability for an extension of the forward 

guidance and the announcement of additional asset purchases increased to 57 percent 

in this Monday™s phone survey, up from 46 percent in 
the 
dealer survey. 
The panel to the right shows the dealers™ projections for the size and distribution 
of additional asset purchases anticipated through the end of 2013, as derived from 

respondents™ expected path of the SOMA balance sheet.  Respondents ex
pect the size 
of the balance sheet to grow by around $600 billion by the end of 2013.  Median 

expectations are for an increase of $300 billion in Treasury and about $300 billion in 
             
                  
                 MBS holdings by the end of 2013.  While not asked specifically about the st
ructure of 
a potential asset purchase program, some respondents indicated in their written 

comments that they expect an open
-ended program conditioned on economic 
variables.  Mr. Chairman, this completes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions for Simon?  President 
Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Two questions for Mr. Potter.  The first has 
to do with 
the 
duration of our holdings of agency MBS.  The graph indicates the average 
duration of our current holdings is around two.  Now, would our average duration of purchases 

under what we™re going to talk about later today or tomorrow, would that be substantially larger? 

Do you have a sense of what that would be? 
MR. POTTER.  Yes.  Somewhere between four and six.  Is that right, N
ate
? MR. WUERFFEL. 
That™s correct
. MR. LACKER.  Four and six? 

MR. POTTER. 
Yes
. MR. LACKER.  Okay.  So the other question I haveŠ
I was at a conference a couple of 
weeks ago.  I believe I saw you there, Mr. Potter, andŠ 
MR. POTTER. 
Symposium
, yes
. MR. LACKER.  An economist there was arguing that the effect of our forward guidance 
occurred more via revisions in investors™ expectations about future economic conditions rather 

than a change in their views about our future reaction function, and 
becaus
e you folks have such 
rich interactions with the dealer community and you talk to them about 
this forward guidance, I 
wondered if you guys had a view as to the economist™s assertion. 
MR. POTTER. 
Those dealer economists also 
read about
 Jackson Hole.  Some of 
them 
were there
, so I think they viewed that with quite a lot of interest.  I
n the dealer survey
, some 
               
     
            
        
        
      
   people thought that the change in rate guidance might be not just a calendar type, but trying to 
distinguish it from just a pure expectation of where you expected the economy to be.  I don™t 

think it™s possible to get a very clear answer from these respondents, because I don™t think the 

FOMC
™s been completely clear on this either. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Simon, I think I heard you correctly.  So we™ve been purchasing about a 
third of the eligible TBAs, and you also mentioned that there™s a planned 
increase
 in the 
rate 
of 
GSE wind
-downs to 15 percent from the 10 percent level earlier.  I
s that likely to change? If we 
were to proc
eed with just 
$30 or $40 billion, as outlined in a
lternative 
B, would that change our 
percentage of the eligible TBA purchases, given the contraction that™s occurring among the 

agencies
? If my memory is correct, they had about $1.4 trillion.  It goes back 
to last March. 
I can™t remember the last time I looked at the numbers.  So that™s about $15 billion; 15 
percent 

translates to about $15 billion, I think, in the contraction.  I™m just curious if it 
affe
cts the 
percentage of eligible TBA that we™d be hold
ing if we were to proceed. 
MR. POTTER.  No, I don™t think so. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

MS. LOGAN. 
We™re currently purchasing about a third of gross issuance.  That number 
is going to go up to 60 to 75 percent, depending on which option the Committee chooses. 
MR. FISHER.  Right, s
o that is not affected by
Š MS. LOGAN
.  The reduction that the GSEs are doing is happening 
in more than just 
TBAs
; they™re reducing in other types of securities 
as well
.  So I would think that number is 
probably fairly small.  In terms of the total amount outstanding, we™re currently going to have 

about 18 percent of the MBS, and that would move to about 25 percent. 
       
    
   
      
             
         
        
    
   
 MR. FISHER.  Okay
, thank you.
  And just an observation, if you look at your 
panel
 5 and
, particularly
, the high-
yield 
spread 
on panel
 6, things obviously are going our way.  T
his is 
what we would like to see, as well as the equity price response.  What doesn™t seem to be going 
our wayŠand I only point it out as an offset, even though it™s a short time horizonŠ
is 
it seems 

that the 
breakeven 
inflation rates
Šwhether it™s the 
5-year
, 5-year forward
; the 
5-year
; the 
10-year, which is not on this chartŠbottomed in the spring of this year, and the slope is upward.  

We can talk
, perhaps
, later.  I don™t know if we™ve done an LSAP-
type program in a context 
of 
rising inflation expectations or 
not. I think there was at least a 
chart in the 
Teal
book that would 
indicate we haven™t done one yet under those circumstances. 
But I just point out, Mr. Chairman, that if you draw 
a line from the bottom of the 5-
year 
rate, it really bottomed out in the summer of 2011 and has been on the rise. I™m not saying it™s 

dangerous, and it may be something that we would like to encourage, 
or some at this table would 

like to encourage, but we do have rising inflation expectations.  And to say inflation expectations 

are contained
Šwe might think about how we want to phrase that as we get down to the policy 
statement of tomorrow. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I™m not sure I take the same inference.  The 5-
by-5 
is pretty 
flat and is lower than it was last year. 
MR. FISHER.  
And 
the 
5-
year? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  At
 the margin, and the 5-year is obviously being affected by 
the oil price movements. 
MR. FISHER.  And the 
10-year also is not on this chart, and then gold prices, of course, 
have increased significantly
, for those 
who 
care about that ancient relic. 
       
      
           
           
                
   
            
  
                                                     MR. POTTER. It is true that the deflation risk we can calculate is lower than it was in 
2010. MR. FISHER.  Right.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questi
ons for Simon? [No response] 
Okay.  Seeing 
none, we need to vote to ratify domestic open market operations since August.  
Without 

objection?  Okay.  Our next item is the economic and financial situation, and David Wilcox and 

his colleagues will make that
 presentation. 
MR. WILCOX.
3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think there should be a single 
summary exhibit. 
You all may be relieved to know that my prepared text includes 
1,192 words, and I do not plan to ad lib an additional 2,000 words into my delivery.  
[Laughter] 
As you can see from the upper-
left panel of the forecast summary exhibit, the 
near
-term outlook for real GDP growth in last week™s edition of the Tealbook is 
broadly similar to the one that we sent you in July.  To be sure, the July gain in real 

PCE was better than we had expected.  However, consumer sentiment
Šshown in the 
lower
-left panel
Šhas remained downbeat, job gains have been modest, and the price 
of gasoline has moved back up, all of which caused us to largely discount the 

favorable spending news.  Similarly, July shipments of capital goods were stronger 

than we had expected, but forward-looking indicators, including the continued decline 

in the capital goods orders data, as well as the subdued responses to various surveys 

on capital spending plans and business conditions, are consistent with only subdued 

near
-term increases in business outlays.  If you squint hard at the upper-
left panel, 
you will detect that we shifted a little GDP growth from the second half of this year 

into the first half of next, reflecting our assessment that the drought will depress farm 

output in the second half of this year by more than we had predicted in July. 
The one component of aggregate demand that has seemed to have been on a 
somewhat stronger trajectory relative to our expectation in the July Tealbook was net 

exports.  Even so, last week™s forecast called for GDP growth to average just 

1.8 percent through the middle of next year, about in line with our prediction for the 

growth of potential over this period. 
Since the Tealbook closed, the main piece of economic news was last Friday™s 
employment report.  In a seeming exception to Dave Stockton™s famous description 

of the usual shelf-
life of t
he staff economic forecast, our jar of mayonnaise survived 
its first 48 hours in the Mojave Desert with only relatively minor signs of spoilage.  

[Laughter]
  The red line in the bottom-right panel summarizes our effort to combine 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
          
       
                                   
      
   
 the signals from the estab
lishment and household surveys (the latter of which is not 
shown on the chart because it is so noisy compared 
with the establishment results), 

and to control for weather effects and recession-
related seasonal adjustment 
distortions.  As you can see from the downward tilt toward the end of that line, the 

estimated underlying pace of private payroll employment growth has trended lower 

over the course of this year and now 
is 
at the low end of the range that it has occupied 
during the past 2½ years.  The unempl
oyment rate unexpectedly declined 
0.2 percentage point, but like many other analysts, we have been inclined to see more 

weakness than strength in the totality of the results from the household survey, given 

that the employment measure from that survey and 
the participation rate both 
declined.  Based on our projected path for real GDP over the next several quarters, we 

continue to expect the unemployment rate to average around 8¼ percent through the 

first half of next year.  I should also note that the workweek was lower than we had 

expected, and average hourly earnings were flat
, rather than increasing slightly as we 
had expected.  In combination, these results suggest a modestly weaker trajectory for 

compensation and
, therefore,
 household spending than we had factored into the 
Tealbook. 
Two other key pieces of information released since the Tealbook were also 
weaker than expected.  In particular, vehicle assembly plans now point to a slower 

pace of motor vehicle production in the third and fourth quarters th
an we had 

projected in the Tealbook, whileŠ
as Steve will discuss shortly
Šthe latest foreign 
trade data were slightly to the soft side of our expectations in terms of the
ir implications for GDP growth. 
In all, these bits of information would cause us to shave about ¼ percentage point 
off our forecast for the pace of real GDP growth during the second half of this year, 

leaving our forecasted average growth rate for this quarter and next at an anemic 

1¼ percent. 
Turning to the medium term, we upgraded our outlook slightly relative to our July 
projection.  As Steve will discuss, the improvement, such as it is, partly reflects a 

somewhat less worrisome situation in Europe than we had previously believed.  As 

we described in the Tealbook, even after factoring in the disappointment that we think 

would ensue from an announcement of no change in the stance of monetary policy at 

the conclusion of this meeting, we judge that stock prices would remain on a slightly 

higher trajectory and the dollar would be slightly weaker than we assumed in the 

previous projection.  These small positive influences are only partly offset by the 

increase in oil prices, part of which may itself reflect the improvement in sentiment 

related to the crisis in Europe. 
The small upward revision 
to real GDP over the medium term led us to shave a 
little off of our projected path for the unemployment rate, which is shown in the top-

right panel of the exhibit.  Even by the end of next year, however, we expect no 

significant reduction in the unemploy
ment rate. As real GDP accelerates more into 
2014, the unemployment rate declines about ½ percentage point, ending that year at 

about 7½ 
percent. 
         
    
    
     
         
   
   
     
         
     
       
    
  
  Aside from the crisis in Europe, the other main concern that continues to loom 
over the domestic outlook is the fiscal cliff.  On this front, there have been no major 

developments recently, and we continue to expect none, 
at least through the 

November elections.  At this stage, I can only assure you that our decision to stand 

pat on our fiscal policy assumptions reflects no lack of concern or uncertainty on our 

part:  The fiscal cliff continues to figure prominently in our thinking as a serious 

threa
t to the still
-anemic recovery. 
Turning to the inflation outlook, the incoming data on core PCE price inflationŠ 
the 
middle
-right panel
Šhave been close to our expectations.  We continue to project 
that core inflation will hold steady at about 1½ percent through the end of 2014, 

reflecting anchored inflation expectations, a persistent margin of labor and product 

market sl
ack, and modest gains in imported goods prices. 
In response to the upward move in spot prices for crude oil since the July 
Tealbook, we have marked up our near-
term projection for headline PCE inflation
Š the middle
-left panel.  We have, however, made only small revisions to our near-
term 
food price forecast.  Although we now expect the quantity effects of the drought to be 

worse than we had forecast in July, the futures prices that we used in preparing our 

July food price projection had apparently already in
corporated almost all of the price 

effects.  Despite the upward pressure from food prices that we think will begin to 

show through around the end of this year, we expect headline inflation to step down 

slightly in the first part of next year, as the antici
pated reduction in crude oil prices 

implied by futures markets pushes down retail energy prices.  Steve will now 

continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.  In 1972, when Chinese Prime Minister Zhou Enl
ai was asked what 
he thought was the historic impact of the 
French 
Revolution, he famously answered: 
ﬁIt™s too soon to tell.ﬂ 
[Laughter] 
By those standards, assessing the implications of 
the European Central Bank™s plans to intervene in peripheral debt markets would 

seem hopelessly premature.  And yet, as Simon has described, anticipations of 

aggressive ECB action have substantially calmed European financial markets, slightly 

brightening an admittedly still
-cloudy outlook. 
As described in its announcement last week, the ECB plans to purchase sovereign 
debt on the secondary market, provided that the beneficiary governments enter into an 

arrangement with the region™s financial backstop facilities and agree to policy 

conditionality.  Although the ECB will be announcing neither a target ceiling for 

yields on peripheral debt nor the amounts it intends to purchase, it has signaled a 

more aggressive and sustained program than its earlier forays into bond markets. 
Beyond simply comforting investors that the ECB is riding to the rescue, these 
plans could ease financial stre
sses in a number of ways.  First, by lowering yields, the 

bond purchases would reduce public debt service burdens and improve fiscal 

sustainability.  Second, and as a related matter, by taking sovereign bonds out of the 

hands of private investors, ECB purchases may create room in those investors™ 

portfolios for new issues, thereby improving the governments™ access to financing.  
          
  
           
                 
   
   
         
                     
  
    Finally, the package of ECB purchases
, plus access to the regional financial backstop 
facilities
, is widely anticipated to involve less stringent conditionality, and thus less 
stigma, than the full
-blown IMF and EU rescue packages received by Greece, Ireland, 
and Portugal.  In consequence, it is more likely, though far from certain, that Spain 

and/or Italy may request financial assistance before market conditions have become 

so adverse that further financial turmoil is inevitable. 
With markets figuring in brighter prospects for official support, financial stresses 
over the next several months are likely to be less pronounced than we assumed in the 

July Tealbook, and we are anticipating that, barring further adverse shocks, European 

markets could soon begin the long, slow process of normalization.  However, we are 

still very far from being out of the woods.  In the near term, European l
eaders still 
need to work out the conditionality to be required of governments benefi
ting from the 
financial rescue facilities and ECB intervention, and that could be contentious.  

Additionally, IMF and EU officials are currently assessing the status of Gr
eece™s 
struggling adjustment programŠalthough Greece™s official creditors are expected to 

approve a much
-needed disbursement by October and postpone more difficult 
decisions until later, this is not assured, and a messy Greek exit from the euro area at 

this time could be quite dangerous. 
Taking a longer view, the ECB™s new program is not, to 
coin a phrase, a panacea. 
It can only give Europe breathing space to implement the fundamental reforms that 

will ultimately restore confidence.  If the Europeans do not make progress on the 

measures needed to achieve fiscal and financial stability
Šbudget consolidation, 
growth
-promoting structural reforms, and region-
wide banking initiatives
Šthe 
ECB™s ability to contain financial tensions will be sorely tested.  Accordin
gly, market 
confidence likely will not be fully restored until the peripheral economies prove they 

can cut their budgets, improve growth prospects, and strengthen their banksŠ
and all 

that could take a number of years. 
In consequence, economic activity in Europe is also likely to remain subdued for 
some time to come.  To be sure, the easing of financial stresses, combined with some 

data that have been less bleak than expected, have led us to project a somewhat 

shallower recession than we wrote down in the July Tealbook.  Even so, in our 

current projection, euro-area GDP continues to contract through the middle of next 

year and recovers only very weakly thereafter. 
The outlook for our other trading partners, while hardly as bleak as that for 
Europe, is nonetheless subdued.  Excluding the euro area, aggregate foreign growth 

dropped from roughly 4 percent in the first quarter to 
less than
 3 percent in the 
second, below its trend pace.  Moreover, since your last meeting, indicators such as 

PMIs and exports have ge
ner
ally come in on the soft side. 
These developments are worrisome, but considering the factors responsible for 
the slowdown, our best guess is that 
economic 
growth will bottom out in the coming 
quarters rather than deteriorate further.  The pace of 
deterioration in Europe, which 
accounts for much of the United Kingdom
™s stagnation this year, as well as the 
             
                               
              
                    slowdown in Asia™s exports, is projected to become only a little more pronounced in 

the second half of this year.  The recent weakness in U.S. growth has also weighed on 

our trading partners, but the U.S. economy should start picking up a few quarters 

down the road.  And much of Asia™s slowdown reflects the fading of the bounceback 

from Thailand™s floods and Japan™s tsunami last year.  All told, we 
anticipate that 
foreign growth outside the euro area will stay subdued at 3 percent over the remainder 

of this year.  It then picks up to 3¾ percent by 2014, as the euro area starts to recover, 

the U.S. economy picks up steam, and monetary policies around 
the world remain 

quite accommodative. 
Another factor weighing on foreign growth, especially in Asia, has been China™s 
slowdown from near double-digit rates in the past two years.  Chinese growth 

registered 7½ percent in the second quarter of this year.  With recent weak exports 

and PMIs leading us to revise down our forecast, we see growth remaining at that 

relatively subdued pace during the remainder of this year, before picking up to about 

8 percent thereafter. Under these circumstances, we continue to s
crutinize the data 
for indications of a hard landing, but we do not see any compelling signs that one is in 

the offing: 
 Retail sales growth has remained reasonably solid, housing prices have 

flattened out, and the government retains the monetary and fiscal scope to counter a 

decline in demand. 
The effect on oil prices of resurgent political tensions over Iran poses another 
threat to the global economy.  Crude oil prices have now retraced more than half of 

their decline from earlier this year, and our curre
nt projected trajectory of oil prices 
averages roughly 10 percent higher than in the July Tealbook.  A rise in oil prices of 

this magnitude should not substantially affect the foreign outlook.  By our rough 

estimates, it could reduce 
economic 
growth in the advanced economies by 
0.1 percentage point over the next year or so, while the effect on aggregate emerging 

markets growth is roughly a wash
, as gains by oil exporters offset losses by importers.  

By the same token, our inflation outlook is a bit higher i
n the near term but little 
changed further out.  However, no resolution of the problem of Iran™s nuclear 

program is in sight, and we are attuned to the risk of much steeper rises in oil prices. 
All told, considering the momentous developments taking place 
in the global 
economyŠMario Draghi™s plan to save the euro, China™s struggle to achieve a soft 

landing, and 
fluctu
ations in commodity marketsŠthe outlook for U.S. trade is, well, 
not so momentous.  In the first half of this year, notwithstanding the global slowdown 

and the rising dollar, net exports managed to eke out a 
small 
positive contribution to 
U.S. GDP growth.  We received trade data for July yesterday; both exports and 

imports fell, but the trade balance was little changed.  Accordingly, we retain o
ur 
view that for the next couple of quarters, the combination of slowing foreign growth, 

a still
-elevated dollar, and the effects of the drought on agricultural production leads 

to some moderation in export growth, and the external sector imposes a modest 
drag 
on the economy.  After that, net exports gradually shift back toward neutral, as the 

global economy picks up and European stresses subside, so that a reversal of flight-

to-safety flows allows the dollar to start depreciating.  Thanks to Mr. Draghi, th
is 
projection is based on a somewhat lower path of the dollar than in the July Tealbook, 
         
  
      
                     
   
                   
                                                         and thus a bit faster export growth and less drag from net exports.  Andreas will 

continue our presentation. 
MR. LEHNERT.
4 I™ll be discussing material from our recent 
QS report 
on financial stability 
and from an earlier memo on the effect of low interest rates.  In our 
report, the most prominent shocks we identified were an intensification of the 

European sovereign crisis and a U.S. recession, perhaps brought on by a s
uboptimal 
resolution of the ﬁfiscal cliff.ﬂ  The major vulnerabilities we highlighted were, first, 

the market™s perception that some large banks remain weak, despite substantial 

increases in capital and liquidity, which raises the likelihood of funding runs and 

increases the cost of raising capital; second, the unstable funding model of brokerŒ 

dealers
; and, third, the persistent risk of runs on money market funds. 
We have also placed increasing emphasis on vulnerabilities stemming from the 
low interest rate 
environment, and that™s what I™ll focus on today.  After all, long-
term Treasury yields haven™t been below 2.5 percent for a sustained period since 

1954, a time when the financial system was quite different. 
A low short-
term interest rate policy, given st
rained household and business 
fundamentals, is designed to improve macro performance.  The benefits arise, in part, 

from increases in asset prices and
, thus, the value of collateral held by businesses and 
households.  These increases should, in turn, enhan
ce financial stability. 
But a low 
rate environment could lead investors trying to boost yields to borrow too much, take 

on too much risk, or bid up asset prices enough to stretch valuations.  Relatedly, 

important parts of the financial system might become
 vulne
rable to a rapid rise in 
rates. 
To assess these risks, we surveyed a wide range of asset markets and financial 
institutions looking for signs of excessive valuations, greater leverage, 
or increased 

risk
-taking.  To summarize, we found little evidence that the low rate environment 
has fostered additional vulnerabilities to date: 
 Valuations for broad asset classes are 
not stretched
, and we identified only a few isolated pockets of increased 
risk
-taking. 
As shown by the top panel on your first exhibit, 
estimated term premiums 
for 
10-year Treasury yields are quite low, due in part to safe-haven demand for 

Treasuries resulting from strains in Europe.  Term 
premiums
Šand thus Treasury 
yields
Šcould increase quickly if, for example, concerns about the U.S. fis
cal situation were to intensify. 
Your next three panels cover valuations in three major U.S. asset classes: 
equities, residential real estate
, and corporate bonds.  Overall, valuations across these 
asset classes show little sign of pressure.  As shown in the middle left, stocks are not 

trading at unusually high multiples; indeed, forward price-
earnings ratios are 
generally well within their ranges over the past 20 years.  Our measure of residential 

real estate valuation, shown to the right, is near an all-
time low.  Risk premiums
 in 
4 The materials used by Mr. Lehnert are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 
       
           
                   
              
  
        
       the high-
yield corporate bond market
Šas measured by the implied forward spread far 
out in the future (the black line in the bottom-
left panel)
Šare near their average of 
the past 20 years, notwithstanding the extraordinary highs 
experience
d during the 
financial crisis. 
However, valuations of assets in narrower and less-liquid markets have shown 
signs of pressure. Issuance of so
-called leveraged loans has been robust this year.  
Moreover, there is a trend toward lighter use of loa
n covenants and increased 
leverage.  As shown to the right, average ratios of debt to earningsŠknown as a debt 

multiple
Šamong this class increased further this year, although it remains below its 
pre
-crisis levels. 
Your next exhibit considers evidence on l
everage and 
risk
-taking
.  In the 
nonfinancial sector, as shown by the pink and blue regions in the top panel, household 

and business leverage has continued the decline begun in the recession.  Government 

borrowing, by contrast, has picked up, leaving the ratio of debt held by the public to 

GDP at its highest level since W
orld W
ar II. 
As shown in the middle two panels, there are signs that, potentially, commercial 
banks are taking increased interest rate risk.  Banks have increased their holdings of 

long-
mat
urity securities. As a result, their portfolios may be more sensitive to a 
sudden rise in interest rates than they were a year ago, depending on their interest rate 

hedges.  The low interest rate environment, combined with an unlimited FDIC 

guarantee on transactions accounts, has attracted a surge of deposits to banks.  The 

ability to issue deposits at below
-market rates should benefit banks were rates to rise; 
however, we don™t have historical experience to judge the sensitivity of these new 

deposits to a rise in rates.  That said, as discussed in the Tealbook, results from a 

recent informal survey of banks suggested they did not think it was likely that 

deposits would decline rapidly when the added insurance expires.  We™re currently 

working with economists and supervisors from throughout the Federal Reserve 

System on an analysis of interest rate risk at banks and plan to include the results in 

our December report. 
Life insurance companies are vulnerable to extended periods of low interest rates, 
in part b
ecause they have a significant body of liabilities with guaranteed returns that 

exceed current yields on safe assets.  As a consequence, insurers may be feeling 

particular pressure to reach for yield by extending their exposure to duration and 

credit risk. 
Indeed, as shown in the bottom left, the average maturity of insurers™ 
bond portfolios has risen in recent years, as firms accept greater duration risk.  

However, the shift isn™t particularly dramatic, and we are working with colleagues 

here and at the F
ederal Reserve Bank of Chicago to understand the risks faced by, and 
posed by, these institutions. 
The panel to the right shows the rapid rise in assets of real estate investment 
trusts
ŠREITs
Šthat specialize in holding agency-
guaranteed mortgage
-backed 
sec
urities.  While these institutions are something of a niche player, their business 

model of funding agency MBS holdings with repo, while vulnerable to sharp rate 
            
    
                 
      
            
     
        
  
     
   
  
   
                                                   rises, has proved quite profitable in recent years, producing double-
digit returns for 
shareho
lders.  This growth is one of the clearest indications we have of the 
willingness of some investors to take on additional interest rate risk in order to earn 

higher current returns.  This willingness may be enhanced by the apparent safety of 

investing in G
SE-guaranteed securities. In terms of their systemic threat, at their 
current scale, the sudden distress of mortgage REITs would likely be painful but 

manageable for the broader financial system. 
I™ll conclude with a less quantifiable form of risk produced by the low 
interest 
rate 
environment, related to a sense that a great deal of money is sitting on the sidelines.  

Consider two examples:  First, respondents to the SCOOS report that their clients 

have significant unused borrowing capacity; and second, pr
ivate equity firms focused 
on leveraged buyouts have elevated levels of committed but uninvested capital.  
All 

of this and more amounts to ﬁdry powderﬂ that could be deployed quickly.  Thus, 

while our ongoing monitoring efforts have so far found little evi
dence that the low 
interest rate environment has led to excessive increases in leverage, asset valuation
, or 
risk
-taking, investors do have the means to rapidly shift their portfolios.  Ed Nelson 
will continue our presentation. 
MR. NELSON.
5 I will be referring to the packet 
labeled ﬁMaterial for Briefing 
on the Summary of Economic Projections.ﬂ 
As shown in the top panel of exhibit 1, under your individual assessments of 
appropriate monetary policy, you see real GDP expanding only moderately t
his year
, but you expect the pace of the recovery to pick up next year and that economic 

growth in 2014 and 2015 will be somewhat above its longer-run value.  

Correspondingly, you expect the unemployment rate, shown in the second panel, to 

stay near recent readings for the rest of the year
, before gradually declining over the 
subsequent three years.  All of you expect that the unemployment rate at the end of 

2015 will be appreciably below its present rate; nevertheless, almost all of you expect 

it to be above what you judge to be its longer-run normal level.  Turning to the 

bottom two panels, you generally expect total PCE inflation of around 1¾ percent 

over the four quarters of 2012.  For 2013 through 2015, you generally see core and 

overall inflation stayi
ng close to or slightly below your 2 percent inflation objective. 
Exhibit 2 tabulates the ranges and the central tendencies of your projections, 
along with comparisons to the June SEP and the current staff forecast.  Compared 

with your June projections, you now anticipate a slightly stronger recovery and a 

somewhat larger decline in the unemployment rate over the projection period.  Your 

inflation outlook is little changed.  The Tealbook forecastŠwhich embeds the 

assumption of no additional accommodationŠputs economic growth in 2013 and 

2014 at the lower end of your central tendency, and the unemployment rate above it; 

the 2015 forecasts, however, are within the central tendency.  The Tealbook forecast 

for inflation runs consistently below your central tendencies for 2013 to 2015. 
5 The materials used b
y Mr. Nelson are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
                   
             
     
     
       
   
      
     
               
        
          
  Exhibit 3 provides an overview of your assessments of the appropriate path for 
the federal funds rate.  As shown in the top panel, most of you think that it will not be 

appropriate to begin raising the funds rate until 2014 or later.  About two-
thirds of 
you now see firming only beginning in 2015 or 2016, compared with about one-third 

of you in June.  Four of youŠtwo fewer than in JuneŠ
now believe that economic 

conditions will warrant increasing the federal funds rate before 2014.  Two of you 

favoring a funds rate increase before 2014 cited the need to tighten policy relatively 

soon in order to prevent inflation from exceeding the Committee™s 2 
percent 

objective, and two pointed to the need to forestall financial imbalances.  Many of 

those who would not raise the funds rate until 2014 or later cited sizable output or 

unemployment gaps alongside an inflation profile unlikely to exceed 2 percent over 

the medium run. 
The bottom two panels of the exhibit provide your assessments of the app
ropriate 
target for the federal funds rate at the end of each year of the forecast period and over 

the longer run.  For the 6 participants who 
see the funds rate leaving the effective 

lower bound in 2014 
or earlier
, the median value for 
the funds rate at 
the end of 2014 
is 
1.75 percent.  The 12 participants who expect that the funds rate will not leave the 

lower bound until 2015 judge that the appropriate funds rate at the end of that year 

will be 1.6 percent or less, while the 1 
participant who sees the st
art of firming in 
2016 sees the funds rate at 75 basis points at the end of that year (not shown). 
Fourteen of you now judge that ﬁappropriate monetary policyﬂ calls for a more 
accommodative path for the federal funds rate than in your June SEP, involving 
either 
a lower target for the funds rate at the end of the initial year of firming or a shift out 

in the first year of firming.  Moreover, 11 of you indicated that appropriate policy 

calls for additional asset purchases
, at this meeting or before long. 
Exhibit 4 depicts the economic conditions that you anticipate for the year in 
which you expect the first funds rate increase. Your projected unemployment rates 

range from about 5¾ to 8 percent, with a median of 6½ percent, while your inflation 

projections 
are in a narrow range of roughly 1¾ to 2¼ percent, with a median rate of 
2 percent.  Generally, participants who expect the first funds rate increase in
 2012 or 2013 (shown by the 
blue triangle and 
white diamonds) see a higher level of 
unemployment at the time of 
the first funds rate increase
 than do those reporting later 
firming
 dates (shown by the gray circles, dark blue squares, and 
the 
gray triangle
). The final exhibit reviews your assessments of the uncertainty and risks 
surrounding your economic projections.  As shown in the top two panels in the 

column on the left, almost all of you continue to indicate that you judge the current 

level of uncertainty about GDP growth and unemployment to be higher than the 

average level over the past 20 years.  The co
rresponding panels to the right indicate 
that you continue to view the risks to GDP growth as weighted toward the downside 

and, accordingly, the risks to unemployment as weighted to the upside.  Many of you 

attributed your continued emphasis on downside growth risks to concerns about 

Europe and U.S. fiscal policy; other factors cited included uncertainty about the level 

and growth rate of potential output and the possibility of a hard landing in China.  
      
  
  
    
     
    
                                Turning to the bottom two panels, 8 of you assess the uncertainty attending your 

projections for total PCE inflation as higher, and another 10 of you see the 

uncertainty as broadly similar to the average level of uncertainty over the past 

two
 decades.  Most of you continue to see the risks to inflation, shown 
to the right, as 
broadly balanced.  Thank you.  That concludes the staff presentations. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much for your presentation.  The floor is 
open for questions.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Wilcox, the lower right-
hand panel 
displays a model estimate, and I 
was wondering what it™s an estimate of. 
MR. WILCOX. It™s a statistical exercise that tries to combine several different sources of 
information.  First and most broadly, it combines the payroll survey estimate of job gain with an 
adjusted measure from the household survey, 
where the adjustments
Š MR. LACKER.  Have been comparable. 

MR. WILCOX.  Štry to take the household measure and do about a dozen or 
15 adjustments that put it on
, as conceptually 
as possible, 
an apples
-to-apples basis with the 
establishment survey. 
The second category of information that it builds in is that we had one of our seasonal 
adjustment experts, Charlie Gilbert, take a close look at this series, specifically with a question in 

mind of trying to disc
ern effects on seasonal factors that stem from the timing of the sharp 
downdraft in employment in 2008 
and
 2009, and to advise us on the extent to which those timing 
effects may have bled into seasonal factors
, causing published estimates of seasonally adjusted 
job growth around the turn of the year to be systematically higher than they should actually be. 
The third type of information that™s built in is a regression
-based analysis of weather 
effects.  It seems like a dim memory at this point, but we had, a
s you will recall, an 
extraordinarily warm winter this year, and there was some speculation that that may have shifted 

the timing of employment.  Those weather
-related effects are pretty small, but they™re included 
           
    
                    
       
       
     here
, as well
, for the sake of completeness.  And then around all of that, what we do is just apply 
a simple 
Kalman 
filter to the resulting series in an effort to extract for you where we think all this 
statistical evidence would point in terms of what™s the best available estimate of job gain
, taking 
account of all that information that™s available to us. So it™s
, at some level
, nothing more than a 
statistical exercise to try to extract signal from noise.  On the other hand, it packs in a 
tremendous amount of information. 
MR. LACKER.  Those all sound like very useful and constructive statistical initiatives.  I 
just wondered what the target you were aiming at trying to estimate is. I mean, is it the trend or 

the current value? 
MR. WILCOX. It™s essentially a smooth
ed trend that takes account of both the 
information in the establishment survey and the household survey.  I mean, I could reiterate: 
It takes account of that
; it tries to adjust for weather and 
seasonal
Š MR. LACKER.  You™re aiming at a true measure of the cu
rrent gain
, or a true measure of 
the trend? 
MR. WILCOX.  True measure of the current gain, smoothing through 
a variety of 
sources of noise. 
MR. LACKER.  A smooth measure of the current gain.  I™m less confused now. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You™re confused at a 
higher level. President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I actually drove back from our western 
symposium this year with two geriatric dogs and other things, but I want to comment on the fact 

that driving across the s
tate of Nebraska, what
 struck me was the drought and the corn crops and 
just how dead the entire s
tate of Nebraska looked
, at least from Interstate 80. 
       
                                 You made some reference to the drought and the corn crop, and I remember reading 
somewhere
ŠI couldn™t find it in my searchingŠabout your estimated effects of the drought on 
GDP this quarter and next.  And I™d like to hear you talk a little more about what you think those 

effects were
; the ramifications of those effects, of how they bleed, in some sense, through in your 

forecast t
o your employment forecast, for example, through an Okun™s l
aw measure because 
GDP is lower
; how much impact you thought it had on the gap in the near term; and how that 
dissipates through your forecast.  Can you just walk me through those linkagesŠt
his is clearly a 
classic supply shock of 
a dr
oughtŠand how much then it feeds into other things that matter that 
we look at a lot for monetary policy? 
MR. WILCOX.  So I™ll take a first crack at it and invite my other colleagues to jump in 
with additional i
nformation.  We thought in July we had built in some quantity-
related effects
Š about $10 billion is my recollectionŠon farm output.  This time, based on USDA assessments of 

field conditionsŠ
people may be doing something a little more systematic, out walking
 in the 
fields with their clipboard and so forth to look at corn yields
; corn is one of the crops that is most 
affected
Šwe think that it™s about a $30 billion hit to real farm output this time, so substantially 
bigger than what we had built into the July projection. 
We think that that™s likely to show up mostly in a decumulation of inventories in the third 
and fourth quarters.  The way that inventory arithmetic works, the hit to GDP growth is going to 

be concentrated in the third quarter.  We™ve got the same rate of inventory decumulation built 

into the fourth quarter, but because it™s the same rate of decumulation in both quarters, the 
effect 
on GDP growth 
we™ve penciled in 
is zero in the fourth quarter.  
We also think there will be a 
small additional negative effect on agricultural exports as well, so that™s where in terms of the 

GDP accounting
Š        
       
   
                       
   
  
                    
MR. PLOSSER.  And that led to how much of a decrease in your estimate of 
GDP growth for the third quarter? 
MR. WILCOX.  About 0.8 
percent
age point o
n GDP growth
. MR. PLOSSER. 
Yes, 0.8 
percent
age point.  That™s what I thought 
I remembered. 
MR. WILCOX.  We thinkŠwe hopeŠthat™s going to be a transitory supply shock and 
that next year
, our planning assumption has been, crop yields are going to come back to normal.  
Now, there™s sort of a philosophical question about when that actually occurs.  If we were 
operating 
in annual data, it would be perfectly clear that it would happen in 2013.  
However
, the 
way that the BEA does it, and we™ve been in very close contact with them, is 
to smooth that 
through the four quarters of the calendar year, so that snap back to normal crop yields, 
basically 

at this point, of course, by assumption, occurs in the firs
t quarter. 
So we™re mimicking 
the 
BEA™s algorithm in packing in the return to a normal level of GDP in the first quarter of 2013.  

That™s not based on any pretense that anybody actually knows that that™s the way the corn plants 

are going to grow in 2013.  
That™s just the 
BEA 
methodology.  I wouldn™t have anything better to 
suggest to them if I were in their shoes. 
Now, farm proprietors™ income actually sees a much smaller effect because prices are up 
and there™s crop insurance, and so the implications for 
nominal farm income are much less 
severe than they are for real output. 
We think that there™s likely to be very little effect on 
employment because we™ve made the assumption that employers are going to smooth through 

this transitory effect.  I wouldn™t be surprised, of course, if there was some effect on things like 

farm equipment manufacturers and that sort of thing, but I think that™s going to be lost in the 

noise in terms of our ability to actually 
estimate it. 
       
                               
   
   MR. PLOSSER.  So this wouldn™t show up in 
any sense on your estimates of the 
magnitude of your output gap over the next two quarters? 
Would you raise that? 
MR. WILCOX.  M
echanically, I suspect our output gap will be a little wider over the 
second half of this year, and then it will just come back in the first quarter of 2013.  Is that right, 
Bill? 
MR. 
WASCHER
.  Yes, that™s right.  Because we tend to set potential growth on an 
annual basis, we didn™t make an explicit adjustment to the gap measures you see in the Tealbook 

for the effects of the 
drou
ght
.  I would say that in terms of when we look at Okun™s l
aw relationships and thinking about the path of the unemployment rate, 
we did take out the effect of 

the drought from potential in that equation.  So we didn™t want the drought to affect the 

unempl
oyment rate forecast. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Ye
s, that™s kind of what I was trying to get at.  Okay.  Thank you very 
much. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  One minor place it might show up, because we didn™t do the 
adjustment, would be in the Tealbook 
B rules thing. It™s pretty small, but the 
rules
 would 
respond to that. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Did I just understand correctly that you removed the effect of the 
drought on the gap, the unemployment rate gap? 
MR. WILCOX.  In our Okun™s l
aw analysis, in setting the unemployment rate. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It will bounce right back. 

MR. WILCOX.  I™m sorry? 
                           
               
    VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The effects are just going to go away in two quarters. 
MR. WILCOX. It is a transitory effect.  The fu
nds rate is constrained at zero.  So it 
doesn™t have any implication for the funds rate.  And in terms of calibrating the response of the 

unemployment rate to the GDP gap, we sterilized the GDP gap from transitory dro
ught
-related 
effects on GDP. 
MR. LACKER
.  Okay.  So let me just ask the question for which 
this is most germane
Š do inflation dynamics depend on this adjustment? 
MR. WILCOX. 
I think we™re talking about splitting a micron here, butŠ 
MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, but I™m just very curious about the principle here. 
MR. WILCOX.  The methodology is intended precisely to seal off the implications for 
core inflation.  I should say, of course, 
the first
-order implication for inflation is through food 
prices. 
MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, right, righ
t. MR. WILCOX.  That has been allowed to feed through. 

MR. LACKER.  Right.  But in terms of the gap™s effect on inflation, you want to sterilize 
it from the effect that the dr
ought is going to have on real output and employment in a 
year 
or 
two. 
MR. WILCOX
.  Correct, y
es. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question for Andreas.  
On exhibit 2, you have 
this chart that looks at nonfinancial sector credit to GDP.  
I keep staring at it, and I am still trying 
to figure out what implications I™m supposed to draw from it.  The secular uptrend from 1956, at 
          
      
              
       
                   
best
, flattens out for a while
.  So the first question is what implication do you think we were 
supposed to draw from this
?  And, second, if you looked at a char
t of 
nonfin
ancial sector assets 
to GDP, would that also show 
mostly a secular 
uptrend?  And then, how do you put those two 
together? 
MR. LEHNERT.  I think the
re are
 key macro questions that are impli
cated 
by your 
question, which I™m not going to touch, but 
just from a financial stability perspective, at the very 
highest level
, in some sense, financial stability concerns in a low-
rate environment arise when 
you see people and businesses borrowing more.  This picture was just supposed to 
be an easy 
way 
to portray the fact that we™re not seeing households and businesses borrowing more. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Right.  We could 
also interpret it as, gee, credit to GDP 
is still really, really high
, and
, therefore, that means bad things.  That is what I was sort of 
getting 
at. 
So you don™t take a negative signal away at all from the total level of credit to GDP is still 
high? 
MR. LEHNERT.  Ye
s, okay.  I treated that as a separate question.  So then there™s a 
question, are we approaching some kind of 
fiscal moment
, some sort of S
argent
Wallace 
moment, where the global carrying capacity for U.S. sovereign obligations is being reached? 

That™s something that we highlighted in our report as a potential risk.  
If there™s 
a material 
worsening in the fiscal outlook, 
or if 
there™s some really ugly resolution to the debt ceiling 

negotiations in January and so forth, all those things could have negative implications for future 

stability. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But the total level here, if you add household, business, 
and government together, that™s not a good sign. 
MR. LEHNERT.  If you look across countr
ies
, you would see a lot of different 
levels. 
           
          
   
  
      
    
   
           
    
     
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
They™re 
all over the place. 
MR. LEHNERT
.  Exactly.  So I don™t know why Denmark is one and Japan i
s a different 
one, but we can just judge the 
United States
 by its own history. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  First, I wanted to thank Andreas for a very good summary
, very helpful 
graphics
, and so on.  We™re in the middle of doing our 
SABR
 analysis for banks, and one of the 
positive attributes we have noticed is that we seem to be seeing a brighter picture for the average 

bank.  For example, the ones that we rate one or two probably are performing 
the best that we™ve 
seen in terms of the percentage of potential 
downgrades since December of 2006.  So I think 
that™s one positive aspect that wasn™t included.  I™m not being critical, but when you look at your 

second panel of long-
term securities held by comm
ercial banks and so on, there seems to be a 
healthier tenor, and we™re not done with the analysis yet, but I just wanted to point that out. 
With regard to seasonality, I wanted to ask Dave Wilcox about the August employment 
numbers; I think I™m correct in 
saying that that is a number that gets revised more frequently 

than others.  I think 17 of the last 22 years, i
t™s been revised, and if I remember correctly, last 
year it went from zero to 44,000 to 104,000, and I assume we™re taking account of the fact th
at 
that is often a highly unreliable number.  Am I correct? 
MR. WILCOX.  We™re taking account of the fact that it is the best possible information, 
and we don™t confuse it with truth, absolutely.  [Laughter] 
MR. FISHER.  So we assume it gets revised more o
ften than not? 
MR. WILCOX. 
Yes. 
           
          
   
              
             
  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
The BLS has a 
confidence intervalŠ
the 90 percent 
confidence 
interval is 
plus or minus 100,000.  So that gives you an idea. 
MR. WILCOX.  It™s a sample-
based estimate. It is based on a very large 
sample of 
employers. It™s a universal sample of large employers and a statistically drawn probability 
sample of medium an
d smaller employers, but there are a host of issues associated with 
constructing that number, including the fact that not everybody th
at ultimately will report
, 
reports in the first wave of responses and that seasonal adjustment, as my remarks described 

earlier, involves 
a great deal of science but some art as well.
  So I don™t have any specific reason 
for doubting or casting aspersions on the August number, but you™re absolutely correct that 

month in and month out, that™s a number that is subject to two-sided revision. 
MR. FISHER.  And then lastly, just listening to Steve Kamin, this is perplexing about oil 
and gas 
prices
, and particular
ly prices at the pump.  There may be some seasonality in terms of 
the 
switchover 
that
 occurs, but given the weaker economy, which I think almost all of our 
forecasts have envisioned, and given the production that™s taking place stateside, even 

accounting f
or the storm that took place in the Gulf, it just seems odd that we might expect oil 
prices to increase rather than hold level or decrease.
  And f
or what it™s worth, the ﬁoiliesﬂ that I 
speak to
Šfrom the independents to Tillerson at Exxon and so onŠ
their expectation is that this 
has been a bit of a bulge, and that it™s more likely to settle down and actually decrease somewhat.  

For what it™s 
worth
Šand I always emphasize that because Mr. Tarullo insists that I do so when I 
talk about my anecdotal evidence
ŠI just wanted to pass that on. 
MR. KAMIN
.  Thank you. 
Just to be clear, our baseline forecast for crude oil prices in 
the markets is, indeed, to decline over time from the current level. 
MR. FISHER.  It wasn™t clear the way you presented it.  So I wanted 
to add that. 
      
          
                     
    
  
   
    
   MR. KAMIN
.  Yes.  So just to clarify, what I was alluding to was future upside risks that 
could take place if geopolitical problems in the Middle East became more pronounced than they 
are now. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to come back to the financial 
stability handout, exhibit 2, 
chart
 1, which is ﬁN
onfin
ancial 
Sector 
Credit
-to-GDP Ratio.
ﬂ In 
answer to the earlier question, you said 
that the cross
-country evidence on this was all over the 
map, and that does not gibe with what I understood the cross-country evidence to be, which was 

that this line is basically trending up across the developed economies.  S
o it looks very similar 
actua
lly. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Sorry. I meant the cross-country evidence on the level.  I thought that 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley was asking, is 2.5 a magic number? I mean, this number is much bigger 
in some countries and much smaller in other countries. 
MR. BULLARD.  Oka
y, but the picture would look the same. 
MR. LEHNERT. 
Yes. 
MR. BULLARD. 
It has always been trending up, I guess.  The developed world has 
always been trending up, 
is that right? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
The tricky part about this is if you have a secular trend 
of more intermediation, then this is going to be an upward-trending number, and so the degree of 

intermediation in a financial system really is important in terms of what 
number you 
get. 
               
         
              
    
              MR. BULLARD.  When people showed this picture to me over the year
s, I always said, 
well, this was 
financial market deepening
, and 
good things are happening in the 
intermediation 
sector
.  It didn™t pan out so well later. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Well, and presumably by analogy, 
then
, the fact that it™s 
now falling 
for the household and business sectors 
isŠ MR. BULLARD.  Y
es.  Okay, thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I just 
wanted to make a comment on the 
financial stability report. I continue to find a lot of value in this, and I think particularly as we 

look at these trends 
in a low interest rate environment, I would take no exception to the 
conclusion that right now imbalances are not obvious.  But just thinking back to how we thought 

about land values in the 1980s, in the late 1990s and early 2000s, as we watched banks begin to 

concentrate in commercial real estate and even some of the subprime exposures, the point at 

whi
ch to know when to take signal from some of those things is very difficult, notwithstanding 
supervisors and others 
looking at them.
  So I think as you continue to monitor this, as we get into 
December and beyond
, looking at where these trends are going 
wil
l be 
very important. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any other questions for our colleagues? 
[No 
response]  Okay.  Seeing none, on the agenda, we have an opportunity for participants who want 

to raise questions or issues related to financial stability
.  And Vice Chairman
, if you™d like to 
start off
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen and I were in B
asel 
over 
the weekend, and I have to say that there was a 
pretty strong sense of unanimity that what the 

ECB did was essentially the best that t
hey could accomplish, given the various constraints under 
                              
   
                 
  
 which 
they were 
operating.  The fact that the purchases could be unlimited means that the 
program has the potential for actually being an effective backstop, and the fact that the ECB will 
be pari p
assu 
with other bondholders is important because it really will reduce the pressures on 
private holders.  
So in effect, 
there may be private holders, if they view this as credible, who will 
actually want to invest in these sovereign instruments for a carry trade because the yield 
curves 

in these countries, 
of course
, are very, very steep. 
There™s also a bit of carrot now to incent proper actions by the government.  So if you do 
the right thing, we will intervene and we will hold down your debt service cost.  And I don™t 

think th
ere was that carrot before
, so I think that™s pretty significant.  I think that the ECB has 

essent
ially put on the table something that could take the risk of an interest rate-debt service-
fiscal deficit spiral a bit off the table as long as the countries do the right thing.
  And in addition, 
if these purchases do, in fact, materialize, I think this does push you in the direction toward 

further fiscal union.  After all, the ECB is backstopped by 
the entire 
euro zone, so such purchases 
will increase the joint and several nature of the union.
  And finally, I thought the other thing that 
was noteworthy abo
ut the ECB action was that it was a 22 to 
1 vote, with only 
Weidmann
 of the 
Bundesbank dissenting.  Given the fact that the German political leadership, 
at least for now
, seems to be supporting the ECB actions, this means that the Bundesbank™s opposition i
s somewhat marginalized at this point. 
So that™s the good news. 
Despite this, I don™t think we should kid ourselves.  I think the situation remains very 
tenuous despite the ECB™s supports.  I™d be, probably, slightly darker than Steve™s comments on 

this.
  Several issues worth highlighting: 
First, the ECB program would only activate if the 
countries actually negotiate an MOU with the 
euro group, and already we™re hearing signs 
that 
Spain seems to be reluctant or slow in terms of pursuing it.  In fact, the Spanish may decide that 
                       
         
       
            the backstop might be e
ffect
ive even if they don™t seek an MOU.  That seems like a highly risky 
strategy, but it is something that they might decide to do.
  Second, the program obviously will 
only continue if they stay on the progra
m. And, third, it™s going to take a while for this all to be 
implemented because the MOU has to be negotiated with the e
uro group
, and all of the finance 
ministers have to agree, and several parliaments actually have to approve the MOU.  So this idea 
that this is going to be happening very, very quicklyŠ
I think the market is probably a little bit 
ahead of itself in terms of how quick
ly this will come into play. 
Other issues
Šthe 
ECB program will not necessarily crowd in investors, because it™s not 
clear how long this is going to last.  So you might buy things, but you still have quite a bit of 

risk.  
You still have a very bad feedback 
loop from the austerity programs to the economy, to 
fiscal performance
, and
 the state of the banking system.  This doesn™t take any of that off the 
table, and there™s still no road map as to where we™re actually going in terms of the ultimate 

destination
:  What does greater fiscal union in Europe look like? 
So this is a very important 
thing that the ECB has done.  I think they did the best that they could possibly do, and the good 

thing is they put the problem back in the lap of the governments, 
where it b
elongs.  They have 
done what they can do now, and now it™s up to the governments to decide, both in the core and in 

the periphery, if 
they™re going to go along. 
The basic model
, though, of this whole situation hasn™t changed.  Countries have to show 
they™r
e on a sustainable path to regain market access.  The core countries are unwilling to be 
explicit about the level of support because of 
fears that this will undermine the effort.  The 
constitutional court decision in Germany today, which was actually mostly positive, affirmed 

that the German commitment is limited to 
•190 billionŠthat™s it, and so that™s sort of 
significant. 
            
     
          
              
  
   
     
 I think the unwillingness of the German Constitutional C
ourt to be explicit does create 
uncertainty that makes progress more difficult.
  So we do still have a long way to go, and we 
don™t have big, solid backstops to absorb shocks or support confiden
ce.  The ESM
ŒEFSF resources are
 still very much too small to credibly backstop Spain and Italy, and the ECB support 
may be too uncertain as t
o its sustainability.  So it™s progress, but there a
re still a lot of questions 
on the table. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you for the financial stability report.  Like President George, 
I do appreciate the monitoring that you™re doing in this area.  I just had two quick questions.  

They both relate to money market funds.  We™ve had an SEC proposal that wasn™t proposed, and 

I was wondering about your perspective looking at Europe, 
where there™s more than
 $1 trillion of 
money market funds 
and 
they have a mix of floating and fixed NAVs.  I don™t know how much 
time you spent looking at the European money market funds, but I™d be interested in your 

perspective on the industry™s concern with the floating NAV, which se
ems to have been 
successful in stopping forward movement.  And then the second question is, given that they have 

both floating and fixed NAVs in Europe, and the deposit rate went down to zero, is there 

anything to infer about interest on excess reserves fr
om the European money market fund 
experience with the deposit rate going to zero
? MR. LEHNERT. 
Are
 those questions you™d like me to answer? 
[Laughter] 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If not here, at another time. 

MR. LEHNERT.  Very, very briefly, and I certainly don™t approach your expertise in this 
area, we™ve long maintained that the redemption of par, what you call the fixed NAV, is useful in 

certain circumstances.  There are certain elements of the U.S. tax cod
e and other things that 
             
    
     
        
  
   
          
     
     
                                                                 make it useful
.  But basically
, at the end of the day, it™s just a safe place to put your money
, and 
if 
it floats up and down a bit, it™s not the end of the world.  And, of course, the European 
experience highlights that, although p
resumably their tax treatment might be slightly different. 

Then what™s happened to European money markets since the deposit rate went to zero? It
™s maybe still a little early to tell what the long
-run effects are, but the initial wave of reports is that 
there hasn™t been an implosion of the money markets. 
MR. POTTER.  One fund closed.  The Bank of AmericaŒMerrill Lynch fund closed. 

MS. LIANG
.  I guess I would just add that even at current rates, the proportion of U.S. 
funds that are waiving fees is really
 quite high, so the implications of further reductions in 
money fund rates could have effects.  S
ome ballpark estimates
Šthey are not precise
Šis 
that 
about 70 percent of U.S. funds are waiving their fees at this pointŠthat™s a pretty big number. 
CHAIRMAN BE
RNANKE.  Okay.  Why don™t we take a break for lunch?  When we 
come back, I™ll talk briefly about the experimental consensus forecast, and then we™ll go to the 

economic go
-round.  Why don™t we reconvene at 1 o™clock?
 [Lunch recess] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
6 Why
 don™t we 
re-commence?  Please feel free to finish 
your fruit or your cookie. I™ll provide the entertainment here.  [Laughter] 
I™d like to talk for just 
a few minutes about 
the 
latest iteration of the experimental consensus forecast.  You have a 
handout 
with that title. It proceeded in the same way as in previous iterations
:  The staff sent out 
a preliminary Tealbook forecast about a week in advance and 
received your comments. We also 

had the benefit 
this 
time of having the SEP.  So using all that, 
we came up with the forecast 
that™s shown in table 1 on page 1, and which is diagrammed in exhibit 1 on page 4. 
6 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
                  
           
      
    
  
      Like the Tealbook, this forecast or projection is conditioned on no change in policy.  That 
is, it™s 
conditioned on the August policies of continuing the MEP and late 2014 guidance.  
Generally speak
ing, the data are quite similar to 
the 
JulyŒAugust consensus, which is shown 
immediately below.  One exception is the 2013 real GDP forecast on the very first line, 
2.2 percent, which is a little bit weaker.  That was not inconsistent with the comments that came 

on the first draft
; most people either saw the near term as being a bit weaker or about the same
.  But I want to come back to that number in a moment.  The unemployment and inflation numbers 

are pretty similar, and if you care to look at the figure, you™ll see that the trajectories are very 

similar obviously, particularly relative to the standard errors. 
Like last time
, we also looked at the consensus forecast under alternative policy 
assumptions, and that™s given in table 3 on page 3.  Under each variable, the first line, the status 

quo is, again, the same as the consensus forecast in t
able 1.  That™s the forecast assuming the 
August policies continue.  The subsequent lines include, first, a chan
ge in the guidance to 
mid-2015, so simply 
a mechanical moving out of the interest rate path to mid-2015, and then 
subsequent 
additions of 
a $750 billion or $1 trillion LSAP program.  So that gives the 
alternative
s.  The differences are consistent with the 
FRB
/US analysis
; I™ll come back to that 
point as well.
  And 
exhibit
 2 shows the paths for the federal funds rate, the unemployment 
rate, 
and inflation under optimal control, under the no-
policy
-change consensus forecast in red, and 
then the alternative policies provided in t
able 3. 
Now, this time an issue came up
, which was less of a concern last time, but 
it raises an 
important question that I think the subcommittee is going to have to look at, which is that, of 

course, the SEP is conditional on each person™s view of optimal monetary policy.  And in this 

case, if you turn to table 2, which shows median forecasts in the September SEP, you™ll see the 
        
           
     
    
  
     
    
      SEP is broken into two categories
: all participants and participants who assume further easing. 
A major
ity of people submitted a forecast in which they assumed that the guidance would be 
advanced to 2015 and that we would undertake additional asset purchases. 
So the SEP submissions actually assume that change in policy.  So then the question is, 
how do you get from those SEP projections back to the no-policy-
change baseline?
  And what 
the staff proposed, and what they did, 
was basically they took these policy differentials that are 
in t
able 3
, and they subtracted from the SEP results to get the baseline.  An
d to the extent that 
those differentials are not accurate or are different from what people expect, then that will, of 

course, create some noise in the baseline forecast. 
So I raise this for a couple of reasons.  The first is that we need to think aboutŠ
and we 
talked about this last time
Šwhether the consensus forecast we would want to release would be 
the pre-
meeting status quo policy forecast
ŠI think President Lockhart suggested that last time
Š or the postmeeting inclusive
-of-the-action forecast, or both.  We could consider both
; I think we 
need to discuss that.  If we do both, then we will have to figure out how to make sure people are 

comfortable with both the before and the after, if you see what I™m saying. 
For this meeting, I think it will not 
be 
very m
uch of a problem.  What I had proposed to 
do is, as was given to you earlier on, in 
item
 5 after the policy decision tomorrow, I will ask you 

whether you are comfortable with the consensus forecast inclusive of the policy action.  And if 

we do take policy 
action, then this whole issue will be irrelevant because we™ll be looking at the 
policies assuming 
the further easing
Šat least for those participants who submitted that. 
But I 
just want to flag this point and note that we are planning a discussion in October of this whole 

project, and certainly one of the issues we™ll want to discuss is whether or not we want to look at 

ex ante, ex post
, or both forecasts, and how we would best extract that information.  So, again, 
                   
               
         
    tomorrow after the policy decision, I™ll ask you if you are comfortable with the consensus 
forecast, including whatever policy decisions we m
ake; are 
comfortable, with reservations; or 
have a 
very 
different view.  And 
I™ll 
ask you
, if you have a different view, 
to briefly state 
what 
that 
difference is.
  Any questions or comments? Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
You have this issue that the SEP has some people 
who 
have no change in policy; others have changes in policy.  That™s going to still be an outstanding 

issue going forward.  Do you have any thoughts on how we wouldŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that™s what I™m raising
Šwe have to figure out how to 
deal with that
.  One possibility would be to specifyŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  A, B
, and C? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, ye
sŠI suppose.  If we™re going to do the ex ante, 
before
-meeting projection, then everybody would be asked to make a projection conditional on 
the policy prior to the meeting, and the forecast could be used to say, 
ﬁWe thought this was 
unsatisfactory.  That™s why we took the action we did today.
ﬂ  Alternatively, we could ask for a 

forecast conditional on one or more policy actions.  But that™s an issue that 
this particular 
exercise has made clear, and I™m just flagging it for discussion by the subcommittee. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It™s interesting to see the difference that people submit in 
terms of the policy, because you actually find out what people think 
about how 
efficacious the 
policy is
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, of course.  
That™s right.  That™s certainly one of the 
benefits of doing that.  But everything that we are considering here also has the cost of 

multiplying the number of projections and forecasts we™re asking people to do, and that™s 

something we need to take into account.  
President Lacker. 
       
              
         
           
          
MR. LACKER.  You mentioned parts of the consensus forecast process.  We™re asked to 
provide a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, and I™d urge the staff and all of us to give 
some thought to what that ought to mean.  As I read the instructions, I thought of f
our different 
interpretations of that.  You take as a given that what we™re trying to do in writing down a 

forecast is 
to write
 down the mean of a joint distribution of the economy and policy.  Well, if you 
ask us to submit a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, are you asking us to replace our 

reaction function with one that™s fixed at that path unchangingly, 
and averaging over that? 
What 
do all 
of 
the shocks have to be? 
What™s the most likely outcome that delivers that as the policy 
reaction
Šwhat
 economy is weak enough to justify that policy?  That™s a different question.  Or, 
do we take 
our reaction function and add-
factor it so that it delivers that policy 
as a mean? 
There™s a bunch of different ways you can think of doing that, but we ought to be precise about 

it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course
Šwe™ll have to be precise.  These are 
complexities. 
One possibility would be to have everybody, again, assume appropriate monetary 
policy and 
deliver that joint distribution 
that you™re describing; and then, 
try to see if th
ere™s a 
center of gravity 
of that, which looks like the consensus; describe that consensus; and then 
describe those wh
o differ and qualitatively how they differ.  So that would be one approach.  
Another approach could be, for example, to ask people to use a specific reaction function or to 

specify their own reaction function.  
President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. 
Yes
Šthank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I like the idea
, in principle, 
of having a consensus forecast based on status quo policy and then a consensus forecast based on 

the policy action.  I think, though, that 
in practice
, the latter is going to be very challenging
, because you could easily imagine that the Committee could come up with a choice of a policy 
            
  
     
                 
    
action that they had not considered ex ante.  And then it becomes very difficult to know how the 
timing would work and to 
get the logistics to work. 
CHAIRMAN BERNA
NKE.  No, absolutely.  And again, I think Governor Yellen™s 
subcommittee will solve these problems for us [
laughter] and bring that to us in October.  
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Let me just reiterate on this. I do think that the market expectation o
f the Committee™s policy as of a certain date, which encompasses all aspects of monetary policy, is 

a fixed point that we could rally around.  Everyone c
an give their prognostication based on that.  
That would give us just one exercise to do.  Usually the 
market ex
pectation is not a long way off.  
It might be somewhat off, but it™s not a long way off, and it would simplify the exercise in my 

mind and would keep it clear
er what we™re 
doing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s, of course, what the British and some others do. 

MR. BULLARD.  Ye
s. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Does that address President Lacker™s concerns?  I wouldn™t have thought 
so. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not exactly.  Only if it™s approximately 
right
. MR. EVANS. 
Yes
Šright. 
CHAIRMAN BERN
ANKE.  Anybody else?  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  Narayana made the point I was going to make. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments or questions? 
Again, we will be 
discussing this at the next meeting.
  President Evans. 
             
    
                    
   
   
        
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a question 
that™s a little bit different
? I
t was triggered by 
some comments that President Fisher made earlier in asking questions, where he alluded to the 
fact that some people around the table would be, however you put it, more accepting of a high
er 
inflation rat
e than others, or whatever.  And in exhibit 2 on page 5, this question comes to my 

mind, which is, 
there is an optimal control path that is shown that has inflation rising to
ŠI think 
it™s 2.3 percent, 
if it™s co
nsistent with previous Tealbook-
style analyse
s. I personally don™t see 
anything in this path that™s inconsistent with our long
er-run strategic approach that we adopted in 
January, and I just wonder if that™s the sense of the Committee or if there™s an important 

divergence of opinion there, which seems to be one of the points that President Fisher might 

have been raising. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we are clear that our objective
s are
Šthink of a 
quadratic objective function.  They™re symmetrical.  The
re is an 
increasing marginal cost 
of being away from each objective. 
We have a balanced approach, but people w
ill have different 
models of the economy, and they™ll have different weights in their objective functions.  So this 
is 
obviously not a purely value-fee projection.  
President Bullar
d. MR. BULLARD. Is 
exhibit 2 something that would be distributed as part of the 
consensus 
forecast
? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, nothing has been decided, but I would
n™t 
imagine 
we would want to do all of those things. 
MR. BULLARD.  So this is just an internal document, 
like the ones we always use. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. EVANS.  I wasn™t asking a question about communications.  I was asking more a 
question about how we interpret our long
er-run strategic document, 
because at various times
, we 
          
          
                
    
  make diffe
rent comments about these types of outcomes, and it strikes me that there™s less 
agreement on that particular observation than sometimes is given by the words that we use. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I™ve said in press conferences that it™s a symmetric 
objective a
nd we have a balanced approach, and so on.  
Anyone else? 
[No response] 
All right. 
Now we come to the main event. Let™s start ou
r economic go-round with President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Intermeeting data
, I think, 
have done little to 
alter the economic picture.  We
™re in a period of sluggish economic growth, clearly.  
Our Fifth 
District survey measures, which fell sharply in July, 
have 
bounced back to neutral readings now, 
and the tenor of our anecdotal reports has been middling of late, consistent with reports we™
ve 
been hearing since the spring.  While activity is weak, we
™re not seeing any signs in our D
istrict 
of a dramatic slowdown around the cornerŠ
or a dramatic pickup
, for that matter. 
I thought it was appropriate, Mr. Chairman, that at our last meeting you took a longer-
term perspective by focusing on economic growth over the entire recovery.  As you noted, real 

GDP growth has averaged around 2 percent since the recovery began.  I think 2.2 percent is the 

pre
cise number.  We keep seeing swings in growth every couple of quarters around that average.  
So it mak
es sense to focus on the longer-run path around which we™re fluctuating, rather than 
just the last quarter or two.
  At our last meeting, Mr. Chairman, you talked about why growth 
was so low, and you discussed the spider charts put together by Board economists Greg Howard, 

Robert Martin, and Beth Anne Wilson.  I believe they refer to them as butterfly charts, but I™m 

not taking a stand on insects here.  
The 
main purpose of their paper was to show that advanced 

economies recover as rapidly from banking and financial crises as they do from other recessions, 

and I thought they did a pretty convincing job of that.  
Their charts also show that the current 

recovery
 in U.S. GDP tracks quite closely the typical advanced economy recovery from banking 
        
                                        and financial crises
, as well as the typical advanced economy recovery from housing slumps.  
The message I take away from their work is that we shouldn™t have expected to do much better 
than what we™ve experienced, and I think that™
s consistent with the message from some other 
research along the same lines.
  Now, the authors don™t focus on the notion of a gap, however.  
And for many people right now, the motivation for furt
her stimulus is that the relevant gap is 
quite large. 
I was quite pleased to see the memo from Bruce Fallick and Jeremy R
udd on this subject.  
It™s 
a helpful, well-organized description of how the staff thinks about and estimates economic 
slack
Šlays it out
 quite clearly.  And I think this memo should help clarify our mutual 
understanding going forward. 
But I
™d like to make a suggestion or two for further clarifying our 
discussions.  My suggestion is that we distinguish carefully between two distinct concep
tual 

notions of slack.  One concept is defined by the number to which the unemployment rate would 

converge in the future in the absence of unanticipated shocks and under appropriate monetary 

policy.  This is essentially what 
we™ve referred to as the 
ﬁlonger-run normal rate of 

unemployment.ﬂ I think that™s what we called it in our consensus statement in January.  T
hat™s a 
fine term for it.
  When people refer to sustainable employment, this is the concept I think of
:  what the economy is going to converge to 
several years from now, after the current shocks we
™ve 
experienced have dissipated and
, under appropriate policy, we get back to some trend with no 
shocksŠ
the mean forecast out there.
  Now, this number probably doesn™t vary much over time 
because
, by defi
nition
, the effect of current shocks has faded out by the time the economy 
converges to this number.  In fact, this number might be close to constant over time, or it may 

vary only with some slow-moving and predictable things, 
such as
 the demographic compo
sition 
of the labor force and the like.  So I think when you look at a construct like the NAIRU, the non-
              
      
                              
 accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, it
™s constructed with this notion in mind.  I™
ll come 
back to 
the 
NAIRU in a minute. 
The second concept of 
economic slack
, which I think we should distinguish from this 
first one
, is based on the reference level of the unemployment rate 
with which it is most 
appropriate to compare the current unemployment rate for the purposes of assessing current 
monetary pol
icy.
  Equivalently, one can think of this just as well in terms of the reference level 
for output 
with
 which it™s most appropriate to compare current output for monetary policy 
purposes.  
This is sometimes referred to as the 
ﬁnatural rate,
ﬂ although some writers refer to this 
as the 
ﬁefficient rate
ﬂ and reserve 
ﬁnatural rate
ﬂ for something distinct.  But 
ﬁnatural rateﬂ 
tends 
to be the term that 
we™ve used around the table here and 
that 
others 
have used
, and it™
s what the 
staff memo uses.  So 
I™
m going to stick with that term for this reference rate. 
In some very simple models, these two concepts are identical.  But in general, they™re not 
the same.  Indeed, in our standard, modern, mainstream models, almost all of the shocks hitting 

the model should affect the natur
al rate, even if the longer
-run normal rate doesn™t vary much.  
Now, not all of the shocks that hit the economy should affect the natural rate.  That™
s very clear 
in these models as well, and I™
ll talk more a little bit later about 
the difference and
 what kinds 
of 
shocks fall in that category.  By the way, I™d mention that modern models are all extensions of 

the 
Solow 
growth model that the Chairman referred to at our last meeting. That model is 
deterministic, nonmonetary.  These mod
els are extended to include a role for monetary factors 

and to include the role of uncertainty and unpredictable shocks to the economy.  I think the staff 

memo would have been clear
er if it had distinguished between these two notions of slack, 
because the 
estimates they present in this memo
Šsome are aimed at this longer
-run notion, and 
some pretty clearly are aimed at this short
-run reference notion.  
For example, the NAIRU 
            
       
             
      
          
  
      estimates they present ar
e designed to estimate the long
er-run normal rate of unemployment, 
because 
they 
deliberately exclude high
-frequency factors, but our models tell us that™
s clearly the 
wrong benchmark for policy in a world in which the economy is hit by a range of shocks.  
So my 
suggestion would be that staff 
members
, when they present 
to 
us a gap or a natural rate concept, 
be clear about what they™re trying to present.  I™ll note hereŠ
and I
™ll come back to this in a 
second
Šthe discussion we had about adjusting the natural rate for the drought
; that
™s a high
-frequency 
adjustment.  But the logic for making that adjustment is really identical to the logic for 
this reference rate that responds to current shocks. I think it would also aid clarity if we, in our 

discussions, were mindful of this distinction between these two.  The gap between the current 

unemployment rate and the long-run normal unemployment rate is exceptionally high by 

historical standards, and that gap clearly represents a tremendous amount of human suffering.  

And I can understandŠeveryone should understandŠwhy that would add urgency to the search 

for remedies to that.
  But modern macroeconomics is pretty clear about the gap that™
s relevant 
for the conduct of monetary policy, and it™s conceptually different from the gap defined by the 

distance 
between whe
re we are today and 
where we
™re going to be several years from now. 
So how do you estimate policy-
relevant gaps? Well, you need a model because you
™re 
talking about a counterfactual; 
you
™re talking about something that doesn™t happenŠ
it™s a latent, 
unobserved variable.  You need a model to be able to extract something like that from the data, 

and different models, obviously, 
give you different estimates. 
The staff memo presents estimates 
derived from EDO, the Board™s New Keynesian dynamic stochastic gener
al equilibrium
 model.  
And it delivers 
an estimate of the current gap 
of 
a little under 3 percent, defined this second way, 
the natural rate way. 
That compares 
with 
the NAIRU
-based estimate that the Tealbook provides 
        
      
                 
  
         
     
       
     
         of about 4½ 
percent, so you can see 
that you can get a significant difference there
.  This 
illustrates the extent to which the model you bring to bear makes a difference. 
So how big is the relevant gap?  Well, I™ve said beforeŠand I think others around the 
table have said before
Šthat we don™t think it™
s large, and we
™ve tried to describe economic 
factors that, in theoretical models
, would affect the natural rate and so would
n™t
 add to the gap.  
So they™d reduce your estimate of the gap.  
Now, rather than repeat myself
ŠI know that hasn™t 
stopped 
me in the past
ŠI thought I™d take the opposite tack and talk about what™s in the gap.  
The economy in a model that™s taken to the data is envisioned as driven by shocks and other 
developments.  Those shocks 
all affect the data you see, but not all of th
em affect the natural 
rate.  So the things that affect the economy, but don™t 
figure 
into this natural rate, are the things 
that affect the gap. 
What could those things be?  Well, this depends, obviously, on the model 
you use to interpret the data, the mode
l you use to extract an estimate of the natural rate, and so 
determine the gap. 
Let™s take a look at
 EDO, the Board™s DSGE model.  Its 
estimate of the gap 
is based on the natural rate, as I said, and it™s near 3 percent.  What would it take for the gap to 

be that large in that model?  Now, I should caution here
:  What I
™m going to say is based on my 
understanding of the model conceptually, theoretically.  I haven™t looked at the empirical 

decomposition, but based on my understanding of what™s going on in t
hat model
Šthis is true for 
a lot of other models as wellŠ
you
™d have to believe 
that 
one of two sorts of things 
is going on 
for the gap to be large. 
First, you could believe that firms have not fully adjusted their prices in 
response to the downward shift in demand that occurred four years ago.  These models are based 

on the notion of prices being sticky temporarilyŠ
that people set prices and
, for a time
, they™
re 
not incented to
ward, 
or they
™re prevented from
, adjusting their prices to reflect developments 
that they
™re seeing at their doorstep.
  So this price stickiness keeps prices from adjusting.  A 
fall 
                                             
     in demand shows up in quantities rather than prices at first, and then later, as prices adjust, the 
adjustment shows up in prices rather than quantities.  So that™
s the general mechanism.
  To 
attribute it all to that, you
™d have to believe that there™s 
an incredible amount of price stickiness 
in this economy.  I don™t find that plausible, and I don™t think it lines up with other evidence we 

have on the degr
ee of price stickiness in the economy. 
The second class of things you could believe, in order to believe that the gap is large, is 
that the economy has been hit by a string of large shocks that have not affected the model™s 

natural rate but have affected t
he economy.  And this is what the model attributes the large gap 
to.  What would those shocks be? Well, in EDO, there 
are
 only two kinds of shocks that would 
affect the gap.  One is a string of upward shocks to the degree of monopolistic power that firms 

have in setting prices. Firms are monopolistic competitors.  They have a little bit of pricing 

power, not total, and the amount of pricing power they have is determined by the degree of 

substitutability between goods.  For some reason, goods are less of a substitute for each other 

now, so firms have more pricing power, and t
hat™s why prices haven™t adjusted
, quantities have, 
and the gap is high.  Alternatively, you could believe that a string of analogous shocks in the 

labor market ha
s occurred, so that workers have more bargaining power in setting wages and 
are 

able to extract a 
kind of monopoly power from the firms they work for.  Now, I don™t have direct 

observations on any of these.  You infer these from the model and the data.  You 
take the model 

as given, you infer these kinds of things.  But those don™t really match up, in my mind, to the 

kinds of anecdotal stories you hear from people.  You just don™t hear about firms having a lot 

more pricing power than they did four years ago, and it certainly doesn™t seem consistent to think 

of workers as having a lot more leverage now, either.  So I find both of these implausible.  
Now, 

as I said, this is based on my understanding of EDO
; my understanding of how the theoretical 
              
    
    
    
              
     
  
       
  
       model is built
Šthat is well documented.  In that EDO model, in the memo results, they didn™t do 
the decomposition.  They didn™t show us how much of the gap is due to sticky prices left over 

from 
2008 shocks, how much is due to monopoly power shocks, how much is due to wa
ge pricing shocks.  I said they don™t seem plausible, but the right way forward for us, in talking 

about these things, is to put some estimates on the table and do the decomposition.  W
e have a 
working group under 
way that works with a set of these models. 
There are 
other DSGE 
modelsŠPhiladelphia, Chicago.  What™s the other one? 
PARTICIPANTS.  New York. 

MR. LACKER. 
New York.  I forgot New York.  And there 
are
 others around the 
System.  I know 
that 
Atlanta operates a pretty elaborate model as well.
  So e
ach of these taken to 
the data would give you a different estimate of the gap, and they™d give you a different 

decomposition of what the gap was about.  We™d be able to look at those, if we had them in front 

of us, and say, ﬁWell, attributing the gap to this is persuasive to me.  It matches up with what I 

think is out there,ﬂ or, ﬁThis reason for the gap to be large isn™t persuasive to me.ﬂ  And we could 

have a discussion that goes beyond, ﬁI think the gap is big.
ﬂ ﬁNo, I think the gap is small.
ﬂ  ﬁNo, 
I think the gap is big.
ﬂ ﬁNo, I think the gap is small.ﬂ I think we could make progress by putting 
the cards on the table, by putting some more-
explicit analysis on the table. 
So that™s my suggestion for improving our discussion of the gap going forward.  As I 
said, the estimates of the 3 percent gap in EDO seem implausible to me compared 
with 
factors 
that I
™ve talked about that are likely to affect the natural rate rather than the gap
Šthings like 
the 
labor market
, skill problems, 
the 
housing overhang, and policy uncertainty, which 
aren™t 
captured by the models.
  We could have a debate then about what is in the model or not.  T
his is 
what goes into my thinkingŠthat we shouldn™t expect much from monetary policy now.  
                   
                     
 Moreover, we might be pretty close to where the policy-
relevant natural rate is right now.
  Thank 
you
ŠI took some extra time here.  I appreciate it.  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE C
HAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I don™t really understand why the DSGE model should 
be particularly relevant to the current set of circumstances, given that this is a financial shock, a 

huge financial shock, and my understanding is that DGSE models are very rudimentary, 
if 
they 

hav
e anything
, in terms of the financial sector.
  To go to the DSGE models 
as a source of 
determining the natural rate versus the NAIRU and 
the size of the gap seems a little bit 
ﬁoff the 
reservation
ﬂ relative to the source of the shock.  So I™m just curious what your reaction is. 
MR. LACKER.  Sure.  Let me say two things to that.  
The f
irst is that progress has been 
made in putting the rudiments of a financial sector in these models.  The New York model is a 

leader on that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  B
ut we™
re still in elementary school. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  The second thing I™d point out, though, is that if we™re going to 
think about the data we see, draw conclusions, and act on it, we™
re using either an explicit model 
or an implicit model.  There
™s no avoiding that.  Otherwise, what we™re doing is gibberish.  
An explicit model has the advantage of exposing all sides of the reasoning process to scrutiny by 

others.  You can say, 
and it
™s perfectly legitimate to think, 
ﬁAll right
Šyes, this factor that I t
hink 
is important is not in this model,
ﬂ and I just did that with EDO.  I just said, 
ﬁLook, it doesn™t 
have a very articulate labor sector
ﬂŠbut we can debate that, and we can look at the magnitudes 
and talk about that.  
So I think it
™s a vehicle for analysis and discussion that crystallizes our 
thinking, that pins things down, but I don™t think it™s constructive to say, ﬁX isn™t in the model.  I 
       
              
    
    
                have a free pass to say whatever I want.ﬂ I just don™t think that™s constructive.  I know that™s not 
what you were advocating. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, President Lacker.  You™
re a 
perfect straight man for me because 
I™m going to be rather brief 
[laughter] 
to preserve 
time for 
the main event. 
Reports from my 
District contacts were very little changed from August. 
Economic expansion remains positive but very modest.  Just a coup
le of comments from 

contacts.  First, housing-sector contacts and several of my banking directors repor
ted that 
residential real estate activity in general is clearly improving.  Prices have firmed in many areas, 

sales volume has increased, and permitting is rising.  Purchase mortgage applications have 

increased recently, and refinance activity remains positive. I have also seen data suggesting that 

the recent increase in purchases is bei
ng driven primarily by mortgage-financed homebuyers 
rather than cash investors.  Second, a director from a large management consulting firm offered 

the view that a number o
f his firms, very large corporate clients, have resigned themselves to a 
2 percent growth world, and that major actions these businesses might take to accelerate their 

growth are largely on hold.  We heard a similar theme from several contacts.
  And, third, 
inflation and rising business costs are not much of a concern among our contacts.  My director 

from the country™s largest home-
improvement retailer reported that suppliers are not asking for 
price 
increases in this environment. 
Let me shift to my 
Bank™s assessment of the national economy and outlook.  It has 
become pretty difficult, in my view, to reject the view that the economy has been on a roughly 

2 percent growth trend for most of the recovery.  Maybe I™m a little slow, but the recognition has 

gelled
 in my thinking, 
just in the last few weeks
, that this is the prevailing reality.  Based on 
                        
          
     
         recent estimates, this may even overstate the immediate reality.
  My outlook for GDP growth 
continues to show only modest improvement on this trend over the forecast horizon.  In 
particular, beyond this year and next, I remain less optimistic about the pace of 
GDP growth than 
the Tealbook.  With respect to employment, my baseline outlook has been a continuation of the 

trend of roughly 150,000 per month that has prevailed over the past two years.  This pace would 

be sufficient at current participation rates to make continuing but modest progress on the 

unemployment rate. However, last week™s job report makes it pretty clear that employment 

growth has fallen short of the 150,000 trend over the past four months.  Even though four months 

amount to a small sliver of time, I am concerned about the lack of any sustained progress on the 

unemployment rate since the beginning of the year.  It is getting harder to rule out the p
ossibility 

that returning to the 
scenario of 
150,000 jobs a month is at risk.  
My perception is that the well
-known uncertainty factors, including those associated with various downside risks, are 

contributing to some of the recent softness in the data.  I have no argument with the SEP bias that 

GDP growth risks are weighted to the downside, but I don™t rule out that these uncertainty drags 
could dissipate and that there is some upside potential.  For instance, some of the incoming 

information around housin
g and 
Europe has been mildly encouraging, and it
™s plausible that if 
the major sources of uncertaintyŠnotably, the fiscal cliff and European situationŠ
are resolved 

favorably, or more or less favorably, in a few months, the outlook actually could be brighter.  So 

it strikes me that this environment is not as clear
-cut as the situations that we faced on the cusp 
of LSAP1 and LSAP2. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Mr. Wilcox, did you want to add to the 
conversation? 
          
   
        
      
      
                      MR. WILCOX.  
Yes. I don™t have a detailed response to President Lacker™s comments, 
but I thought I might just offer a few observations.  Sometimes I
™m in sympathy with many of 
the points that President Lacker makes.  I think it™s impor
tant, though, to state that we take it as 
our remit to advise the Committee to the limit of our ability to measure the economy, to estimate 
and understand the economy, to observe economic processes.  We think it™
s critically important 
not to do more than that, and we™re profoundly aware of the extent of our ignorance and the 

ignorance of the macroeconomic profession at large, regarding key questions about how the 

macroeconomy works. 
I™
m reminded of a comment that Larry Summers once made in quite a 
differen
t situation
, in which he said, ﬁYou know, economics is an interesting field.  I doubt that 
when astrophysicists get together
, they debate the fundamental validity of the laws of gravity.  
And yet what we as economists do is, we have profound uncertainty about questions that are as 

fundamental as the laws of gravity.
ﬂ  We on the staff do make every effort to distinguish short-

run influences that we can identify.  For example, we have adjusted our reference level of the 

unemployment rate in light of influence
s that we can identify and estimate
, stemming from 
emergency unemployment benefits and from the quality of functioning of the labor market.  We 

have adjusted our measure of the gap between the actual unemployment rate and the reference
, 
or natural, 
rate of
 unemployment for those kinds of things.  But beyond that, we confront the real 
world in which data are imperfect, theory is deficient, policymaker and staff bandwidth is 

limited, and there are a lot of profound and fundamental debates to be resolved. 
With regard to EDO, it is a state
-of-the-
art DSGE model coming directly out of the 
intellectual tradition that President Lacker refers to. It
™s part, but only part, of the intellectual 

base that we consult in the course of putting together our analysis that we provide to the 

Committee.
  Now, whether the empirical properties of that model are plausible or implausible is 
                
                              
              
a little difficult for me to say.  They are what they are, and they
™re derived by an effort to work 
directly in that intellectual tradition.  W
e have pursued a diversified, 
multimodel strategy
, which 
we think provides our analysis with a greater robustness than would be the case if we had a 
single 
model or a single-
intellectual
-tradition strategy. 
So I
™m in sympathy with many of the 
points that President Lacker raises, but I think we need to recognize that the macroeconomic 

profession has a long way to go before we can deliver the kind of clarity and certainty that it 

seems to me is implicit in much of your remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President 
Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate Dave Wilcox™s comments 
there, and I™
ll have a few comments on the slack memo at the end here. 
Let me talk for a minute 
about the Eighth District economy, which continues to expand at a modest pace.  The drought in 

the 
District has been especially severe and is having an important effe
ct on agriculturally 
based 
businesses.  I generally agree with the Tealbook analysis of the 
effe
ct of the drought on the 
macroeconomy over the next couple of quarte
rs. 
District labor markets are improving slowly. 
The 
District unemployment rate, based on 16 D
istrict MSAs, has continued to decline this year 
and is, according to the most recent data, about 7.5 percent, noticeably below the national 

unemployment rate.
  Employment growth in the District has been slow, just a touch better than 
the national data, according to the most recent observations.  District real estate markets have 

improved during 2012.  Data on home sales for District MSAs, for instance, are up by 
a healthy 
margin compared 
with
 2011.  Specifically, year-
to-date home sales are up almost 13 percent in 
Louisville, 7 percent in Little Rock, 10 percent in Memphis, and 16 percent in St. Louis.  

Similarly, building permits for single
-family homes year to 
date in 2012 versus 2011 were up 
42 percent in Louisville, 14 percent in Little Rock, 46 percent in Memphis, and 23 percent in 
               
             
          
   
    
  
    St.
 Louis.  So I think that the housing part of the equation is moving off the bottom in 2012, and I 
find that encouraging. 
Natio
nally, I view the macroeconomy as being in a sluggish 
economic 
growth mode, but 
for a variety of reasons, I do not think the current constellation of data readings is one that should 
trigger outsized monetary policy action.  I view the U.S. economy as being on a path not too 

different from the one suggested in the work of Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rog
off as cited by 
President Lacker.
 They noted that post-
financial
-crisis or 
post-bubble economies tend to grow 
relatively slowly for a long time.  Our economy cl
early suffered through 
a collapse of a housing 
bubble, along with an associated financial crisis, so it is not really that surprising that the 

economy is following a path similar to the one experienced by other countries 
that 
have been in a 
similar situati
on.  In particular, the notion of a rapid return to the pre-
crisis
, bubble-influenced 
real GDP growth trend seems quite unrealistic accor
ding to the international cross-country 
evidence.  This, to me, is the leading hypothesis for our current situation.  I am concerned about 

the global slowdown and that, fed in large part by ongoing recession in Europe, this is affecting 

and will continue to affect U.S. multinational corporations.  These effects are quite apparent in 

my discussions with business contacts in 
medium and large firms in the 
District and across the 
nation.  Many are reporting troubling or worrisome movements in revenue and volume data 

during recent months.  While this bears watching, I do not think it is yet at the point where I 

foresee an especially severe impact on the U.S.  Some of this is certainly to be expected when the 

pan-European economy, which is actually somewhat larger than the U.S. economy, is in 
recession. 
I see U.S. inflation as subdued but generally close to target, unlike the summ
er and fall of 
2010, when nearly all measures of inflation were low and on a downward trajectory.  Again, this 
             
                 
   
   
             
  
     bears watching, but in my view, a threat of continued disinflation and possibly eventual deflation 
has not materialized, at least so far. 
Inflat
ion expectations are, by our own description, stable.  
Five
-year TIPS
-based expected inflation was about 208 basis points yesterday.  This, again, is 
not the situation of 2010, at least so far.  In addition, the five-year TIPS real yield of about 

minus 145 basis points is considerably lower than in 2010, suggesting that monetary policy may 

be much easier today than it was at that juncture.  In addition, I do not see financial stress as 

being particularly high at the current moment.  The St. Louis Financial Stress Index is showing 
a relatively tame reading. Of course, many factors could increase financial stress, but as of now
, those events have not occurred and, in fact, may not occur. 
I think it makes sense to wait and see what Europe can deliver during th
e fall.  As I
™ve 
told all of you before, I™
ve become 
more pessimistic on the medium
-term European prospects 
during the summer, as I have come to doubt that Europe has the type of either informal or formal 

institutional arrangements to deal with a crisis of
 this magnitude.  
Still, I think the jury remains 
out on that issue, so it would make sense for us to wait and see what the Europeans do, 
and see 

what happens.  
Certainly, recent declines in Spanish and Italian yields across the yield curve for 

government debt in both countries have been impressive 
and
 substantial, even if the medium-
and longer-term outlook for Europe is questionable.  
I am concerned that the ECB is not really 
easing aggressively in order to mitigate the 
euro
-area recession. Indeed, the ECB is preoccupied 
with selective debt purchases on a basis that requires some conditionality, which means that they 

have to wait for the country to react to their offer.  This throws off the timing of the relationship 

between the 
normal business cycle 
and 
monetary policy.
  So that™s keeping the ECB from acting, 
which makes me worried that the U.S. action could exacerbate the recession there by 

strengthening the 
euro.  And indeed, the e
uro has been stronger in recent weeks.
  You might say 
      
             
              
          
  
   
 we worry only about the U.S. economy, which I think is very true and very relevant, but this 
could end up feeding back to the U.S. in a detrimental way if we make the European situation 

worse. 
Longer
-term interest rates in the U.S. are already very low.  Ten
-year 
Treasury tr
ading in 
a recent session was around 170 basis points.  That™
s extremely low by rec
ent historical metrics. 
Longer
-term inflation expectations are in excess of 250 basis points, depending on which 
measure you use.  That implies negative real yields over a 
10-year horizon.  That™s an extremely 
long horizon to have a negative real yield.  I think the U
nited States 
can benefit from the lower 
yields that we have in place right now.  We can benefit from the flight to safety that has driven 

capital out of Europe, 
much as the U
nited States
 did during the 1997Œ98 
Asian currency crisis. 
Also, equity markets are at recent highs
Šfour
-year highs, 
if I™m not mistaken.  This seems to 
indicate among investors a certain confidence in the future of U.S. economic performance 

despite an ongoing worldwide slowdown, and I think the jury is still out a little bit on whether 

the U
nited States
 can be the strength in the storm here or whether we™re going to get pulled into 
the global slowdown ourselves.  Obviously, there are detrime
ntal effects from the rest of the 
world, but there are also offsetting 
flight
-to-safety effects in the U
nited States
.  So I think we 
could afford to see how that plays out for a few months here going forward. 
Labor markets in the U.S. are improving, although in a halting and uneven way.  It is 
sometimes noted that the national unemployment rate has not improved during 2012.  I might 

remind the Committee that this was also true in 2011.  We had 9.1 percent unemployment in 

January of 2011.  As of August 2011, 
we were also at 9.1 percent.
  However, today™s 
unemployment one year after that is 8.1 percent, 1 full percentage point lower.  That™s about as 

good as we can do in this game, about as good as we can do in one year™s time.  The U.S. 
              
    
       
       
          unemployment rate has 
rarely, if ever, dropped this much in one year during the past 25 years.  
This improvement, 
of course
, occurred unevenly, but it did occur nevertheless and from a 
starting point last year at this time in September that looked considerably darker than today
™s outlook.  
Some might say we did
n™t
 take action last year, but we took action through the m
aturity 
extension p
rogram.  That program is still in place and still on the table. 
In summary, as always, there are many ongoing developments that bear watching, but I 
think that the current readings on key aspects of the economy do not argue for outsized monetary 
policy action at this particular juncture.  I™m not saying I would never support it, but I don™t think 

that this moment is probably the right time. 
A few comments on the slack memo.  I do appreciate the memo, and I think it did a great 
job of outlining the approach to the slack issue that has been taken by the staff for, 
I belie
ve, 
many years at the Fed.  I thought it was accurate and outlined the issues very well.  The memo, 

to me, suggests that the ﬁ
get
-serious DSGE approachﬂ shows exactly how complicated this 
concept really is when you try to get down to it.  W
henever 
you
™re 
trying to fix something, it
™s good to know what you™re trying to fix.  And the great thing about the New Keynesian model is, 

you know what you™re trying to fix.  You™
re trying to fix the fact that there are sticky prices out 
there, and you can improve welf
are in that model in a certain way by certain types of monetary 
policy actions.  But different assumptions that you might make inside the model are quite subtle, 

and they can imply different welfare outcomesŠ
that is, different amounts of utility that actua
lly 
get delivered to households.  I think 
that 
there
™s no substitute going forward, that the Committee 
just has to take a stand on these complicated issues and we have to roll up our sleeves and say, 

ﬁWhat is it that we think we need
 to do?
ﬂ and ﬁW
hat is it that we want to fix?ﬂ
  The problem is, 
because of the subtleties inside these models, what we learned from the models is that you can 
          
        
                       
       inadvertently be doing more harm than good, depending on what™s actually going on in the real 
world and depending on whi
ch assumptions are really the ones that make the most sense. 
I think 
there
™s a very clear core idea, and you don™t have to read the whole literature to get at the core 
idea.  The co
re idea is that the flexible price level of output is a volatile object. 
Even in an 
economy that had no frictions whatsoever, there would be all kinds of shocks, and that level of 

output, which would be a Pare
to-optimal thing, would be moving around all of the time.  T
he 
actual level of output that we observe is probably not that level of output, and therefore there 

may be scope for a policy action.  But in any event, that volatile flexible price level of output is 

not going to be a smooth trend the way we traditionally have thought about it in macroeconomic 

circles since the 19
50s and 1960s.  Most of what we try to do when we think about potential 
output and measures of slack is to get a smooth trend.  I don™t think that that™s supported by the 

modern macroeconomic literature. 
The memo also makes it clear that there
™s tremendous 
uncertainty about estimates of 
slack, even if you™
re willing to swallow other assumptions about 
the 
statistical models or the 
economic models.  
As I
™ve emphasized in the past, even if all you want to do is forecast, and you 
don™t care about all of the the
oretical issues, the relationships between the slack measures and the 
actual inflation outcomes are questionable themselves and are weak and
, I think, 
have gotten 
weaker over time. 
I™ve talked about slack many times here, but I do think that, 
going forwar
d, it would behoove the Committee to put a clear model on the table.  W
e can argue about whether 
those assumptions 
are
 the right ones, whether 
we like them, 
and whether we think we can bring 
other evidence to bear on the particular assumptions.  And 
we can 
get it clear
er in our own heads 
how we think we™re helping matters with our policy. 
                                    
           I also thought it was very interesting in the memo
ŠI™ve often wondered about the term 
ﬁNAIRU.ﬂ  The memo makes it clear that the ﬁAﬂ no longer belongs in 
ﬁNAIRU,
ﬂ and in fact
, the ﬁNﬂ doesn™t belong in ﬁ
NAIRU
ﬂ either
Šso just ﬁ
IRU.
ﬂ It™s just 
ﬁIRU
ﬂ at the end.  T
he ﬁAﬂ 
stands for ﬁ
accelerati
ngﬂ 
and staff 
members 
make it clear that they™ve had to take that part out 
because it wasn™t working very well over maybe quite a long time period.  So I thought that that 
was interesting.  Maybe we should quit using the term, since the acceleration part isn™t in there 

anymore.
  Thanks a lot.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The past nine months remind me a bit 
of Samuel Beckett™s play 
Waiting for Godot. 
Rather than waiting for 
Godot
, we are waiting for 
the labor market recovery.  And like 
Godot, the recovery in the labor market continues to elude 

us.  
In the Beckett play, the character
s seriously consider suicide as their best solution to the 
seemingly endless wait.  I do hope 
that 
tomorrow we arrive at a better solution.  [Laughter] 
Unfortunately, last month™s labor market report was quite consistent with my submission 
for the e
xperimental consensus forecast.  I had a more pessimistic outlook for the next 18 months 
than the consensus forecast, and it assumed that we would not see robust employment growth or 

a significant change in the unemployment rate by the end of the yearŠ
or, for th
at matter, the end 
of next year
Šwithout further accommodation.  The modest employment growth did not surprise 
me, although I may not have sufficiently considered the possibility of the further declines in 
the 

labor force participation rate that were a striking feature of last Friday™s employment report, 

reducing the unemployment rate but for the wrong reason.  
One of the distinctive features of this 

recession and recovery has been the percentage of the unemployed who remain unemployed for 

greater than
 26 weeks.  Unlike the deep recession in 1982, in which there was a quick recovery 
        
                          
          and, as a result, a re
latively small increase in long
-duration unemployment, this recession has 
had a weak recovery, resulting in more long-duration unemployment.  Work being done by the 
staff in Boston that decomposes the 
Beveridge 
curve by duration of unemployment finds that the 
shift in the curve is primarily generated by workers who suffer long-duration unemployment.  

Faster growth in the economy would likely mitigate some of this problem. 
While some have attributed the slow recovery to a deleveraging process, I would put less 
weight on that argument.  Consumption and business investment have not been the laggards in 

this recovery.  Rather, government spending and housing account for much of the unusual 

weakness.  In fact, if you exclude housing and government spending from GDP for this recovery, 

it looks much like the previous two recoveries.  The unusually weak government spending is, in 

part, a result of the state and lo
cal governments pulling back in response to greatly diminished 
revenues, a direct consequence of the depth of the recession and the weakness of the recovery.  

Many were prepared for a revenue shortfall, with funds accumulated in their rainy day funds, but 

this recession quickly put most rainy day funds underwater.  Housing is usually a driver of most 

recoveries but has been absent for much of this recovery.  However, since the onset of the 

housing bust, the population has grown, per capita income has grown, 
interest rates are low, and 

prices are more affordable, resulting in tentative signs of a housing recovery.  This is a propitious 

time for considering additional stimulus to housing. 
If homebuyers feel that house prices are on 
the rise
Šas many indicators
 suggest 
and
 the Tealbook forecastsŠ
and that mortgage rates will 
remain this low only temporarily, we may start to get new homebuyers to commit before rates 

and prices rise. 
It is important to note the significant downside risks we are still facing.  While there have 
been some positive announcements about financial support out of Europe, the underlying 
                        
              
      
   solutions still require political support.  Domestically, while most are aw
are of the dangers of a 
fiscal cliff, the positive solutions still require political action.
  Should either of these risks 
materialize, we will need to consider a further array of tools: 
 possibly expanding QE even 
further, using asset purchases to target long rates
, or providing more commitment in our 
guidance.  An important addition to these tools might also be an expanded set of discount 

window actions.  The staff memo on this provides a good road map to possible ways forward.  

They include a variant of 
the Bank of England program, a mortgage program that would provide 
low-cost funding for banks to finance mortgage loansŠparticularly to those parts of the 

mortgage market that have been slow to recover, and programs that might require T
reasury 
support to reduce the credit risk entailed on certain types of lendin
g.  While some of these tools 
are likely to be most useful during a crisis where lending markets are disrupted, some could be 

implemented even in the current rate environment. I would encourage the staff to continue to 

search for creative ways that we can support those areas of the economy that are still troubled.  

As further progress is made, it may be worth discussing, either as an additional tool if the 

recovery continues to be quite slow or as a contingency plan should some of the tail risks 

materialize.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  During the intermeeting period, the 
economic data have confirmed that the ec
onomy remains stuck in low gear. Like the Tealbook, I 

expect only modest 
GDP growth in the second half of this year.  
Clearly, the economic recovery 
hasn™t been able to gain traction in the face of a variety of head
winds.  These include household-
sector d
eleveraging, tight credit for many potential borrowers, fiscal retrenchment, and global 
uncertainties.  Given these headwinds, absent further monetary policy accommodation, I would 
          
  
          
         
    
     expect sluggish growth and no meaningful progress toward our employment mandate until 2014.  
Indeed, when judged on a policy-consistent basis, my outlook is somewhat more pessimistic than 

the Tealbook forecast and consensus forecast, with slower 
GDP growth and a higher path for the 
unemployment rate. 
In gauging the medium-
term ou
tlook for the economy and the stance of monetary policy, 
I find the 
Kalman
-filter model that I developed with Thomas Laubach to be a useful tool.  A
fter 
this morning™s discussion, I™
m a little nervous about going into the 
Kalman 
filter, but I
™m assured 
that Thomas is ready with a white board to answer any technical questions regarding our model.  

But this model seeks to distinguish between transitory and highly persistent supply and demand 

influences on economic activity.  In response to President Bullard™s 
earlier comments, I would 
stress that in our model, we do not impose any restriction that potential output growth is smooth.  

We let the data speak to that.
  The highly persistent influences on demand can be summarized by 
what we call the natural rate of 
interest.  In the model, a highly persistent reduction in demand 
lowers the natural rate of interest.  And I think importantly for thinking about the stance of 

monetary policy and a number of issues around that, our balance sheet policies should boost the 

natural rate of interest, all else 
being 
equal, in this empirical model. 
So, influenced by Board 
staff research that highlights the information content of gross domestic income along with gross 

domestic product, I™ve estimated a modified version of the LaubachŒ
Williams model using both 

GDI and GDP.
  The current estimate of the natural rate of interest from this model is about 
minus 75 basis points.  The current real funds rate, therefore, is only about 1 percentage point 

below this estimate of the natural rate.  This implies that the current extent of monetary 

accommodation, including our balance sheet policies, has only modestly exceeded the severe 

headwinds that we™re facing in our economy. 
         
          
        
                             Given my forecast
s for subdued 
economic 
growth and very little pr
ogress on the 
employment mandate over the next few years, my SEP projection assumes considerable 
additional monetary policy stimulus.  In particular, I assume a new program of open-
ended 
purchases of 
Treasuries and MBS.  They expand the Fed™s balance sheet
 by about $1 trillion over 
the next year or so. 
And with this stimulus, I expect a faster recovery, with real GDP growth of 
2½ percent next year and 
3¼ percent in 2014, with the unemployment rate edging down to 
7.9 percent at the end of next year and 7.3 percent 
at the end of 2014.  
I see the risk
s to this 
outlook as skewed to the downside.  Another bout of brinkmanship around the fiscal cliff seems 

likely, if not inevitable.  The problems plaguing Europe also remain daunting, with considerable 

risk to our economy if the financial crisis intensifies. 
Here I would just echo the comments made 
earlier by Vice Chairman
 Dudley.  I share those views and was somewhat more pessimistic than 
perhaps the Tealbook™s description of recent events in Europe.  The bold program that the ECB 

has announced will certainly buy some short-run relief, but the underlying problems remain
:  a 
lack of political federalism, an unsustainable fiscal outlook, and disparities in economic 

competitive
ness across Europe.  So, in summary, the ECB™s actions may serve as a useful bridge 
loan.  
I hope it is not a bridge loan to nowhere. 
The fiscal cliff and the crisis in Europe are not just risks to the outlook; 
by increasing 
uncertainty
, they 
also 
seem alr
eady to be adding to the factors slowing our recovery.  It seems 
everyone I talk to stresses that uncertainty is holding back hiring and investment.  Indeed, 

uncertainty appears to have virtually paralyzed some businesses, prompting them to postpone 

capita
l spending and delay payroll expansions.  So a key question for monetary policy is whether 

this rise in uncertainty should be viewed primarily as a shock to demand, which lowers both 

output and inflation if not counteracted by additional monetary policy stimulus, or as a shock to 
            
    
       
                
           
   
supply, such as the drought, which lowers output but boosts inflation.  R
ecent theoretical and 
empirical research has addressed this question.  As I described back in December, empirical 
research by my staff at the San Francisco Fe
d finds that over the past 30 years, 
higher uncertainty 

operates like a negative aggregate demand shock that reduces both economic activity and 

inflation.  Following uncertainty shocks of the types that we currently face, expenditures on 

consumer durables, investment, short-
term interest rates, and inflation all fall
, while 
unemployment rises
, in this analysis.  
Now, I
™m sure President Lacker will be very happy to hear 
what I
™m about to say, and that is that we also looked at this issue in a fully micro
-fou
nded 
DSGE model.  This finding that uncertainty acts primarily as a demand shock is confirmed by 

the research using such DSGE models, both by my staff and by academic researchers. 
An increase in uncertainty causes households to save more for precautionary reasons.  This a
ffects 
both supply and demand in the models.  However, in these models, the demand effects are by far 

the dominant ones.  This is because the negative effects of an uncertainty shock on consumption 

are amplified when prices are slow to adj
ust, causing businesses to cut production further.  
This 
implies that uncertainty shocks lead to a negative output gap, a fall in inflation, and this is 

consistent with the empirical evidence I mentioned a moment ago.  All told, both theory and data 

sugges
t that the uncertainty shocks that I believe are holding back
 our economy today really 
should be seen more as adverse shocks to demand, which monetary policy should aim to offset. 
Turning to inflation, the medium-term outlook has not changed.  I continue t
o expect 
overall PCE inflation to remain below 2 percent for the next few years, and I view the risks 
to the 
inflation forecast as balanced. 
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 
           
   
                           MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like Presi
dent Lockhart, I
™m going to 
keep my remarks on economic conditions particularly brief today because I believe that we have 
more agreement on the outlook than we have on the policy implications of the outlook, which 

means 
that 
I™m not going to be as brief in my comments on policy 
tomorrow. 
My 
District 
business contacts remain concerned about the risks to the outlook, yet they are generally 

reporting only small changes in activity levels in their own businesses.  A few of my business 

contacts point to either a coming slowdown or a coming acceleration in their sales.  Their 

comments are consistent with the holding pattern around today™s 2 percent growth rate.  
In my 
current outlook, I expect the recovery to remain in this holding pattern for the rest of this y
ear 
and then generally pick up to a GDP growth rate of a little more than 2½ percent in 2013 and a 

little more than 3 percent in 2014.  In order to achieve these projected growth rates, I assume that 

we provide further policy accommodation by extending the period of very low rates into 2015. 
Among the data released since our last meeting, the August employment report stands 
out.  It was particularly disappointing in that the BLS confirmed that the economy had made very 

little progress in labor markets over 
the summer. While the month
-to-month swings in the 
household survey make the progress on the unemployment rate difficult to interpret, the decline 

in the employment
-to-population ratio to essentially its post
-recession trough makes it clear that 
there has
 been little sustained progress in labor markets.  Nonetheless, as GDP growth picks up 
over the next two years, I am expecting that we will make gradual progress on unemployment.  

As mentioned in the memo on economic slack, the Cleveland staff has taken a close look at the 

flows into and out of unemployment to examine the natural rate of unemployment.  This research 

finds that the trends of flows into and out of unemployment, often referred to as labor market 

churning, have been f
all
ing for several years.  This decline in labor market churning implies that 
             
                   
  the current path to full employment will likely be slower than in past cycles. 
Some 
commentators treat the slow progress on reducing unemployment as evidence that the natural 
rate 
is far higher.  However, in the Cleveland Fed model, a faster pace of GDP growth does 

lower the unemployment rate more quickly.  While this result is supportive of monetary policy 

accommodation, it doesn™t answer the question of the effectiveness of our no
ntraditional 

monetary policy tools. 
Turning to inflation, I have made only small changes to my outlook for inflation.  I agree 
with the Board staff that we
™re likely to see more disinflation in core PCE rates, but my forecast 
doesn™t get quite as far away 
from the 2 percent rate as the Tealbook anticipates. 
The risks to my economic outlook remain primarily to the downside for GDP growth.  
Although market participants seem to be taking a more optimistic view that Europeans will solve 
their problems, a 
crisis
 in Europe remains a large risk to 
the recovery in the U
nited S
tates
.  In addition, the fiscal cliff poses a significant risk of 
a dramatic slowing of the U.S. economy.  
These risks to growth imply that unemployment could end up higher than anticipated.  On 

inflation, I continue to see the risks tilted toward the downside, given th
e significant downside 

risk
s to economic activity and 
the
 low levels of 
some measures of 
inflation expectations.  In my 
view, these risks to growth, unemployment, and inflation make the outlook more uncertain than 

normal.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Following our July meeting, the key question 
was whether the incoming data would finally begin to show substantial and sustainable 

improvement in labor markets.  It™s pretty clear that the answer to that question is no.  Without a 

doubt, 2012 will go into the books as another year of unsatisfactory economic performance.  This 
                    
         
         
           
  
 is the third year in a row 
of growth around 2 percent.  This pace of growth leaves 
resource slack 
quite large. 
At the same time
, the inflation outlook is not threatening, and numerous theoretical 
and empirical analyses show that there are ways to provide additional accommodation th
at will 
improve this economic situation. 
In terms of recent developments, the problems that we™
ve characterized as downside risks 
earlier in the year have materialized into actual headwinds.  They are gathering in strength. 
My 
business contacts noted that 
their current operations are being adversely affected by increasing
ly negative forces in the U.S. and around the world.  Similar to some comments that President 

Lockhart made, apparently CEOs are sharing their gloomy outlooks with their fellow CEO 

interlo
cutors, and this has the potential to reinforce downward expectations and spiral into even 
softer spending and hiring.  
For example, one of my regular contacts repeated comments he had 
heard from the CEO of a major U.S. conglomerate, 
who was a former Fed Bank chair 

somewhere.  According to my contact, this CEO instructed all of his business units to plan for 

the possibility that the U.S. will experience a lost decade
, like Japan.  I think that™s disturbing.  
With regard to Europe, many of my contacts thought the odds of truly awful outcomes had 

declined, and that™s a positive comment.  The recent ECB announcements regarding outright 

monetary transactions give the fiscal authorities somewhat more time to maneuver, but the 

additional bond buying will be condit
ioned on fiscal consolidation that likely will be difficult to 
achieve and bad for growth in those countries.  And without stronger growth, the periphery 

countries are going to face repeated crisis events over the next several years. As one financial 

contact we spoke to put it, 
ﬁAll the Europeans have done is transform an acute problem into a 
chronic one.
ﬂ  The other elephant in the room is the U.S. fiscal cliff.  On the upside, my contacts 
say 
that 
surely the parties in Washington will find a way to limit 
the damage after the election
.           
                       
        But on the downside, many currently see uncertainty over the cliff weighing on activity, and no 
one can rule out the possibility of a messy outcome that would result in very significant fiscal 

drag hitting us around the turn of the year. 
One bit of positive news is that I™m hearing commentary that indicates monetary 
accommodation is helping.  Several financial contacts say that today™s low rates are leading them 

to increase investment, and that should facilitate futu
re activ
ity. 
For instance, we heard 
comments on how funding for distressed properties has increased and capital is being redeployed 

to the residential sector. Indeed, there™s been a 
lot of talk about residential construction 

improving, as several have noted.  Furthermore, refinancing continues to help firms strengthen 

their balance sheets, putting them in a position to increase investment or pass on funds to 

someone else more likely to spend them, as you pointed out at our last meeting, Mr. Chairman.  
I should 
note that while lo
w rates are pushing some to undertake more investment, our financial 
contacts do not say that 
they are seeing excessive risk
-taking or anything approximating 
financial 
froth
.  And in the past, they™ve not been shy about pointing that out when they have seen that. 
As I said earlier, condition
ed on our current policies, the outlook for 
economic 
growth is 
unacceptable.  It™s unacceptable in part because recent data reinforce the obvious point that high 

inflation is not a concern, certainly not relative to our long-run objective and certainly not within 

our balanced approach strategy.  And it™
s unacceptable because mainstream monetary analysis 
clearly indicates that there are means of providing more accommodation that can improve these 

outcomes
.  The Board staff analyses clearly demonstrate this.  The LSAP memos had simulations 
that pointed that out, FRB/
US™
s optimal control simulations and 
the nominal-income-
level
-targeting simulations point that out, too.  Mike Woodford™s careful analysis in h
is Jacks
on Hole 
paper showed the same. 
       
    
        
           
    
    
   
               
  
        While I™m at this point, let me make a couple of comments about DSGE models, which 
were discussed earlier today. It is certainly the case that we are presented with results from four 
models that are currently being l
ooked at: 
the 
EDO model out of the Board, our Chicago model, 
Philadelphia™s model, and New York™s model.  A 
question that President Lacker was asking was
, in the context of these models, how big 
is 
slack, 
and 
how is it measured
?  At some level within 
the 
context of these models, this is a bit of a red herring.  For instance, if you look at the 

projections, all of the inflation forecasts coming out of these models are under our 2 
percent goal, 

and that™s true through 2015.  So, 
even
 in a model that™s lookin
g at whatever measure it is that™s 
holding back inflation, 
there is no
 inflationary pressureŠand some of the models have much less 
inflationary pressure than others.  The second point is that the theory in these models is really 

about marginal costs.  That
™s the fundamental variable.  The firms in these models are faced with 
the following question: W
hen I get to change my price and I™ve seen things change, what™s my 
margin
al cost structure that tells me how much I should increase my price, given that I won
™t be 
able to do it next time for sure? What have 
I face
d, w
hat am I expecting others to face, and 
things like that? 
Slack i
s often viewed in these models as a useful proxy at best.  I
f there™s a lot 
of slack, then your marginal costs won™t be rising
; they™ll be low, and things like that.  But the 
fundamental is really about marginal costs.
  And so, when you think about that, these models are 
really looking at the inflation data and everything around those data and saying, ﬁWe just don™t 

see inflationary pressures.ﬂ I can™t tell you exactly what the resource slack is that is embodied in 

that, but we don™t see inflationary pressures, and that™s coming out of all four of the models that 

we™re presented with quarterly. 
Another point that President Lacker ra
ised is, if sticky prices are really what™s 
fundamental here, why haven™t they adjusted already
?  And you hear that a lot.  In these models, 
                     
   
  
     
    
         
      
     a lot of asynchronous price adjustment for whatever reason is 
given
, and John Taylor has 
contributed importantly to exactly that point going way back over the last 20 or more years.  
But 
even allowing for the fact that maybe there would have been adjustments already, I think it™s 
reasonable to assume that we™ve been hit with a sequence of negative aggregate demand shocks 

along the lines 
that I 
believe 
President Williams™
s comments were pointing at.  At least we™ve 
certainly been surprised the last three summers in a row that output has been lower than we were 

projecting, s
o something different is at work.
  And then it™s 
also the case that 
inflationary 
expectations matter in these pricing equations and models.  This is a little more delicate and 

subtle.  Apparently inflation expectations are stable in all of these models, but there 
are
 subtle 
modeling choices at work in each of them about what the stochastic process is for marginal cost 

pressures and how they™re updated and what inflation expectations are.  This gets at a point of 

dissatisfaction
Šwhen I talk with various people in the Federal Reserve, they might say, ﬁI do
n™t 
like looking at the FRB/
US projections because I see all 
of 
this monetary accommodation 
coming, and I don™t see inflation coming, a
nd why is that?
ﬂ  I talk to people, and they worry a lot 
about inflation.  
We aren™t able to model that
Šapparently not sa
tisfactorily, 
because they all 
come back to the same place, which is
, expectations are well anchored or the stochastic process 
is 
mean
 reverting at some level, and so we just don™t see things getting out of hand.  I want to 
point out 
that this is not 
a FRB
/US question per se, but it™s a statement about how much we 
really 
know within the context of well-articulated macro models.  It™s way beyond just FRB/
US. 
All of our DSGE models have that same feature. 
So the bottom line, Mr. Chairman, 
is that this is the
 third summer in a row that economic 
growth has failed to achieve escape velocity, and the economy™s liftoff has fizzled on the 
          
                 
               launching pad.  It seems clear that the outlook crosses the threshold that justifies more action.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Thank you.
  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When we were in Jackson Hole, 
we got to hear you, Mr. Chairman, talk about the tools we have available.  You described our 

asset purchase tools and our communication tools, and so I™d like to give you some feedback 

from the 
Ninth District about how we™re doing on the communication front.  I get the same kinds 
of questions, I would sayŠusually from different people, but they sometimes come from the 

same person
.  The first comment is
, as the FOMC 
considers its date to keep rates low through 
late 2014, people are concerned, 
why is 
it that 
the Fed 
is 
committed to keep
ing 
rates low for two 
years
?  How could the Fed commit like this without thinking about the fact that the world could 
change in some fashion
?  And the second 
comment is
, by saying that interest rates are going to 
be low for that long or 
are expected
 to be low for that long, the Fed is signaling that conditions 
will be weak, and that
, in and of itself, is suppressing demand.  Now, of course, I say to them, 
ﬁNo, you misunderstood what the FOMC is intending to say to you.  It is meaning to 

communicate that the economic conditions threshold for raising rates is now higher than you 

might have thought.  The recovery has to be further along than you might have thought.ﬂ  A
t this 
stage, my questioner says, 
ﬁWell, that makes sense, but why didn™t you guys just say that?ﬂ  A
t that point, I usually turn the conversation to something about fracking 
[laughter] because that 
seems to work.  To me, this kind of dialogue suggests 
that 
we need to communicate more clearly 
about our reaction function.  And communication about our reaction function is sometimes 

motivated in terms of accountability and transparency, and these are, I think, good motivations.  
      
       
    
                           
       But as my brief summary of my 
Ninth District colloquies indicates, communication about 
our react
ion function is also an 
essential
 ingredient to the effectiveness of policy. 
Now, the changes that have been made in B(5) relative to what was in the previous 
FOMC statement in July
ŠB(5) 
now represents even more of a commitment because actually the 
conditioning clauses have been removed, although 
many readers were not paying close attention 
to those conditional clauses anyway.  I think the lead-in sentence to B(5) is much better, but I 

have to say, most people don™t read the words that carefully in the FOMC statement.  Their 

takeaway is the year.  That™s the main thing they™re hearing. 
So before we communicate 
our reaction function, we have to start thinking about how we 
formulate one, and as I™
ve m
entioned before, I think that a good reaction function should have at 
least two inputs
: some measure of inflationary pressures and some measure 
of labor 
market 
underutilization.  These inputs would capture how well we™re doing in terms of our two 

mandates
, and our policy stance, I would think, should evolve as these inputs change.  
I see this 
as the basis for the approach that President Plosser, President Williams
, and I are following in 
our alternative policy statements.  The K
PW statements emphasize only those changes of the 
data that are viewed as leading to changes in measures of inflationary pressures and labor market 

underutilization.  
And then the KPW statement
s translate those changes in inflationary pressure
s and labor market underutilization into 
the rationale for the 
Commit
tee
™s policy decisions.  
At this 
point, I™ll digress briefly to say that I think we™ve completed our cycle of going through the 

parallel FOMC statements, and President Plosser, I believe, will bring forward the KPW 

approach to t
he 
subcommittee on communications for further consideration.  So I™m sure the 
subcommittee members are glad to hear that.
  That said, just like the FOMC statement itself, the 
               
                    KPW memos are very oriented around changes in monetary accommodation and how they 
relate 
to changes in conditions. 
Ultimately
, though, 
a Committee reaction function has to translate the level of 
inflationary pressures and the level of resource utilization into a decision about the level of 
monetary accommodation.  A 
key challenge we
™ve
 struggled 
with is that it™s much easier for us 
to reach accord about the changes in these variables than it is for us to reach accord
, at least 
qualitatively, about the levels of inflationary pressures and the levels of resource utilization.  A
s we saw fr
om submissions of the consensus forecast, there are very different views around the 
table on that.  Some might see this heterogeneity as precluding the possibility of developing a 

Committee reaction function, but I think this is where the consensus forecas
t process is a very 
useful way forward.  It provides a way for us to come together behind a 
Committee view about 
the medium-term inflation outlook and about the economy™s performance relative to the 

employment mandate, conditional on our current policy stance now and as anticipated.  
Then we 

can usefully formulate the Committee™s reaction function as a mapping from that consensus vi
ew into policy choices.  ﬁMedium-
term inflation is too high relative to target
ﬂ:  That would say you 
should contemplate reducing accommodation.  ﬁThe unemployment rate is too high over the 

medium run relative to 
mandate
-consistent levels
ﬂ:  Then the Committee should contemplate 
adding accommodation. 
Mr. Chairman, the Committee™s consensus view about the economy seems clear, and it™
s been described in many recent FOMC statement
s. The Committee expects inflation to be at or 
below target over the medium run and unemployment to continue to be elevated fo
r some time 
relative to mandate
-consistent levels.  That consensus viewŠ
inflation 
running too low; 
                 
        
                         unemployment, too highŠimplies a need for additional accommodation, accommodation that 
would lower unemployment while keeping inflation near target. 
I open
ed by discussing a public desire, 
at least in the Ninth District
, for greater clarit
y about our reaction function.  In the next go-round, 
I™ll describe how
, by fulfilling that desire
, we 
can also provide additional accommodation.  And I™ll return to the question being posed to me 

implicitly by my Ninth District interlocutors
:  Under what conditions 
will
 the FOMC begin to 
raise the fed funds rate? I will argue that our communications often suggest the FOMC is 

unwilling to tolerate low unemployment, even if that low unemployment rate is not translating 

into medium-
term inflationary pressure
s.  And I think p
aragraph 5
 of 
alternative B offers us an 
opportunity to clarify our attitude toward low unemploymentŠthat we™re not against low 

unemployment 
if it doesn™t lead to medium
-term inflationary pressures. Maybe that clarification 
could provide stimulus that™s appropriate in light of the Committee™s consensus outlook.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
The 10
th District economy continues to 
expand at a moderate pace. Our retail, restaurant
, and auto contacts reported higher sales and 
expect gains in coming months, particularly those in the auto sector.  
Energy activity expanded 

further as gains in oil drilling outpaced declines in natural gas drilling.  Housing marke
t conditions continued to improve, and construction activity increased for both residential and 

nonresidential sectors.  
Manufacturing activity in the 
District expanded at a slightly faster pace in 
August.  The number of contacts in our manufacturing surve
y who 
were expecting higher levels 
of production and shipments in six months moved notably higher, and expectations of 

employment gains remained in positive territory. 
One component of our survey that has softened 
      
    
       
                           over the past several months is the expec
ted level of new export orders.  The number of contacts 

reporting higher levels has been declining but still outweighs those expecting an outright decline.  

So far this year
, total 
District exp
orts remain above their level a year ago, though exports to 
Eur
ope have been decreas
ing. 
In terms of the D
istrict labor market
, initial claims for 
unemployment insurance have declined notably over the past few months, and layoff 

announcements have been modest.  Still, employers remain quite cautious about expanding their 

payrolls.  
In terms of ag
ricultural
 conditions, U.S. net farm incomes are 
projected to reach their 
second
-highest level in history despite the worst dr
ought in three decades. Farm incomes are 
being supported by higher crop prices and crop insurance payments, 
which are offsetting 

declines in production and livestock profits.  In addition, the persistent, strong demand from the 

ethanol and export sectors continues to strain low crop inventories and could 
place upward 

pressure on prices heading into 2013 as reflected in futures markets. 
Turning to the national outlook, the recovery has been progressing mostly in line with my 
expectations.  Overall, I take a similar view as the 
Tealbook in that incoming dat
a since the last 
meeting ha
ve not materially affected my outlook for 
economic 
growth.
  For the second half of 
this year, I anticipate 
that 
firms will remain reluctant to undertake large expansion projects or 
aggressively add to payrolls because of the near-term risk.  In particular, I noted in the most 

recent NFIB survey that small businesses cite taxes and the regulatory landscape as their most 

pressing problems, with poor sales third on the list.  These issues are reaffirmed when I talk with 

my business contacts, 
and suggest that monetary policy may find it particularly challenging to 

offset headwinds of this nature.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 
                    
                         MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Incoming information since our last 
meeting suggests that economic conditions in the 
Third
 District have continued to improve 
modestly.  Although labor markets and manufacturing remain subdued, the housing sector and 
retail
 sales have strengthened notably.  Housing markets in the D
istrict are 
showing their 
strongest signs of recovery since the recession began.  House prices are up significantly in the 

second quarter in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.  Housing permits driv
en mostly by multifamily
-sector housing have been on an upward trend, and residential builders and real estate agents both 

reported increased activity in August.  
The commercial real estate market is also showing 

continued signs of strength.  Tightening in the office market in C
enter 
City
, Philadelphia, 
is 
placing upward pressure o
n rents.  
Retail sales in the region have grown somewhat faster over 
the intermeeting
 period, and auto sales have continued to increase at a good pace. 
Turning to the nation, based on incoming information, my forecast for the second half of 
this year is not terribly enlightening. It™s modest
, and I think it will continue to be over the 

coming six months.  
How
ever, my medium-term and longer-term forecasts have not changed 
very much and, indeed, point to a continuing modest recovery.  Given the large size and nature 

of the shocks that hit the economy, a slow recovery, 
as we™ve heard
, is actually the most likely 
outcome.  It™s not necessarily evidence that our monetary policy stance is inappropriate.  Indeed, 

many of the rules reported in Tealbook 
B suggest 
that policy is about right.  Political and fiscal 
uncertainties at home and abroad still cloud the outlook and are holding back business 

investment.
  Overwhelmingly, 
the anecdotal evidence suggests that business leaders
™ reluctance 
to invest and hire i
s driven by uncertainty, not excessively tight financial conditions.  Households 
continue to deleverage, and that™s holding back spending as saving remains high.  My concern is 

that 
none of the
se headwinds will likely be ameliorated or substantially affected in the near term 
                
    
                             with further monetary easing or the 
further 
easing 
of 
financial conditions.  That doesn™t seem to 
be a constraint. 
I know I™m not alone in having wished for a stronger employment report last Friday.  
The 
payroll increase in August and the downward revisions to June and July were disappointing.  
Despite the strong actions that the Fed has taken, the unemployment rate remains above 

8 percent.
 This has generated a discussion about whether the continuing high levels of 
unemployment are structural or cyclical in nature. I actually don™t find this conversation very 

useful, particularly for policy.  Rather, 
I believe 
it™s better to think about whether the high level 
of unemployment can be addressed by further easing of financial conditions, whic
h is what 
monetary policy would entail.  
It seems to me that before we conclude that unemployment calls 
for more monetary policy accommodation, we must understand more about the nature of the 

shock that™s caused high unemployment and its unwelcome persiste
nce.  This is consistent with 
President Lacker™s observations.  It™s not about whether unemployment is 
cyclical, structural, 
permanent
, or temporary, necessarily.  It™s about understanding the nature of the shock that™s 
causing the problem that we observe. 
There™s still a lot we don™t understand about the labor market and its ongoing struggles.  
Academic and public debate expresses a wide range of views, and we should be humble about 

our state of knowledge.  We™ve discussed, for example, the difficulty of t
ransferring skills from 
one sector to another.  Those who lost their jobs in construction will have a hard time going to 

other industries.  But this type of unemployment cannot be solved by monetary policy.  

However,
 it™s not the only source of mismatch.  
Skill mismatch can occur within sectors, not just 
across sectors. 
Jai
movich and S
iu point to what™s called job polarizatio
n.  Job opportunities in 
middle
-skill occupations, which tend to be focused on routine tasks, 
are disappearing because of 
                
                  
          changes in 
technology and other things, while low-
skill
 and high-skill job opportunities are in 
fact increasing.
  The employment share of routine occupationsŠthis middle group, which 
includes jobs 
such as machine operators, meat
-processing plant workers, and 
office a
nd administrative supportŠ
has been decreasing since the mid
-1980s.  At the same time, the 
employment share of nonroutine cognitive occupationsŠincluding surgeons, lawyers, and, 
of 
course, economistsŠand that of nonroutine manual operationsŠ
whether it be janitors, 

gardeners, bartenders, 
or 
home health care
Šhave been rising. 
In other words, there appears to 
be a polarization in the job market to
ward the low and the high, 
or the tails of the distribution
, and away from the middle.  During the three jobless recoveries since 1991, the level of 

employment in these routine occupations has never recovered to pre-
recession levels.  The 
absolute level appears to fall and fall permanently.  The fact 
that 
this job loss seems to occur 
sharply during rece
ssions makes it appear to be cyclical, but it does not recover.  This is a 
phenomenon that cannot be addressed by monetary policy.  
For t
hose who point to low w
age 
growth as evidence against mismatch
, it™s interesting to note that real wages in the tail of 
the 
distribution actually seem to be rising modestly, unlike in the middle of the distribution.  Again, 

we do not have definite answers to what™s happening in the labor market, but we need to 

consider that evidence exists that the problems may not be amen
able to monetary policy 
or easing of financial conditions. 
The FOMC has applied a high level of monetary stimulus during this recession and 
recovery.  The fed funds rate has been effectively zero for four years, and we 
have said we 
expect 
it to remain 
there 
at least through late 2014.  We have implemented two rounds of asset 
purchases, followed by the maturity extension program.  Yet unemployment remains high.  

Given this evidence, one could draw two possible conclusions.  One is that monetary policy is 
         
    
    
                   
  
         
   
   
   the right tool, but we just haven™t implemented a large enough program.  Given the sluggish 
employment response to date and the large amount of stimulus that has been supplied
, it seems 

as though 
it™s increasingly plausible that further monetary accommodation
 is not going to be 
effective in quickening the pace of recovery to 
a higher 
level
 of employment
, much as we wish it 
could. 
One still might argue that because high unemployment is very costly and we are 
uncertain about the effect of more monetary policy accommodation, we should try it.  What do 

we have to lose?  Well, in my view, 
we have a lot to lose. The large
r the balance sheet becomes
, the higher 
are 
the risks to the economy that we will not be able to exit in a way that preserves 
price stability, maximum employment
, or 
our own credibility.  Ever-more-
aggressive action 
increases the r
isk of poor outcomes in the not-too-distant future or maybe the distant future.  
To avoid this, we are going to have to be relying on tools that are not guaranteed to work.  Inflation 

expectations, while stable, are stable 
until they™re not.  Should inflation begin to rise quickly, we 

may have to contract our balance sheet at a very fast pace or perhaps raise IOER very rapidly. 

Will that be disruptive to markets? We won™t 
know until we face that situation.  If our policy is 

not very effective at influencing unemployment rates, then inflation could begin to rise well 

before unemployment has shown much of a decline.  Will we have the fortitude to take the 

necessary actions to reduce accommodation
, and if so, how well will we be able to communicate 
our rationale?  Would we disrupt markets? Would we reverse the progress on unemployment? I 

have grave concerns that we are sowing the seeds of a very complicated exit for little or
 no benefit to the unemployment rate today.  
We say these exit risks are manageable, and I™d like to 

believe that they are, but we really don™t know that.  Given the unprecedented nature of the 

actions we™ve taken, how manageable these risks are is really 
unknowable at this time.  
We are 
       
      
                 
         
    
     
     
   
       and will be in uncharted waters.  That™s one reason I strongly urge us to be prudent.  To my 
mind
, at this point, costs of further action greatly exceed expected benefits.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank 
you.  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, just as 
President Lacker was 
a straight man for President 
Lockhart, in a 
way
, President Plosser has been a straight man for me
.  L
ike President Pianalto
, I will interlocutate 
[laughter] 
more tomorrow than I plan to do today. 
President Williams made a very important point. 
He talked about how uncertainty has 
paralyzed most businesses and how uncertainty acts as an aggregate demand shock.  I agree with 

that analysis. I hear that from my contacts.  The ques
tion is, is monetary policy effective in 
offsetting this form of uncertainty?  President George mentioned the National Federation of 

Independent Business.  She cited some data.  What she did not cite was that 93 
percent of that 

sample makes clear that they
 do not wish to borrow, 
either because of uncertainty or because 
they have access to capital that
™s abundant and cheap.  In my own surveys 
as preparation for this 
meeting, I asked a simple question
: If the actions we were to take at this upcoming meeting 
were 
to reduce your cost of capital by 25 basis points or more, what would it do in terms of your 

investment plans? I deliberately sampled larger companies because that™s 
where cap
-ex come
s from.  Employment comes from small
 and medium-sized businesses.  
We assume that, just by 

sheer wei
ght of numbers, significant cap-
ex come
s from large corporations.  And I would say 
that 
9 out of 10 said it would not change 
thei
r investment plans, even if we took action that led to 
a reduction 
of 
1 percent or more in the
ir cost of capital.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 
                       
     
                           
    
        VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  First, I want to make a comment on President Fisher™s 
last remark.  My understanding is that capital spending has never been particularly i
nterest rate 
sensitive.  It™s really driven by demand and capacity utilization, things of that nature.  So I 
wouldn™t expect that to be a really strong channel by which monetary 
policy stimulates the 
economy. 
MR. FISHER.  Can I just make a point to that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
.  Sure. 
MR. FISHER.  At least in the drafts 
of our statement, we were 
saying that 
business fixed 
investment was weak.  The question is, are we affecting business fixed investment?  And, more 

important than 
that, are we affecting employment? 
My point is that in the responses I™
m getting 
to anecdotal 
inquiryŠ
not systematically organized, although the systematic surveys that we see, 
through the NFIB and others, show 
that it is questionable whether or not we are ac
tually 
affec
ting employment.  The question is, 
are we affecting employment 
over the short term or the 
long term?  We have a wealth effect.  The Chairman has made that a very strong argument, 

including 
at the last meeting. 
If you™re advising 
a corporation about what to do with the savings 
that they can achieve through cheaper capital
, they can invest it in greater plant or equipment 
expansion, they can buy back their stock, or they can increase their dividends.  And I would 

argue that the former would have 
a more immediate impact on employment creation than the 
latter. 
Excuse me. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
My point was that I don™t think very many people in the 
room would debate the point that capital spending is not going to be very influenced by small 

changes
 in interest rates.  So I don™t think that™
s something that we have a big disagreement 
about around the table. 
                    
             
    
          
           
    
    As far as the outlook is concerned, since the last meeting, I think there™
s been very little 
change with respect to the U.S. data.  Some data are 
a bit better
Šthe retail sales data, the motor 
vehicle sales data.  Some are 
worse
Šlike the ISM, which fell below 50, and the components of 
the ISM were particularly weak. 
Inventory strength actually held up the ISM, which is a little 
concerning.  T
he cap
ital goods orders have clearly been weak.  I™ve noticed that, if you look at 
the nondefense capital goods orders ex air, the rate of orders now has 
fallen below the rate of 
shipments, and this is actually not a positive indicator for what™s going to happen 
to capital 
spending going forward. In terms of payrolls, I was prepared to come into the meeting, if we had 

a strong payroll employment report, to argue how noisy the data 
are
 and how we can™t take a
ny signal from 
that
. But the reality is, if you really
 look at the trendŠand understand that there™
s a 
lot of noise in the 
series
Šthe last two months, 118,000 per month
; so far this year
, 139,000 per 
month
; in 2011, 153,000 per month.  Now, there™s noise month to month, but if you look at the 

longer-
term tren
ds, 
what you see is basically either a flat trend or maybe a gradually slowing 
trend.  So that™s what I would take away from the payroll data. 
There are 
also two other negative developments that I think are really worth highlighting.  
First, I think the external environment continues to worsen.  We™ve talked a lot about Europe, but 

we haven™t really talked very much about China.  ChinaŠif you look at the 
official GDP growth 
numbersŠ
is still okay; 7.6 percent, I think, 
was 
the number for the last quarter.  But if you look 
at the actual indicators coming out of China
Šlike 
trade
, for exampleŠ
it would not at all 
surprise me if it turned out that the Chinese sl
owdown was much more substantial than what the 

official indicators 
show.  
We™re also going to be seeing a further shock to real income over the 
near term from higher oil, gasoline, and grain prices.  T
he grain price effect is going to be 
particularly probl
ematic for the EMEs
, where f
ood is a much larger share of the consumption 
          
  
      
          
        
        
     
    
 basket.
  Also, as many other people have noted, the risks in early 2013 are tilted to the downside 
given what
™s going to happen on the fiscal front.  I don™t think any of us knows 
with any 
certainty what
™s going to happen, but the uncertainty between now and then is negative for the 
outlook.  And I think most of us 
believe 
that we
™re probably going to end up with some greater 
degree of fiscal restraint in early 2013 than what we have 
right now. 
So to me, the economic outlook calls for us to do more.  Now, I agree that the tools we 
have are not that powerful.  But rather than concluding from this that we shouldn™t use them, I 
conclude that we should use them more forcefully.  I think 
a failure to act forcefully at this 
meeting would be very damaging to confidence; 
it would imply that we
™re out of ammunition or 
almost out of ammunition
; and it 
also 
might signal that we were cowed by the political 
environment, which I think would be very u
nfortunate.
  When I consider the risks to action 
versus inaction in an uncertain world, I also view the outcome very much as quite 
asymmetric, 
with the bias clearly on the side of action.  
Consider two alternatives
:  We do more, and the 
economy is stronger 
than expected
; versus, 
we do very little
, and the economy disappoints.  
Which creates the greatest disappointment? Surely the latter. 
I would be very happy if we did 
another round of LSAPs, extended the guidance, et cetera, and the economy turned out to 

surprise us and did better than expected.  In that case, we could cut off the LSAP program early, 

and the balance sheet wouldn™t have grown very much.  In contrast, if we do nothing and the 

economy disappoints, I think we will rue that as a lost opportuni
ty. I also think the timing is 
right.  The ECB did something very forceful at their last meeting, and following on right behind 

them might actually provide a firmer underpinning or momentum to confidence and market 

sentiment. 
       
         
             
           Now, what
™s the lesson of the past few years? Well, I think the lesson of the past few 
years is 
that 
we™ve been consistently disappointed on the 
economic 
growth side of the equation.  
There are two explanations for this.  One is that the headwinds were greater than what we 
thought, but there™
s another explanation as well
Šthat maybe monetary policy is not as 
accommodative as we thought.  And this goes back to President Williams™s 
comments. 
I™
m pretty convinced that monetary policy stimulus effects probably become attenuated over time, 
because part of the way that monetary policy works is by affecting the timing of spending 

decisions.  We don™t really have an experience where we
™ve had a period like this in which 

monetary policy has supposedly been very loose for many years in a row.  A
nd I expect what 
we™re seeing is that the monetary policy impulse to the growth side is actually lessening over 
time.
  Regardless of whether you say it™s consistent disappointment because of headwinds or 
consistent disappointment because monetary policy is not as 
stimul
ative
, as we thought, I think 
either way
, they both imply that we should do more.  
We™ve essentially foreshadowed forceful 
action in the August FOMC statement, the minutes to that meeting, and the Chairman™s Jackson 

Hole speech, so I think it™s time to follow up on what we™ve foreshadowed with action at this 

meeting.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anybody for coffee?  Coffee is available.  Why don™t we 
take 20 minutes and return at 3:10? 
[Coffee break] 
CHA
IRMAN BERNANKE
.  This i
s a prompt group.  I like this. 
MR. 
LACKER
.  Thanks to Debbie.  Thanks to the Deputy S
ecretary. 
MS. DANKER.  Happy to help. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  All right.  Governor Yellen. 
      
    
      
           
                     
     
  
    
MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The two employment reports we have 
received since our last meeting confirm that the economy is growing too slowly to generate any 
meaningful progress in improving labor market conditions.  They™re consistent with an economy 
that is expanding at or near its potential.  And although I was heart
ened by July™s strong reading 
on consumer spending, I agree with the staff™s reluctance to make too much out of one month of 

better data.
  Taking a broader perspective, incoming data provide no evidence of any 
fundamental change in the outlook for the better.  I agree with the conclusion, too, of the staff 

memo for this meeting that the preponderance of evidence points to a large margin of labor 

market slack. 
If payroll gains are sustained at their recent paceŠaround 125,000 per month in 
July and AugustŠ
there
™s a good chance that we will look back on a lost decade.  The SEP 
forecast I submitted this round shows unemployment hovering above 7 percent at the end of 

2014, even with substantial additional policy accommodation.  Moreover, continued progress at 

the pace we have seen recently is a big ﬁif.ﬂ 
Readings from some forward
-looking indicators, 
such as the expectations component of consumer sentiment and new orders for nondefense 

capital goods ex aircraft, do not bode well for household and business spending in the months 

ahead. 
Amid the search for explanations of the painfully slow recovery, there™
s been a lively 
debate about the role of economic uncertainty.  Now, there are many different sources of 

economic uncertainty, but many of you have highlighted uncertainty about economic policy, 

especially about European policy responses and about the outlook for U.S. fiscal policies.  

You
™ve noted that this policy uncertainty has been restraining household and business spending.  
And several of you have hypothesized that this might account for the weak spending and hiring 

we saw last spring. 
If uncertainty about economic policy as opposed to uncertainty about the 
                      
     
                    broader economic outlook, accounts for why employers were deferring hiring and investment 
decisions, then a lifting of that uncertainty might arguably provide a significant boost to 

spending.  Under a favorable scenario, for example, we could see some resolution of fiscal policy 

uncertainty in the months after the election.  My own view is that policy un
certainty has been 
exerting some negative influence on aggregate demand.  Some systematic evidence of its 

influence comes from empirical work by Nick Bloom at Stanford.  Bloom and his coauthors have 

developed a high-frequency measure of economic policy uncertainty, and they™
ve related this 
measure to key economic variables, such as payroll employment growth.  They show that 

increases in economic policy uncertainty foreshadow declines in output, employment, and 

investment, and that high levels of policy uncertainty in recent years, such as uncertainty about 

future tax policies and the debt ceiling, have hampered the recovery. 
But economic policy uncertainty is only one of many factors relevant to the economic 
outlook.  And the evidence, as I read it, strongly suggests that an uptick in policy uncertainty 

cannot account for last spring™s slowdown.  Bloom™s index of economic p
olicy 
uncertainty 
spiked up in the summer of 2011, but by March it had fallen back two-thirds of the way toward 

pre
-recession levels. 
It remained at low levels in April and May, at the very time when the 
economic recovery was sputtering.  On the premise that economic policy uncertainty affects 

economic activity through consumer and business sentiment, it™s also worth noting that several 

ind
exes of consumer sentiment and business optimism peaked in April or May.  
So an increase in 
economic policy uncertainty does not seem capable of explaining the spring slowdown.  This 

suggests to me that spending is unlikely to surge, even if policy uncerta
inty were to diminish in 
the months ahead.  Unfortunately, our current economic malaise has substantially deeper roots 

than just uncertainty about the future direction of economic policy, and these headwinds are 
           
       
    
        unlikely to soon subside. Uncertainty, broadly defined, does, however, influence my thinking 
about monetary policy.  Uncertainty provides a reason why we should act forcefully now to 

strengthen the recovery, rather than trying to keep our powder dry.  Given the downside risks to 

the current outlook, and the constraints on our ability to provide stimulus while the funds rate is 

at the lower bound, the best we can do at this point is to ensure that the economy is as resilient as 

possible in case we are faced with fiscal gridlock, a European debacle, o
r other negative shocks. 
Another argument for strong action relates to h
yste
resis.  We face the worrisome risk that 
the longer the economy operates with such high levels of slack, the more likely it is that the 

downturn will have a lasting negative impact on employment and potential output.  I™
ve seen no 
strong evidence for h
yste
resis effects yet, but our current situation is unprecedented, at least in 
recent U.S. history.  
In the early 1980s, the unemployment rate fell almost 
4 percentage points 
over the 2¾ years following its late 1982 peak, to 7 percent.  By contrast, since its most recent 

peak in October 2009, the unemployment rate has fallen less than 2 percentage points.  

Moreover, h
yste
resis effects may become evident not only in the unemployment rate, but also in 
labor force participation.  As the Tealbook box shows, the participation rate remains far below 

the staff™s estimate of its demographic trend rate, and persistently poor job-finding prospects may 

well leave a permanent imprint on the particip
ation rate.
  Taking this argument one step further, I 
would argue that just as there can be permanent costs of allowing unemployment to remain high 

for an extensive time, there can also be permanent gains in output and employment in a high-

pressure labor market.
  We saw some evidence of this in the late 1990s, when h
yste
resis seemed 
to be working in reverse by pulling population segments into the labor force that for a long time 

had been excluded.  Chronic labor shortages induced firms to invest more heavily in training, 
         
        
       
                        
and it fostered upward mobility as firms moved employees up through internal job ladders more 
rapidly. 
Hyste
resis provides a rationale for 
a more expansionary monetary policy.  The argument 
runs as follows.  Our usual loss function is symmetric around 
the 
NAIRU.  It thus assigns equal 

costs to given size deviations of unemployment above and below 
the 
NAIRU.  But with 
hyste
resis
, the penalty for a deviation of unemployment above 
the 
NAIRU should be greater than 
that for an identical deviation of unemployment below 
the 
NAIRU.
  The implications of such an 
asymmetric weighting of unemployment gaps for optimal monetary policy in the present 

circumstances are substantial.  Bob Tetlow, a staff member in the 
Board™s 
Division of Research 
and Statistics, has been exploring optimal control simulations where the loss function depends on 

the squared deviations of a transformation of the unemployment rate from the NAIRU, rather 

than on the squared deviations of the unemployment rate itself from the 
NAIRU. 
This is a 
tractable technique for, in effect, assuming an asymmetric loss function.  In Tetlow™s 

simulations, the only policy tool available is the path of the federal funds rate.  His results 

showed that even a moderately lower weight on unemployment undershoots below the NAIRU, 

relative to overshoots, could postpone the timing of liftoff substantially. 
Based on all of these considerations, in tomorrow™s policy go-round or maybe this 
afternoon™s, I will argue that strong policy action is called fo
r at this meeting. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was going to make comments about my 
forecast compared 
with
 the consensus, but I™m not entirely sure which one of the consensus 
forecasts to compare it 
with. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You pick. 
[Laughter] 
          
              
                      
        
       MS. DUKE. I
™ll just say that I think it
™s not inconsistent, but there are four assumptions 
that are a little bit different in my forecast than in the Tealbook and
, maybe
, in the forecasts of 
some of you.  Th
e first one 
is that there is an underlying strength in the fundamentals of the 
economyŠ
such as balance sheet strength, debt service capacity, and credit supply
Šand that this 
strength is being masked by low levels of business and consumer confidence as well 
as concern 
about risks posed by Europe and the fiscal cliff, but that whenever loan demand picks up, 
the 
credit supply will be fully available to meet it. 
The second
 one is 
that it
™ll be especially difficult 
to interpret data over the second half of this year and the first half of next year, as investment and 

purchase decisionmaking is increasingly either paralyzed or distorted by uncertainty about 

federal tax and spending policies, and that, on balance, the uncertainty itself will depress activity 

and lead to weaker outcomes for 2012 and 2013.  Third, the one place I do still see a potential for 

an upside surprise is in housing, and I 
believe
 purchasing mortgages might be helpful here, but 
not necessarily in the ways that you might think.  And, finally, I 
have assumed that we choose 
alternative B today
.  Furthermore, in light of my assumptions about the fiscal cliff, we™
re more 
likely to face deteriorating conditions than simply unsatisfactory progress as we approach the 

end of the year; 
and that the deter
ioration will lead us to continue asset purchases well into 2013. 
In recent meetings
, I™ve talked at length about my belief in the first assumption, and I™
m not going to repeat that today.  But I™d like to discuss assumptions 2 and 3 in this round and 

rese
rve comments about assumption 4 for the policy round.  
Beginning with my pessimism about 

the rest of this year and the first part of next, almost every conversation that I™
ve had with a 
business person or a banker recently has ha
d the same theme: 
Things s
eem pretty much the 
same
Šslow, steady improvement in business fundamentals, but with a new tendency to put all 

long-term investment or expansion decisions off until after the election.  Oddly enough, these 
                     
             
                  
businesses have the luxury of postponing decisionm
aking precisely because things have 
improved.  They™ve strengthened their balance sheets and found ways to grow the bottom line 
even in the face of sluggish top-
line growth. In fact, their profitability
-improvement efforts are 
likely at least partly 
responsible for the slow improvement in labor markets.  Indeed, the business 
investments that do get the green light are mostly directed at saving labor, and no one mentions 

any plans for hiring.  I believe the marked slowdown in business spending that we™
re already 
seeing is 
a direct result of a wait
-and
-see attitude. 
As we get closer to the end of the year and the expiration of tax cuts, implementation of 
expense sequestration, and expiration of fixes for doctors and alternative minimum taxes, 

businesses 
and individuals will have to start making adjustments for what could happen, whether 

or not it actually does.  For example, contractors who expect that they™
ll have to cut staffing if 
their contracts are affected by sequestration are legally required to is
sue layoff notices in 
advance, even if the spending is not ultimately cut and the layoffs don™t actually happen.  Those 

who receive the notices will surely adjust their spending accordingly, and this potential pall on 

holiday spending has to be making retailers nervous about their inventories.  Those same 

retailers are having to pull the trigger now on their inventory decisions in the face of a potential 

shutdown of E
ast 
Coast ports by a longshorem
en™s
 strike.  So who could blame them if they 
decide to shav
e a bit off their purchases just to be sure? 
Health
-care companies are especially 
cautious as they plan for both sequestration and implementation of health-
care reform.  Simple 
operational changes, like tax withholding tables, have to be put in place for all businesses.  For 

individuals, asset sales decisions, especially for sales of businesses, will have to be made soon to 

ensure the current capital gains tax rate. I had the personal experience of doing a new will 

recently, and my lawyer explained to me 
that things would be very different if I died this year or 
              
                
        
   
         
 in January [laughter].  For these reasons, I believe that the fourth quarter is going to be 
affe
cted 
by the fiscal cliff regardless of its ultimate resolution as businesses
, in particular
, hit the 
brakes. 
And I ca
n™t convince myself that a lame
-duck Congress will somehow resolve all of the fiscal 
issues by the end of the year, no matter how the election turns out.  In fact, the best case I can 
construct is a temporary extension that pushes the poli
tical wrangling well into the first quarter 
of next year.  And after the debt ceiling brinkmanship we saw last time, I think a perfectly 

plausible scenario is a plunge off the fiscal cliff
, on the assumption that some sort of deal will be 
easier to construct after the damage becomes more obvious.
  So I think we have to make 
contingency plans for how we can shore up confidence in the face of a really bad outcome, 
rather 
than thinking just about 
how we react if the recovery stays unsatisfactorily slow.  For these 
reasons, I
™ve taken on board a bit of a lean toward the 
ﬁFiscal 
Cliff
ﬂ scenario in the near
-term 
portion of my forecast. 
In contrast, my continued optimism about housing and the underlying strength in the 
economy shows through in my medium-
term foreca
st.  I think 
that 
the inventory factors that 
began to emerge early in the year are now taking full hold in house price movements, and that 

the momentum arrow is pointing up.  This makes a difference.  
The s
taff estimates that roughly 
3 million households, 
almost 
one-
fourth
 of underwater households, moved from a negative to a 
positive equity position in the second quarter.  The Tealbook baseline forecast assumes a 

5 percent increase in house prices this year that
™s already pretty much baked in, 
followed by a 
leveling
-off.  But some models are predicting continued strong gains in house prices.  Staff 
forecasts of house prices and residential investment are on the conservative side, tempered by 

concern about foreclosure pipelines, 
the elevated level of vacant h
ouses, weak household 
formation, and the tepid pace of 
the 
housing recovery so far. 
                                  Here I think there™
s reason for more optimism. 
Foreclosure pipelines are full because the 
exits are still clogged, but the pace of new delinquencies has slowed markedly.  
The exits are no 
longer clogged by national moratoriums or retooling for new modification programs.  The 

current backlog is more closely tied to state
-specific or operational issues that seem to me 
unlikely to suddenly clear and release a flood of foreclosures onto the market.  
As for the vacant 

inventory, a large portion of the vacant homes not listed for sale 
is outside of bank REO 
inventory.  
Becaus
e we don™t know why they™
re held off the market, I
™m not sure we can make 
assumptions about their sudden return to the market.  I view the potential for pent-up demand to 

show through in faster household formation and put upward pressure on house prices as even 

more likely than the potential for a surge in foreclosures to hold prices down.  At some point, 

demographics win.  Those kids now living at home with their 
parents will not stay there until 
they™re 40.  
[Laughter] 
And when they do form households, they™re going to require housing 
units, whether rental or owner occupied. 
MR. 
FISHER
.  We™re going to hold you to that. 
MS. 
RASKIN
.  Ship them to Betsy™s house.  [Laughter] 
MS. DUKE.  To me, this represents the one area of dry tinder in the economy that could 
be lit with a spark of confidence.  To be sure, mortgage lending conditions are still extremely 

tight, but some recent developments should help.  The specte
r of putback risk has reportedly 
been holding back loans to borrowers at the lower end of GSE standards.  
The 
FHFA has now 

committed to reducing putback risk beginning in January 2013 through better front-end quality 

control and time limits on liability.  Wit
h house prices on the rise, fewer loans should fall 

through 
because of
 appraisal issues.  Regulatory uncertainty should clear, 
as new regulatory 
               
     
                  
      
          requirements for loan origination, securitization, and servicing are likely to be finalized in the 
coming month
s. Probably the biggest drag on lending is the shrinkage of loan origination capacity.  The 
industry is showing signs of strain in what looks to be only a tri
llion
-dollar origination year, 
compared 
with 
a peak origina
tion of $3 trillion not that many years 
ago. 
But if high profits are 
the best fertilizer, we should see more banks entering the business.  I want to investigate actual 

data, but anecdotally, the bankers I spoke with this time 
who
 were in the mortgage business were 
actually having record profits, while those who weren™t in mortgage origination were wondering 

about their survival.  I™
m talking about the difference between a range of 
0.5 to 0.6 ROA, 
for 
those with no mortgage business, versus one of 1.30 to 1.50, for those with a mortgage business.  

So, for all of these reasons, I think there™s a lot of meat left on the house price and housing 
finance bone, and I™
m optimistic about that part of the forecast.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO
.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Because
 John captured my views on the 
economic outlook, I™m going to jettison most of what I would have said.  In fact, I think John 

captured my views better than I had captured my views.  So I thought I™d turn back to labor 

markets
, moved by some of Charlie Plosser™s comments.  The first comment I™d make 
is that it™s 
important to distinguish between cyclical lab
or market conditions and longer-
term labor market 
issues.  I don™t think there™s any doubt that we™ve got some chronic labor market issues in the 

United States.  There
™s been evidence of declining dynamism in U.S. labor markets for well over 
a decade.  There certainly is a substantial sense tha
t people currently taking lower-
income 
service
-sector jobsŠ
if they had better ed
ucation and trainingŠwould be available for jobs that 
might then 
be created with higher value added. 
What Charlie referred to as polarization is 
                         
     
                   
  
     
   undoubtedly true, but again, a chronic issue rather than a cyclical one.  I actually think that 
unlike so many other questions, there™s been a substantial convergence of viewsŠnot entirely, 

but a substantial convergence of viewsŠaround the proposition that a relatively small portion of 

the big jump in unemployment that we™ve seen is attributable to structural fact
ors. There
™s been, 
as you all know, substantial, good, and careful work from the Federal Reserve Banks of 

Cleveland, New York, 
and San Francisco over the past several years that
 has supported that 
conclusion.  A
nd I think among academic researchers, the c
onvergence is also manifesting itself
, as shown most recently in Ed Lazear™s paper at Jackson Hole, following on, by about five 

months, Jesse Rothstein™s paper, 
which surveyed much of the same material and came to many 

of the same conclusions. 
Jeff
, at the last meeting
, suggested that a paper done by Richmond Fed research staff was 
a dissonant voice on this basic proposition that structural unemployment was not a big part of the 

story.  This paper, of course, starts from a very different perspective on long-
term unemployment 
than the literature I just referred to a moment ago.  The Richmond Fed paper argues that an 

unobserved heterogeneity among unemployed workers means that newly unemployed workers 

have inherently different exit rates
, and that over 
time, the composition of the pool of the 
unemployed shifts toward workers who started with the lower exit rates.  I looked at the paper 

after Jeff talked about it at the last meeting, and I spoke with others here at the Board about it, 

and I actually don™t think it establishes a case for structural unemployment. There are a lot of 

empirical and technical questions about the paperŠ
it™s certainly interesting 
and may well have 
significant merit
Šbut I actually don™t think it™s making a structural argument, at 
least not if we 
think of ﬁ
structural
ﬂ as referring to nontransitory unemployment that can™t be affected fairly 
directly by fluctuations in aggregate demand.  It would be unsurprising to learn that firms are 
                
      
        
  
          more likely to lay off relatively less
-valued employees whose lesser perceived abilities may 
mean that they™re less likely to be quickly plucked up by a firm that is hiring.  That phenomenon 
is entirely consistent with 
a demand
-driven increase in unemployment.  
More generally, the 
Richmond Fed model attempts to decompose the variation in the pool of the unemployed over 

time.  So it addresses the reasons for fluctuations in unemployment over historyŠin recessions, 

but also in recoveries.  The reasons for unemploym
ent increases also explain the reversals that 
take place during recoveries.  That is, as there are fewer unemployed
, firms cannot afford to be 
as demanding and thus are more likely to turn to the pool of the supposedly less 
valuable 
workers. 
This seems
, to me at least
, more a 
cyclical than a structural explanation
, and thus, 
again, whatever the ultimate merits of the paper, I don™t think 
it really undercuts the consensus 

reached in the papers to which I referred earlier. 
One final thought on structural unemployment, 
and this relates a bit to what Janet was 
saying a moment ago.  The Richmond paper describes something as the ﬁtrue duration 

dependence
ﬂ position, as opposed to the ﬁunobserved heterogeneityﬂ position that it takes.  The 

true duration dependence position is that, quite apart from any inherent worker qualities, the bad 

luck of being unemployed for an extended period will itself begin to erode the overall 

employability of enough workers that there 
will 
be macroeconomic effects. As Janet said, 
histo
rically
, we haven™t seen much evidence of this in the United States, though many, myself 
included, have thought that the severity and duration of the current employment problem could 

produce some observable h
yste
resis effects this tim
e around.  L
ogically
, one would think that at 
some point these effects would manifest themselves.
  But I have to say, 
to date
, there still isn™t 
much indication of any such effects.  And indeed, I think if one looks at what™s been happening 

to long-term unemployed, you might sa
y there™s actually been a little bit of an improvement in 
                                       
their performance, which would suggest that we™re not sliding closer toward h
yste
resis, but that, 
once again
, for reasons not entirely understood, the U.S. 
labor market seems relatively insulated 
from those effects. But again, as Janet said, basically
, whether you believe that h
yste
resis is 
around the corner or not doesn™t change your policy prescription.  If you think that it hasn™t 
clicked in to date but it might, that™s an argument for greater stimulus now in order to stop it 

from happening.  If you think that there™s unlikely to be h
yste
resis and thus the cyclical 
explanation dominates, then obviously the unemployment should be susceptible to increased 

aggregate demand stimulus.  So, in that sense, I think 
these arguments
 happily converge around 
the same policy prescription.  And for me, 
this all, again, reinforces the view that the story of the 

economy is still one of inadequate aggregate demand.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  First
, I™d like to thank Governor Tarullo for reading the Richmond Fed 
paper
.  Second, I™d like to point out 
that
Šin terms of the distinction I was making before 
between what the unemployment rate would converge to in the long run and the reference rate 

that™s relevant for current policyŠ
a shock that hits the economy today, if it™s a structural shock 

that™s permanent and long lived, 
it is going to affect the longer-
term normal rate of 
unemployment
. But whether it™s permanent or transitory is irrelevant for whether it affects the 
policy-
relevant rate today.
  See what I™m saying? It doesn™t matter if it fades out right away or if 
it™s going to last a long time. It could affect the policy
-relevant rate to
day either way. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How does that handle policy lags?  Monetary policy doesn™t 
work for 
a while. 
       
                     
                 MR. LACKER.  I think that™s orthogonal.  I think that™s tangential to this question.  In the 
models, you™ve got policy lags.  Policy tak
es effect over time, but it™s still the case that you™re 
carrying around this reference rate
ŠPresident Bu
llard talked about a flex price equilibriumŠ 
and it™s affected by both transitory and permanent shocks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook has not changed materially since 
the JulyŒ
August meeting.  Maybe incoming data ha
ve been mixed, but forward-looking 
indicators still remain consistent with an economy growing in the near term in 
a range between 
1½ per
cent and 
2 percent. 
Similarly, the fact
ors shaping the medium-term outlook have not 
changed significantly
; the general contours of my outlook remain the same.  Yes, some of the 
incoming data during the interme
eting period suggested modest increases in household spending 
and employment, and the household sector showed some further slight signs of improvement.  

But no data 
are 
yet showing a basis to believe that these modest increases will be sustained to 
such an extent that faster momentum might be expected
.  Indeed, other data, such as those for 
business spending and consumer confidence, remain soft.  It is not yet obvious that this path, 
or 

even
 a couple of months of stronger-
than
-expected economic activity
, could reduce the amount 
of slack in labor market
s or alter the trajectory of expected inflation to a degree that would 
obviate the need for a further easing of monetary policy.  
Last week™s employment report
Š payroll employment only 55,000 higher than reported in July, 
after taking into account 

revisionsŠdoes not suggest above-trend 
economic 
growth or a declining trend in the 

unemployment rate.  It suggests, 
instead
, that the unemployment rate is likely to move sideways 
with no sign of a substantial and sustainable strengthening in the pace of economic recovery. 
               
                          And this unsatisfactory modal projection is what exists 
before
 even considering downside 
risks to the outlook.  One particular downside risk that remains quite elevated relates to what 
we™ve been talking about
Šthe depressed level of labor participation and the enhanced level of 
long-
term unemployment. 
The decline in the labor force participation rate since the
 beginning of 
the recession is ominous, and although the Board staff predicts that over the next couple of years 

the labor force participation rate will flatten out, the recession
, as Governor Yellen described, 
may well have permanent effects on the labor force participation rate
, just as the high-
pressure 
labor market of the late 1990s pulled people back into the labor force 
who
 had been excluded for 
a long time
Šonly now, unfortunately, 
in reverse. 
In addition, with a substantial and growing 
proportion of unemployed workers having been jobless for long periods, we face an elevated risk 

that such a high level of long-term unemployment will persist long enough to permanently 

depress labor supply and potential output.  Unlike downside risks emanating from the European 

crisis and U.S. fiscal policyŠ
which
, were they to occur, 
theoretically can be addressed with 
accommodative monetary policy after the fact
Šthe potential h
yste
resis created by drops in the 
labor force participation rate and increases in long-
term unemployment will prove intractable to 
address with accommodative monetary policy that isn™t inflationary.
  So I find the particular 
downside risk of h
yste
resis to be especially pernicious because it™s difficult to address after the 
fact. 
But
, more optimis
tically, it is one downside risk that monetary policymakers do have some 
ability to mitigate prior to its occurrence. 
Similarly, I wonder about the permanent or transitory nature of household and business 
expectations.  The economic outlook appears damped by some form of pessimism.  Look at the 

Michigan survey question on the proportion of households expecting unemployment to improve.  

Earlier this year
, that number had recovered, but now it has dropped down again.  
Similarly, 
      
        
     
                         
  households™ income expectations for the coming 12 months have hardly recovered at all since the 
recession despite the fact that actual income has somewhat increased.  On the business side, 

expectations for business conditions six months hence as measured in the Empire State and 

Philadelphia Fed surveys have dropped back sharply again.  In the case of the Empire State 

survey, they™re back close to levels seen during the recession.  Capital spending plans also don™t 

look great.  Surveys from the National Association 
for
 Business Economi
cs show capital 
spending to have dropped sharply in the second quarter.  Surveys from the National Federation 

of Independent Business show capital spending to be gradually rising, 
but still remaining at less 

than half of 
its pre
-recession level. 
It™s diffic
ult to project whether these expectations will 
transition from being temporary blips to permanent shifts, but the fact that these expectations 

have tried to recover from the recession before but been knocked back, sometimes more than 

once, might be a facto
r that could keep households and businesses from getting too hopeful 
again. The longer we have an economy that looks bleak as far as the eye can see, the more this 

bleakness gets built into expectations.  Households and businesses now see a recovery slow to 

materialize.  They assume that things will get better because they always have, but then th
ings 
don™t 
get better
.  So households and businesses start to wonder if this is just a delay or if it™s just 
the new normal.  If they think it™s the new normal, it could become just that.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In terms of the outlook, I™m reasonably close to 
the consensus forecast you put forth, and just a shade more upbeat than I was at ou
r last 

meeting
Šthat is to say, maybe a tenth or two lower on the unemployment rate for 2013. 
I™ve 
interpreted the incoming data since the last meeting inclusive of the jobs report on Friday as 

approximately a 
wash and feel 
as though the situation in Europe looks just a bit brighter.  So, 
             
       
     
   
                    
  
 overall
, I would say it appears we™re still about as 
ﬁstuck in the mud
ﬂ as we have been over the 
last several months, and I agree with Governor Tarullo™s characterization that it™s largely an 
aggregate demand phenomenon. 
In trying to think about the factors that are leading demand to be so sluggish and about 
the channels by which monetary policy might be able to help, I™ve been struck by a few pieces of 

survey evidence.  Now, they turn out to be the s
ame pieces of survey evidence that Governor 
Raskin was just referring to, thereby scooping a fair portion of what I was going to say. 
MS. RASKIN.  It happened to me for a long time.  [Laughter] 

MR. STEIN.  I™m going to 
just start juggling next time. 
Anywa
y, just to underscore, 
really
Šon the Michigan survey, we had a very interesting briefing a few weeks ago by Claudia 
Sahm,
 in R
esearch and 
Statistics
, who
™d been looking carefully at these data.  And the gist of the 
finding is, not only 
is it 
low, but 
also, basically
, it fell 
from
 2007 to 2009, and it really hasn™t 
recovered since.  Moreover, it™s not well explained by household characteristicsŠt
here™s a large 
negative residual there in a way that seems different from previous experience. 
In a similar vein 
but mu
ch less scientifically, I looked at a different survey, the Conference Board™s Consumer 
Confidence Index, which also fell in August.  Very much to your point, they do a breakdown of 

the index into views of the current situationŠ
a present situation in
dex
Šand a future 
expectations piece, and all of the drop was coming from the future expectations piece.  
So I was 

curious.  I went back and compared it 
with
 previous peaks of unemployment that we™ve had.  
The ones I looked at were May 1975 and December 1982.  W
hat you see is
, at those times when 
unemployment was also very high, if you ask
ed people about the present situation, it was dismal, 
but if you ask
ed them about future expectations, it was not nearly so bad as it is today.  These 
are 
just a couple of data points, but 
they™re 
consistent with what I take to be the spirit of Claudia™s 
                  
             
         
    
 work, which is, it™s as if, given where we are today and given the current situation, 
people feel 
the future is considerably more pessimistic
.  And again, I think this is pessimism as opposed to 
uncertainty, which has a slightly different implication because it™s less clear that, if the fiscal 

cliff resolves itself, this kind of thing gets fixed. 
Another survey on the business side
: I just yesterday got a s
urvey that Duke University 
does in conjunction with 
CFO 
magazine
, where they talk to 900 CFOs of U.S. firms.  One of the 
new questions in there this time
ŠI think, 
actually
, Steve Sharp
e helped them design this 
questionŠasked the firms if they would in any 
way change their capital spending plans for a 
given change in interest rates.
  Here
, it is strikingly like a large
-sample version of President 
Fisher™s CEO conversations, where only 3 percent of the firms say they would in any way 

change their capital spen
ding for a 50 basis point movement in rates.  
Now, I take Vice 
Chairman
 Dudley™s critique here.  First of all, in this one, unlike consumer confidence, we don™t 
have a benchmark
, so I don™t know what people would say in normal times
.  But as a Bayesian
, I™m inclined to think that there™s something going on here, even though I wouldn™t say it™s a huge 
thing. 
So, putting this together
Šnow, 
this part is very impressionistic, but I gue
ss the overall 
feeling I get 
from 
looking at these various pieces of survey e
vidence is the sense that when we 
make a policy move now, we™re playing more for whatever effect we can have on consumer and 

business confidence than for the normal hydraulic 
effe
ct we would have on financing conditions 
per se.  That is to say, we may know more about how to move interest rates than about how to 

influence confidence, but it™s the latter that, in some sense, is the dragging anchor.  This is not an 

ﬁalways
ﬂ situation.  I think it™s, in some 
respects, 
the opposite of where we were in 2009 at the 
                     
                    
  
  time of QE1
, when really the thing to do, the imperative, was to fix financing conditions, and 
people would figure it out one way or the other. 
I don™t know if this has any implications for policy. I
t strikes 
me that
, if this is right, it 
should color particularly how we think about the communications aspect.  I, 
like many others 
here
, believe
 that the need for action is clear, but I think, less so than usual, the bond market is 

not really our primary audience.
  So maybe when we think about policy, 
we want to worry less 
about putting together the biggest, most inclusive package that has the maximum bond market 

impact
, and worry more about, how do we deliver a simple and coherent message that normal 
humans can understand, as opposed to mainly Fed w
atchers
?  I think we™ll have a chance to talk 
about some of these issues.  I™m not sure if this concept is fully operational, but I have this 

conviction that we really have to think about our audience as being business m
anagers and 
householdsŠ
more so 
than at other times
.  There™s so much talk about, what are the Fed watchers 
expecting us to do
?  And I think we don™t want to get overly caught up in delivering just to them.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Than
k you.
  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
It does seem to me that there™s a decent 
degree of agreement
, or at least overlap
, about the status and outlook for the economy, and that 
the real question is, what can monetary policy do, 
and
 what should it do going forward?  And 
I™m going to defer that to tomorrow. 
In that spirit
, I propose to deprive the Committee of my 
detailed recitation of intermeeting events and proceed to 
the executive summary part of it
, which 
is, 
really
, that we™ve b
een on a round trip.  We had positive news early in the intermeeting 
period, which 
was a trip to hope and back, and it left me very much in the same place where I 
started
:  I see an economy with a substantial amount of slack that is growing at about 2 
percent
;          
                     
        
       inflation that is bouncing around just below 2 percent on commodity effects, 
but close to target
; and better financial conditions for now.  But as Europe improves, the fiscal cliff begins to 
approach in a serious way, and what I am hearing is that there is little to no hope of action in the 

lame duck.
  Of course, that depends on the arrangement of forces after the election, s
o it™s 
completely unknowable. 
Ultimately and most important
, there is little, if any, reason to expect 
significant improvement in job creation in the coming months. 
My conversations with a group of about 10 diverse industrial companiesŠ
this is not 
auto
s, so it™
s away from one of the real strengths
.  The other parts of the industrial sector, 
let me 
say
, are pretty weak
, and they s
trongly confirm that last point about employment.
  Outside of a 
couple of bright spots like housing and li
ght
 vehicles, it™s soft everywhere, especially in Europe.  
Big customers are postponing orders
; they™re not canceling them.  It™s nothing like from 2008 to 
2009, but the softness that began about six months ago is now the new normal for these 

companies.  The game is about share gain and taking out costs.  It™s 
a low
-growth environment.  
All new projects are on hold, and there is no hiring.  In fact, the 
entire goods
-producing sector of 
the economy lost 16,000 jobs in August.  If you look just at the manufacturing piece of that and 

go back over a quarter, there was a net creation of 15,000 jobs, and two-thirds of that is auto.  I 

want to say that you hear, 
ﬁUncertainty, uncertainty
,ﬂ 
from all 
of 
these people, but they™re really 
talking about two different things.  These are not people who roll over at 4:00 a.m. to check 

Twitter for the latest news from 
Karlsruhe
 on the German decision.  A 
particular compan
y in the 
beverage manufacturing business had a big order from a German OEM for a beverage line, and 

that order has been pushed out at least a quarter.  That™s uncertainty.  It™s about demand.  
As far 

as Europe relates to these companies
Šand 
these are pretty global companies
Šit™s really focused 
on demand.  The fiscal cliff is something different.  There™s a sick feeling in people™s stomachs 
                   
  
     
  
       
              
 that this is really bad, that this is our country not being able to function, and 
it™s like last August 
on steroidsŠnot that there™s anything wrong with steroids.  [Laughter]  They™ve been very 
helpful to me lately. 
Let me say where that leaves me
.  The question that looms isŠ
and I™m going to
, again
, leave aside monetary policy
Šwhen do we break out of this
?  And I really do believe that we 
will.  We always have. 
I can 
remember many of these cycles where you really wonder if this is it 
and we™re never going to get out. I really do feel that
 if you look at our own projections, 
essentially
, all of us project that we™re going to have those 3 
percent, 
4 percent catch
-up years.  
They™re now scheduled for 2014 and ™15, but really, there™s a ton of uncertainty around that.  So 

I™m going to share this highly anecdotal evidence in an effort to end on something of a high note. 
I talked to both private equity investors and hedge fund investors, and it™s always very 
interesting to compare the two of them.
  The hedge fund investors are in a really difficult 
environment.  They™re traders who get marked every quarter, 
and
, in a world that has very few 
ways for them to make money, they™re generally very conservatively positioned, and their 

investor base seems to be fine with that.  
Private equity firms are feeling quite differently about 

things.  They basically think about creat
ing value over a three
-to five
-year period, and many PE 
firms right now, large and small, think that this is a great time to buy. In fact, a str
ing of large 
industrial properties, which would ordinarily have been expected to trade to corporations, 
has 

trade
d to private equity.  T
here are three reasons why the private equity firms are feeling 
aggressive.  First, the
ir natural competitors
, these big companies
, are all frozen on the sideline
s, 
sitting on their cash, ruled by risk-averse public boards, and out of the game.  If anything, 
they™re 

going to wind up being net sellers as the recession goes on.  Second, leveraged 
finance markets, 
as Andreas was discussing this morning, are very attractive
, with low rates and issuer-
favorable 
            
                                    
      
   terms that are just about
 reminiscent of the bubble days, and all 
of 
that provides critical 
flexibility in case deals don™t go well. 
Third
Šand really the one that™s relevant for this policy 
exercise
Šprivate equity firms think about the medium term, and they see the future as bett
er. 
These large private equity firms 
are completely global; 
they 
each own hundreds of companies in 
every major economy and 
in 
every vertical
; and they systematically mine the data that they get 
and they™ve got the talent on board to do that.  This is not the private equity industry of 20 years 
ago.
  So they™re seeing something.  They really are.  It™s pretty consistent, and what™s holding 
back the volume of deals is only supply.  There was quite a similar pattern back in the early 

2000s after the dot-
com c
rash.  In that period, as many will recall, the S&P lost about half of its 
value.  We had a very soft economy in 2001 and 2002, a stri
ng of corporate accounting scandals 
leading to Sarbanes
ŒOxley, and a deflation scare in 2002.  Across the board, 
net sellers of 
businesses were
 on the sidelines, and the private equity firms were extremely aggressive during 
that period.  Those deals turned out to be, 
in many cases
, some of the best investments in the 
history of the industry.  It turned out to be a great time to buy.  I would also add that they were 

net sellers in 
2005 and 2006.  So the question is, 
why take any signal from this, right? I realize it 
doesn™t tell us anything at all about the next few quarters
.  B
ut I will say that it™s a bit of a sign
al to me because this is a group of investors with very successful and, in 
some cases
, long track 
records that were looking ahead to strong growth in the medium term, 
and they were willing to 

put more than just an opinion on the line in that belief.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Could I ask the Governor a question?  Geographically, 
do they express any preferences about where they want to have the business? 
MR. POWELL.  Yes.  T
he hedge funds are, as 
a staff mem
o from Matt and Fabio
 pointed 
out, unanimously not believing a long-run solution in Europe.  They™re just very pessimistic.  
I                  
            
       
          
would say the private equity firms are 
in the same place.  You see very little private equity 
interest in Europe.  There™s great uncertainty 
and
 that kind of thing.  
In t
he United States, you see 
a lot of activity
Šagain, restrained only by a lack of supply.  When there™s a good company 
that™s out there, the bidding is furious, and they™re all saying, 
ﬁThis is the time.
ﬂ  This happened 
10 years ago. 
And Asia
ŠI can™t really give you any call on that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  I see I have two hours now.  
[Laughter] Let me summarize and just make a few comments.
  Participants didn™t see much 
change in the o
utlook, on net, during 
the interme
eting period.  Economic grow
th is still sluggish. 
The near
-term growth outlook is modest, and the recovery is in a holding pattern.  Output and 
employment growth are falling short of levels needed to reduce unemployment.  Headwinds for 

recovery include fiscal policy, deleveraging, tight credit, and international factors, including not 

only Europe, but also slowing in China.  
Some felt that we risk a lost decade, but another view is 

that recovery has been consistent with previous experiences with banking and financial crises, à 

la Reinhart and Rogoff. 
Recent labor market reports have been weak, although unemployment has fallen in the 
past year.  Some decline in unemployment is due to reduced participation, and employment-
to-population ratios are at post-trough lows.  H
yste
resis is a risk and a possible rationale for action.  
Retail sales data were a bit better, and households continue to deleverage, but consum
er confidence is soft, and people are unusually pessimistic.  
Real 
estate activity is improving in a 
number of D
istricts.  Sales are up
, permits
 and 
prices are also rising
, inventories are low, and 
delinquencies are falling.  Rising prices may stimulate further sales.  There is some strength also 

in commercial real estate
.         
   
           
  
       
      With regard to measurements of slack, there was, again, discussion of the issue.  Staff 
analysis concludes that slack is high, and it was noted that inflationary pressures remain low.  
Some argued that measurements of slack should distinguish the long
er-run normal rate and the 
current equilibrium rate
, or natural rate, which varies over time.
  Discussion of the structure 
of 
the labor market noted that routine jobs are disappearing, but 
declining dynamism may be more 
chronic than cyclical, and the long-
term unemployed are not completely shut out of the labor 
market. 
Uncertainty remains an important issue for businesses, holding back investment and 
hiring.  Job growth is particularly weak.  Small businesses are concerned about taxes and 

regulation.  The fis
cal cliff is a particular risk, as is electoral uncertainty. Some research 
suggests that higher uncertainty acts like an aggregate demand shock.  Policy uncertainty is a 

headwind, but not the only one, as the Bloom index suggests.  
In agriculture
, the dro
ught will 
impede GDP growth over the next several quarters.  However, farm income has been supported 

by high prices and crop insurance.  Energy activity is expanding.  Manufacturing reports are 

mixed.  Auto sales are up.  Firms are focused on gaining market share, but among financial 

firms
, private equity is more optimistic and aggressive. 
In the financial sector, long-
term interest rates are very low
, with negative real yields, but 
it was noted that the equilibrium real yield in the economy may also be neg
ative.  Financial stress 

ind
exes are not particularly worrisome, and financial froth has not been reported.  
Firm balance 
sheets are strong
, and credit supply is available when loan demand strengthens.  The ECB™s 
actions have again helped calm Europe, but further progress requires action by governments.  

Risks remain serious, 
and economic 
growth on the Continent should remain weak. 
                    
  
   
   
          
         
              
  
 With respect to inflation, the outlook has not changed much.  Inflation seems likely to 
remain near or below 2 
percent in the m
edium term. Low inflation is also predicted by DSGE 
models.  Businesses are not particularly concerned about their costs.  Inflation expectations are 
stable, and there™s little evidence of disinflation. 
There was a good bit of premature discussion of mone
tary policy
, which covered, among 
other things, the effectiveness of possible actions, the risks and benefits of actions and inaction, 

and issues of communication. 
Any questions or comments? [No response] 
I come after Governor Powell
, so I have an 
even 
more difficult task. I™ll try to respond a little bit to some of the comments that were made 
today.  The basic outlook is, as everyone has pointed out, that we have an economy 
that 
is 
growing very slowly, at or below trend, and, by the usual Okun™s l
aw re
lationships, we™re not 
seeing very much progress in the labor market. 
Unemployment is about the same 
as in 
January, 
and I note that aggregate hours 
are 
also only about ½ percent higher than 
they 
were
 in January.  
President Bullard noted that there was a p
eriod of improvement in the unemployment rate around 
the turn of the year.  One interpretation of that is that it was a one-
time payback for the rapid 
drop in jobs during 
the recession. 
In any case, 
economic 
growth, if anything, is slowing relative to earl
ier in the recovery. 
Now, how do we explain, understand, and interpret the very slow growth we™ve been seeing? 

That was also 
discussed in the go-round.  One possibility is that there™s been a once-
and
-for
-all 
level shift, that we™ve dropped down to a lower level and 
are 
continuing a
t trend at about the 
earlier pace.  So the suggestion there is that we are close to potential and output 
growth going 
forward will remain trend
-like.
  This interpretation does not look implausible if you eyeball 
graphs for GDP or consumption growth.  It is consistent with some 
earlier episodes of financial 
      
               
        
           
     crisis, and
, among others, the IMF has given this perspective a little bit of support.  
The 
alternative interpretation held by others around the table is that we remain well b
elow potential.  
I think it™s perfectly possible to rationalize that.  First, there have been ongoing headwinds, both 
endogenous and exogenous.  The endogenous ones include 
financial balance sheet, financial 
accelerator type
s of 
effects 
and the exogenous ones include Europe, fiscal, and the like.  So 
there 
have been continuing headwinds, and, of course, 
sticky prices
Šas was pointed outŠ
are part of 
overlapping price-setting coordination issues and the like.  I think both of these interpretations 

are conceivable, and they probably both have some truth in them.  
As President Bullard 
mentioned, I don™t think it™s very likely that we™ll return to the pre-
crisis trend. 
Now, on the permanent drop in the level, I™m a 
little bit bemused by the appeal to 
Reinhart
ŒRogoff because the
irs is a strictly reduced
-form observation, 
it has no structural 
interpretation, and it could involve any number of reasons, including uncontrolled factors 
such as 
poor policymaking.  So I don™t take that as a very convincing answer unless I understand better 

what the rationale is that is explaining the slower growth.
  The second story does provide a 
rationale, does provide an explanation.  Notably, labor utilization does appear to be exception
ally 

low, and I won™t repeat Governor Tarullo™s comments, but Eddie Laz
ear, who I don™t think is 
necessarily inclined to find 
a cyclical source of unemployment
, is just the latest of the majority 
of studies in this area 
to find a significant cyclical compo
nent.  It™s true that the short-
term 
equilibrium unemployment rate can vary.  There™s no question about that.  S
taff 
members have 
tried to include some of that in their analysis.  B
ut we need 
a story.  It™s possible, based on that 
kind of analysis, 
that the equilibrium unemployment rate is 
above the long
er-term natural rate at 
this point.  We don™t know.  I want to emphasize that on all of these thingsŠon the economy, on 

the effects of policy
Šwe™re incredibly uncertain, and we have to make decisions under 
                 
   
            
      
    
       
   uncertainty.  We can™t let waiting for certainty be the condition for taking any action.  We have 
to make the best choices we can, given a very uncertain situation.  
So, in that kind of world, of 
course, there are 
type 
I and t
ype 
II errors.  This is similar
 to what 
the Vice Chairman was saying. 
We are close to our inflation objective.  We™re quite far from our unemployment objective, at 

least the long
er-run unemployment objective.  Arguments 
have been made that staying far away 
from the long
er-run unemployment level for a protracted period has its own costs 
besides the 
temporary costs of the cyclical unemployment. 
In terms of our policy tools, I do agree with President Plosser that having a good grip on 
the costs and the risks of those tools is very importan
t, and that™s one reason why we have been
, in some ways, not as quick to use the tools as we might have been if we were using short-
term 
interest rates as our policy tool.
  But I feel that I™d like to thank the staff for the work that™s been 
done over the last couple of interme
eting periods. I think the work on market functioning, the 
work on financial stabilityŠ
all 
of 
those things have made me more comfortable, 
at least
, that we 
can manage the costs of these 
unconventional policy tools. 
Now, I might as 
well take the advantage to talk a little bit about the policy tools and some 
of the issues that have been brought up.  I have great admiration for Michael Woodford.  I hired 

him, I coauthored with him, I was his colleague for many years, and I think he™s a 
terrific 
economist.  And I think a lot of what he said in his paper at Jackson Hole was very useful.  I do 

think that he understates the consensus in the literature about the impact of unconventional tools, 

particularly asset purchases, on the economy.  I won™t go through an extended discussion, but I™ll 

make just a couple of observations on the empirical side.  
He focused primarily on the event-
study evidence.  He came to that with a M
odigliani
ŒMiller type of financial markets perspective, 
which has a lot of theoretical appeal but obviously is not empirically very successful.  It doesn™t 
                  
    
    
                 
     explain a lot of premiums
, a lot of volatility
, in actual financial markets.  So
, using that 
perspective, he was inclined to dis
miss the results from the event
-study research. 
But this 
research does tend to find, 
almost uniformly
, that asset purchases do have effects on financial 
conditions, notwithstanding the fact that it™s very difficult to measure the surprise component of 
a change in asset purchase policy. I was very
 much involved in the literature on measuring the 
effects of surprises in the federal funds rate, and there at least you have a futures market that can 

tell you what was expected.  Obviously, 
that™s very difficult in the case of asset purchases, and 

theref
ore you w
ould expect the event
-study literature
, if anything
, to bias down the findings, the 
impact of asset purchases on financial conditions.  But beyond that, in looking at only the event 

studies, Woodford™s paper ignores two other major literatures.  O
ne is a substantial literature on 
the effects of relative supplies of 
Treasuries on term premiums.  I would cite, for example, 
Kutt
ner
 (2006) and Greenwood and V
aya
nos (2010), and this appears also in work by Ga
gnon, Hamilton and Wu, and others.  
And a sec
ond line of research is based on no-
arbitrage term 
structure models, such as the 
Li and Wei
 paper that has been used a lot here at the Board.  So 
there have been 
a number of different approaches, and again, I do think that the bulk of the 
evidence is that 
these tools do have effects on financial conditions.  Obviously, 
there are issues 
about the transmission to the real economy, and I take some of the points that have been made, 

but there are factors there working in both directions.  For example, to the ex
tent that credit 
markets are becoming less tight
Šstandards and terms are becoming less restrictiveŠl
ower 
interest rates will have more effect rather than less effect. 
The central message of Woodford™s paper, though, which I do agree with very much, is 
that expectations management is really critical to managing monetary policy at the zero bound. 

And I agree with Governor Stein that the language is very important.  How we present what 
         
    
              
         
      
   
           
  
    we™re doing is going to be very important.  I
n particular, 
and 
we™ll talk about this tomorrow, 
trying to signal that the Fed, rather than being pessimistic, is determined 
and 
that the Fed will be 
supporting the economy.  We™ll be there.  We™ll be a backstop.  We™ll provide confide
nce. I 
think that™s a very important part of what our communication should be about.  P
ersonally
, I™ve 
learned something from both Woodford™s discussion and th
at discussion around the table about 
how we should be talking to markets and to the public.  And a very small thing, but in my press 
conference statement tomorrow
, I™m going to try to talk a little bit more to the average person 
than I have been, and try to explain what we™re doing and why it™s helpful more broadly.  So I do 

expect the expectations c
hannel to be very important, but I think I disagree that by itself it™s 

sufficient
. The main problem is that we™ve already said that we™d keep rates low for three years. 
How much further out can we go? 
For example, 
Woodford argues that a nominal GDP targ
et, 
if 
adopted, would allow us essentially to make commitments many years in advance.  I™d like to 

actually raise the question once again to the group because we looked very carefully at nominal 

GDP targets more than a year ago now
, I think, and there was 
really no support at that time
.  The 
basic argument is that
, in order to work, people have to be persuaded that you™ll stick to this 
target for a very extended period, many years, even though a nominal GDP target may involve a 

period of inflation well above your normal range of inflation.  Moreover, of course, there™s also 

the risk that, if that happens, then inflation expectations will become unanchored.  So I think that 

was the case against nominal GDP targeting. A few people have talked about it. 
If I™
m missing 
something and you want me to hedge more when I™m asked about it tomorrow, which I™m sure I 

will be, I™d like to hear that tomorrow because, again, the take of this group a year ago was th
at nominal GDP targeting, price-
level targeting, and so on, 
while useful, are limited in 
that they 
             
                 
         
       
     
     require credibility very far in the future. 
And that™s why I think one of the benefits of asset 
purchases is that they can be used as a concrete action, as a commitment device
, to help 
strengthen the expectations ef
fect of announcements and communication so that they really are 
complementary
Šmore than we have given them credit 
for 
and more than I really said in my 
remarks at Jackson Hole. 
So there 
are
 a lot of interesting issues here.  I think what I™d like to end on 
is just to come 
back to the point that I know we™re all in debating mode.  We want to persuade our colleagues, 

and that™s certainly laudable, but the fact is that nobody really knows precisely what is holding 

back the economy, what the correct responses a
re, 
or 
how our tools will work.  A
nd I believe we 
all have to try to think hard about, 
in a Bayesian context
, using information that we have and 
thinking about both the risks of action and the risks of inaction, what the best choices are, 

acknowledging and
 understanding that whatever we do, it™s going to be a shot in the proverbial 
dark.  I think, 
really
, it™s going to be very important for us to pull together, 
in a sense
, to support 
whatever efforts that we make.
  Any questions or comments?  President 
Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thanks for those remarks.  I 
found them very useful in my own thinking.  I, too, thought the staff™s work on LSAPs over the 

last couple of inter
meet
ing periods has been really helpful, but even mor
e broadly, I certainly 
came to the question of the efficacy of the LSAPs from the same M
odiglianiŒ
Miller framework 
that Mike sketched, and I found the empirical work on the asset pricing side very informative.  It 

certainly shaped my thinking moving away from the Mo
digliani
ŒMiller framework. 
Our statements, 
alternative A and 
alternative B
, make reference to continuing to study the efficacy of 
the LSAPs.  Part of that will have to be ongoing work and ongoing study of that linkage between 
                               
        what™s going on in the financial markets and how that™s getting through to the real economy.  
At least for me
, that™s a major source of uncertainty still. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me make one comment on that, which is, 
you 
sometimes hear the following kind of statement:  
ﬁTight monetary policy is not causing the 
problem
; therefore, easing monetary policy won™t help.
ﬂ  That™s a non sequitur.  If, say, tight 
fiscal policy is the problem, if that™s the reason the economy is growing slowly, it doesn™t mean 

that 
monetary policy can
™t mitigate that.  So I think that kind of argument needs to be looked at 
very carefully.
  We are doing a lot.  We are absolutely doing a lot.  There™s no question about it.  
Nobody can blame the Federal Reserve fairly, in my opinion, for being tightfisted and stingy and 

not willing to take risks to try to support the economy.  
But the fact that it™s not our fault that the 
recovery is slow doesn™t mean that we can™t try to help if we think, in fact, that the benefitŒ
cost 

ratio is appropriate. 
What I™d like to do is let Bill English do his introductory remarks for tomorrow.  I™m in 
your hands.  The reception starts at 5:30.  Would people like to continue with the policy round, 

or should we just have Bill and then start fresh at 8:30? 
PARTICIPANT. 
Break
. PARTICIPANTS
.  Fresh. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fresh.  Okay. 

MR. 
FISHER
.  Governor Powell needs to take a nap. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  He™s not the only one.  [Laughter] 
All right.  We™ll ask Bill 
to make his opening presentation and take any questions, and then we™ll recess for reception and 

dinner.  
Bill. 
         
    
  
    
          
   
  
     
          
                                                                         MR. ENGLISH.
7  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think the policy 
alternatives are being handed around right now.  They are the same as the ones we 

distributed earlier this week. I guess I™ll wait just a mome
nt until everybody has 
them. 
The first page of the handout illustrates the effects of three different policy paths.  
The black
 solid lines in the charts depict the experimental consensus forecast, which 
is conditioned on unchanged policy.  The 
red
 dashed lines show the results of a more 
accommodative policy, one 
that™s 
consistent with an a
lternative B that shifts back the 
date in the forward guidance to mid-2015 and, in addition to $30 billion of MBS 

purchases a month and completion of the MEP this year, involves buying longer-
term 
securities at a rate of $75 billion a month through the middle of next year.  The 

balance sheet implications of this alternative are shown at the top right.  So long as 

the public correctly anticipates that the Committee will follow this policy, the result is 

a more rapid economic recovery that takes the unemployment rate to 
6.3 percent by 
the end of 2015, about ½ percentage point lower than in the consensus baseline; the 

inflation rate (shown at the bottom right) is a bit
 higher but remains near your 

2 percent longer
-run objective. 
The 
blue dotted lines show the results of an even more accommodative policy; 
this corresponds to alternative A and includes a new $1.25 trillion LSAP and a shift in 

the date in the forward guida
nce to mid
-2015.  
In this case, the unemployment rate 
falls to 
about 6.1 percent by the end of 2015, and inflation runs a little higher than 
under the other policies. 
If, in reviewing the outlook under 
the 
unchanged policy, the Committee views the 
likely outcomes for employment and inflation as inconsistent with its mandate, it 

might choose to ease policy by strengthening the forward guidance in the statement 

and engaging in additional asset purchases.  Alternative B
, on page 5, 
may offer the 
Committee an attractive approach to moving strongly in that direction at this meeting, 

but without committing now to a large, discrete purchase program.  Alternative B 

completes the MEP and starts buying additional MBS, with an explicit proviso that 

the Committee will c
losely monitor developments ﬁin coming monthsﬂ in deciding 
whether to continue the purchases and scale them up. 
The first paragraph of 
alternative B updates the description of the economy to 
reflect the mixed incoming information over the period.  The second paragraph 

differs from past statements by expressing the medium
-term outlook as a conditional 

forecast, noting that the Committee is concerned that ﬁwithout further policy 

accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained 

improvement in labor market conditions.ﬂ  Then the third paragraph announces that 

the Committee will complete the MEP as planned and will commence purchasing 

MBS each month.  The options you™re offered here are rates of $30 billion or 

$40 billion a month.  The higher rate of purchases would have the advantage of 

providing more impetus to growth, but some policymakers may prefer the lower rate, 
7 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
      
                          
             
      
      
    
              perhaps to allow for some future ramping-up in reaction to shocks, such as a full 

encounter with the fiscal cliff or
 a worsening of the problems in Europe.  Staff work 
suggests that purchases even 
at the higher pace would be unlikely to cause problems 
with market functioning. 
The fourth paragraph signals another decision point coming in the future.  It says 
that if, ﬁin
 coming months,ﬂ the ﬁoutlook for the labor market does not improve 
substantially,ﬂ the Committee will continue its MBS purchases 
and undertake 
additional asset purchases ﬁas appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a 

context of price stability.ﬂ
 The paragraph offers an option to include the possibility 
of employing other policy tools as well.  Participants may find that additional 

reference attractive if they think that changes in forward guidance, new lending 

programs, or a reduction in the inte
rest rate paid on reserves might also be appropriate 
in the future.  The paragraph concludes by noting that, as always, the likely efficacy 

and costs of asset purchases will be taken into account as the Comm
ittee calibrates its 
purchases. 
In paragraphs 5 and 5
, the statement offers two options for restating the forward 
guidance.  Both versions begin by putting the Committee™s decision with respect to 

the forward guidance in a more positive light and in the context of making progress 

toward its objectives by indicating that
, ﬁto support continued progress toward 

maximum employment and price stability, the Committee expects that exceptionally 

low levels of the federal funds rate will remain appropriate for a considerable time 

after the economic recovery stren
gthens.ﬂ  Paragraph 5 then continues by shifting 
the 
date of the expected commencement of policy firming out to mid-2015.  By contrast, 

paragraph 5
 replaces the calendar date with new conditional language that ties the 
timing of liftoff to the path of the
 unemployment rate, subject to constraints on 
inflation and inflation expectations.  Some participants may see this conditional 

language as preferable to offering a specific date because it will allow market 

participants to adjust their expectations for li
ftoff flexibly as information bearing on 

the economic outlook is received. 
The immediate market reaction to 
alternative B is hard to predict, in light of the 
policy expectations currently in the market and the decision point that would be 

highlighted in paragraph 4.  Primary dealers appear to place high odds on a new 

program of securities purchasesŠ
generally expected to increase Federal Reserve 
holdings by around $500 
billion 
to $600 billion by the end of 2013Š
and some see it 
as likely to be described in flow terms.  But it is not clear how they would gauge the 

likely scale of purchases under 
alternative B. An 
al
ternative B in which the 
Committee decided over coming months to purchase $75 billion in securities per 

month during the first half of next year would be roughly equivalent to the 

$500 billion 
to $600 billion now expected.  With most outside forecasts anti
cipating 
only slow improvement in labor market conditions over coming quarters, the market 

may come to expect the purchases to exceed this amount.  With regard to the forward 

guidance, ﬁmid
-2015ﬂ is in line with expectations, but the language in paragraph 5
 might be seen as pointing to even more accommodation.  On balance, a
lternative B 
might prompt a modest decline in longer-term interest rates, higher equity prices, and 
                          
              
                     
  
          
    
        a depreciation of the dollar.  However, the magnitude and persistence of the effects 

will depend importantly on what investors see as the implications of the statement for 

the ultimate size of the SOMA portfolio, as well as which version of the forward 

guidance the Committee chooses. 
Alternative A
, on page 3, 
may appeal to members who see 
the Committee as 
having persistently missed its dual objectives in the same direction and believe that, 

with the fiscal cliff looming and uncertainty about Europe unresolved, the downside 

risks to economic growth are very large.  They may believe that the 
Committee needs 
to send a clear signal that it is willing to substantially increase its holdings of 

securities and extend the forward guidance.  They may be concerned that the 

effectiveness of 
alternative B would be undermined by investor uncertainty about 
both the Committee™s decision to extend purchases beyond the next few months and 

the ul
timate size of such purchases. 
The first and second paragraphs of a
lternative A are close to those of 
alternative 
B.  The third paragraph of alternative A announces a new lump-
sum LSAP 
program, comprising $750 billion of longer-term Treasuries and $500 billion of MBS, 

at a combined pace of about $75 billion per month through early 2014.  The fourth 

paragraph clarifies that the new program replac
es the MEP and that the Committee™s 

reinvestment policy will continue.  The fifth paragraph, as in a
lternative 
B, extends 
the forward guidance to mid-2015.  Alternative A also provides possible language for 

a 10
 basis point reduction in the IOER rate. 
Beca
use $1.25 trillion lies well outside the range of most market forecasts 
for a 
new LSAP program, alternative A would likely lead to a notable drop in longer-
term 
interest rates, as well as higher equity prices and a lower foreign exchange value of 

the dolla
r.  These effects could be increased somewhat and accompanied by some 
decline in short-
term interest rates if a reduction i
n the IOER rate were included. 
Alternative C, 
on page 7, might appeal to policymakers who see the recent 
economic data as consistent 
with the view that the economic recovery is on a 
sustainable path and proceeding about as well as could be expected given the effects 

of the financial crisis.  They may see the elevated size of the Federal Reserve™s 

portfolio as well as the recent rise in 
oil and other key commodity prices as implying 
some upside risk to inflation.  As a result, they may judge that there is no need to ease 

policy through a change in the forward guidance or a new LSAP program, and they 

may even anticipate that the funds rate 
will need to be raised significantly earlier than 
markets anticipate. Other participants may have views that are shaped less by 

concerns about the outlook, but believe that the costs and risks associated with 

additional asset purchases are likely to exce
ed the benefits in terms of improved 

economic conditions. 
The first paragraph in a
lternative C is somewhat more positive about economic 
developments than in alternatives A and B.  The second paragraph is similar to the 

August statement but projects somewha
t stronger growth and higher inflation.  There 
are two versions of paragraph 3:  The first maintains the ﬁlate 2014ﬂ forward 
                                                    guidance, with an option to change the date to ﬁlate 2103ﬂ
; the second version, 

ate
-dependent forward gui
dance 
with language describing 
the factors the Committee would consider in determining the appropriate time to raise 

the target federal funds rate.  The fourth paragraph is similar to the August statement, 

except that it provides a more balanced outlook for policy. 
The markets would be greatly surprised by a statement along the lines of 
alternative C, especially if it signaled an earlier rise in the federal funds rate. Interest 
rates would likely jump higher, and stock prices could drop sharply. 
Draft dire
ctives for each of the alternatives are presented on pages 9 through 12 of 
your handout.  
Thank you
, Mr. Chairman.  That 
completes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there any questions for Bill? 
President Fisher. 
MR. FISHE
R.  Mr. Chairman, if I could ask Simon and the D
esk
Šagain, just to have a 
factual grip here
:  What kind of market penetration will we have on mortgage-
backed securities 
under the 
program of 
$30 and $40 billion per month?  You mentioned this earlier.  I apo
logize. 
MR. POTTER. 
That™s the flow rate relative to gross issuance. 
MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir. 
MR. POTTER. 
If we™re about one-third right now, if we added $30 billion, we™d be 
about 60 percent
; at 
$40 billion
, we™re about 70 percent.  
But i
n terms of the stock, I think that 
wouldŠ
what was that
, L
orie
? MS. LOGAN.  I don™t have the exact numbers for the particular scenarios, but the stock 
would be 25 percent under the $30-
billion
-per
-month pace, and it would be slightly higher under 
$40 billion per month
. I 
don™t have that exact number, and it depends on the length, but just for 
a maximum
, under the $2 trillion scenario that we had run, the maximum was 36 percent.  So 

that gives you the very upper bound. 
MR. FISHER.  And if w
e assume that we finish the MEP at 
year
-end, what will be our 
duration? 
       
      
     
    
        
     
                 
    
 MR. POTTER
.  The duration will be eight years, but we™ll own quite large amounts of 
some of the longer-duration securities.  T
hat™s 
in the Treasury part of the portfolio. 
MR. FISHER.  And of some of the particular issu
es, we have significant
Šabove 
70 percent
.  I
s that
 correct now? 
MS. LOGAN. 
We™ve a 70 percent per CUSIP cap.  So we can™t buy any
Š MR. FISHER.  That™s our cap per 
CUSIP? 
MS. LOGAN
.  That™s the c
ap. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 
MS. LOGAN
.  We™ve only hit the ca
p on ten issues, I thinkŠthe number that we™ve hit 
the 
maximum 
70 percent on
.  And most of those were old bonds in 
very small size. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you very much. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chai
rman. Bill, I just wanted to clarify since we have 
a few minutes here.  When we do this on page 1 here, there 
are 
three lines
, and then 
alternative 
B has a couple 
of 
options in it.  Are you saying that this is a rough guide to what 
alternative 
B would del
iver? 
MR. ENGLISH. Ye
s. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Or 
do you feel as though it wouldn™t make too much difference which 
option is chosen within the subgroups that are proposed?  O
r is it just 
that it™d get too cluttered
? MR. ENGLISH. 
What we tried to do here was write
 down something that seemed 
plausibly in line with 
alternative B. Alternative B has a couple of different choices that the 
Committee would have to make.  One is, 
later on
, what do you do in a few months after you™ve 
observed the economy?  Do you continue purchasing into next year? We™ve assumed that you 
                   
                
    continue purchasing for about, I think, seven months in this.  And then the other question is, 
what do you do with the forward guidance? 
We™ve assumed
, basically
, that the forward 
guidance goes out to mid-2015 and is compellingŠe
verybody believes 
it.  It™s possible, as I 
mentioned, that because market participants™ sense 
of 
the outlook is a bit weaker than our sense 

of the outlook, they may read that 6½ percent unemployment rate as pushing the liftoff even 

later
.  If that were picked up, then you™d get a little bit more impetus to the economy out of that, 
but we™ve not modeled that here. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  And the other thingŠI™ve been concerned about the withering 
of 
alternative C here.
  Alternative C isn™t mentioned in the graphs. 
MR. ENGLISH.  Alternative C would be, as long as you left the liftoff date unchanged, 
pretty similar to the consensus forecast.  What I™m taking out of that is the sense in the words in 

alternative C that mig
ht hint that things could move more quickly than that. 
So the straight 
consensus forecast is no change in the forward guidance, no additional purchases beyond the end 

of the year.  That broadly is consistent with a
lternative C but maybe doesn™t quite get 
the sense 
of what the words in a
lternative C could mean to market participants. 
MR. BULLARD.  Well, when you describe it, 
you say, ﬁ
Markets would be surprised
.ﬂ  
I think 
that™s 
accurate
Šthey
™d be very surprised by a statement like thatŠand that you proba
bly 
would have some 
effe
ct.  Plus, if we were going in that direction, which I guess we™re not, you™d 
have the possibility of moving up the date 
of liftoff
. MR. ENGLISH.  Right. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
One important point here
:  The black lineŠ
the consensus 
forecast
Šimplicitly has in it
 a significant disappointment 
for
 the market because they pull back 
      
           
       
     
               their expectations for liftoff to late 2014, and they 
remove 
their expectations of any furt
her 
expansion of the portfolio. 
MR. 
BULLARD
.  I see.  So I should read this as ﬁConsensus forecast/a
lternative C.ﬂ 
MR. ENGLISH.  Roughly. 
MR. BULLARD.  Roughly speaking.  Well, I guess, Mr. Chairman, 
I have a concern 
whether 
we have three options that are live options.  And I think it™s been hard while the 
Committee has been
 trying to think about ways to ease, and when the Committee shifts in the 
other direction, the same thing will happen.  But I think you want to have some things that are a 

little bit tighter, a little bit easier, and might actually have a chance of
Š CHAIRM
AN BERNANKE. 
We circulate this and ask whether it spans the range of 
views
 so, of course, we always welcome suggestions. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Well, it™s up to you.  But if you try to span the range of views, you 
might have to put something on the table that™s not going to be adopted.  But from my point of 

view, I
™d like to see three live things that we could do and things that we might be able to 
maneuver around. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The other way we
™ve used the alternatives
, of course, 
is to 
try out different lan
guage or alternative language. 
And in the past, 
we™ve co
mbined, mixed 
things together. 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  One is for you, Bill.  
I™d like your help 
with 
understanding the second sentence in B(4).  I™m having trouble with it.  I 
don™t think I understand it correctly, particularly the role of price stability.  So let me tell you 
      
   
     
      
    
                                 what I think it says, the way I read it. 
It says, ﬁIf the outlook for the labor m
arket does
 not improve substantiallyﬂ in coming monthsŠ
so, if that happensŠthen we™re going to do X.  So X, 
I think, 
is, as I read this, ﬁundertake additional asset purchases 
. . . as appropriate until 
such 
improvement is achieved in a context of price sta
bility.ﬂ
  As I think about that, if that 
improvement is achieved but it™
s not in a context of price stability, that seems to say to me that 
we™re going to still keep purchasing assets.  Have I got this wrong? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I want to defend Bill because he pointed out this problem. 
MR. LACKER.  I actually pointed it out to him yesterday. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You
 pointed it out to him.  Okay. 
MR. 
ENGLISH
.  You™re not 
the 
first
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
We have poetic license here. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  You 
don™t mean that literally, right? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It means that we
™re looking for improvement in a context of 
price stability. If we see improvement 
without price stability, that
™s not a good thing, and we 
won™t continue purchases. 
MR. LACKER.  But th
is says you
™re going to wait until you get im
provement with price 
stability. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it™s clear what
Š VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It™
s ﬁsubject to
.ﬂ That™s really what it means. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It
™s ﬁsubject to.ﬂ  W
hen we actually clari
fy this, assuming 
we go ahead and do more in January or whatever, we™
ll be a little clear
er in this kind of language 
here. 
                 
  
         
      
  
          
                 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  The second question I haveŠand I probably should have 
asked this during our first agenda item.  I™
ve asked t
his at times in the past
.  On the table is a 
flow of purchases of mortgage-backed securities.  I™
ve asked in the past 
about the thought 
experiment of buying mortgage
-backed securities versus buying an equivalent amount of 
U.S.
 Treasuries.
  What I
™ve asked 
about is, all right, comparing those two options, undoubtedly 
your forecast, as you™ve said, is that 
mortgage
-backed security yields 
will be lower with 
purchases of 
mortgage
-backed securities than 
with 
purchases of 
Treasuries, and that mortgage 
rates will 
be lower. 
Now, my gut instinct is that some other rates will be higher.  And I™
ve asked 
about this in the past, but did you do any work on that this time? 
MR. POTTER.  Which rates? 
MR. LACKER. 
Aren™t other rates going 
to be higher if we buy mortgage-
backeds rather 
than T
reasuries?  Because presumably
, that means 
Treasury rates will be higher than they 
otherwise would be.  Presumably, some other rates are linked to T
reasuries 
and not mortgage-
backed securities, and presumably, they™
re higher. Isn™t there some other rate that
™s going to go 
up if we buy mortgage-
backed
s rather than 
Treasuries? 
MR. ENGLISH. Not 
go up
, but go down by less. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Go down by less. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I think that™s right. 

MR. LACKER.  Oh, okay.  Well, noŠbut, see, I™m asking to compare buying X amount 
of T
reasuries 
with buying 
X amount 
of mortgage-
backed.  So rates 
go downŠ 
MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we are still buying Treasuries under the MEP in this 
program. 
       
           
           
                      
MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know.  But instead of buying $30 billion of mortgages, buy 
$30 billion of 
Treasuries. 
MR. ENGLISH.  I think the answer to your question is in table 1 in the options memo 
that we sent, which had an experiment where you do $500 billion of T
reasury purchases or 
$500 billion of MBSŠjust one or the other.  T
he term premium effects are a little bit smaller if 
you buy the MBS, so T
reasury yields decline by less.  They still decline. It
™s still a purchase of a 
longer-
term security and still taking duration out of the market and still p
utting downward 
pressure on longer-
term rates, but by less.
  The mortgage rate goes down by more if you buy 
MBS than if you buy T
reasuries, because you
™re pushing MBS down more and mortgage rates 
down by more.  And our estimate of the effects on inflation and output are similar in size.  
They
™re a little smaller for the MBS purchase
, based on our modeling and our assumptions, than 
for 
the 
Treasury purchase, but they™
re in the same ballpark. 
MR. LACKER.  So what other rates go down by less or are higher b
ecause you™
ve 
been 
tilting toward 
mortgage
-backeds
? MR. ENGLISH. 
In FRB
/USŠDave Reifschneider 
will tell me if I™m wrong
ŠI think, 
basically
, that 
other long-term rates, corporate rates or whatever, would go down by more if you 
bought Treasuries than if you bought MBS. 
MR. PLOSSER.  So the MBS would provide 
less pass
-through, in some sense, to 
corporates and other things.  Is that the idea? 
MR. ENGLISH
.  Yes. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Depends on what you think the 
degree of substitutability 
is between 
them. 
          
       
       
    
   
             
     MR.
 ENGLISH.  Yes.  And this really is pushing pretty hard on our ability to model this 
stuff, but that™s what our modeling 
says
. MR. LACKER.  So that takes away some stimulus, right? 
MR. ENGLISH. Ye
s, that™s right. 
MR. LACKER. 
And the MBS, on netŠ 
MR. POTT
ER.  Well, not overall, 
necessarily. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Well, it doesn™t take away stimulus relative to doing nothing.  
It takes away stimulus relative to
Š  MR. ENGLISH. 
Buying
 an equivalent amount of T
reasuries
. MR. LACKER. 
Right. 
MR. POTTER.  On thoseŠ 

MR. 
LACKER
.  In that sector. 
MR. POTTER.  Not necessarily for the economy as a whole. 

MR. LACKER. 
Right.  So the rationale for MBSŠ
is it that
, on net, 
real outcomes are 
better?  Or is it more of a sectoral argument? 
MR. ENGLISH.  The argument we gave in the memo was that you want to have a 
balance across the two so that you can ramp up or ramp down.  We know from the capacity 

memo that we sent the Committee before the last meeting that there
™s a maximum amount
, roughly, 
that we 
were comfortable saying 
we could buy over the next couple of years.  That 
maximum amount 
has a ratio of 
Treasuries to MBS, 
and 
we™ve roughly maintained that ratio in 
these purchase programs. 
MR. LACKER.  I understand.  Thank you. 
                              
                   
      MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
That
™s the main argument.  
There
™s a second argument, which 
is not in the model sims we
™ve run, but a lot of people believe that MBS could have effects that 
the model isn™t picking upŠ
say, large
r effects on house prices
, bigger effects on mortgage 
refinancing, 
or 
something like that
. CHA
IRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart has a two-
hander. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Is there a connection or correlation between lowering mortgage-
backed rates and other securitization vehicles such as auto, student loan, credit card? 
MR. ENGLISH.  There might be in practice, but we™re not picking that up in the 
modeling that we
™re doing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just one observation.  Presumably, the reason why you 
also might want to split it is a market functioning issue. 
You can go 
bigger if you split it 
between two markets than if you conce
ntrate all on one market. 
MR. POTTER.  We are still buying in the 
Treasury market. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
That was just a comment, but I have a question.  It 
seems to me 
as though the key money line in B is, ﬁIf the outlook for the labor market does not 

improve substantially, the Committee will continue its 
purchases of agency 
mortgage-backed 
securities and undertake additional asset purchases.
ﬂ  That
™s the key money line.  
Now, I
™d like 
to get st
aff members™ 
views of what they think people are going to interpret that line to mean in 
light of, say, the SEPs that are going to be put out 
and the Chairman™s press conference 
statement.  How do we think people are going to interpret that line?  That™s c
ritical
Šyou have to 
have a view on that to know what you™re really voting for, in some fundamental sense.  I know 

it™s judgment, but I™d love to 
hear your view. 
                  
    
   
  
     
      
          MR. ENGLISH. 
We™re not sure.  
I think we argued in our memos that it might be 
something like a
 ½ percent
age point 
decline in the unemployment rate that
™s sustained. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, I don™t mean the effects on the macroeconomy.  I 
mean, when people write the articles at the end of the day, what are 
they going to think about 
how big this is likely to be? 
MR. POTTER.  I don™t think it will showŠ 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They
™re going to have our SEPs, and they™
re going to 
have this information that shows that this unemployment rate trajectory
Š MR. 
KOCHERLAKO
TA.  You mean the purchase program itself? 
MR. POTTER.  The total amount forŠthey™re going to try 
to work out an expected date. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  And so I guess I™m asking, what kind of expected 
date do we think they can work out? 
MR. POTTER. 
The SEP will give them some information.  I don™t believe that shows a 
substantial improvement in the labor market for quite some time.  So that means that they
™ll probably be looking for sometime in 2013.  That™
s the way we
™ve been modeling this, I think.  
And the assumption you had, Bill, was something like $600 billion of total purchasesŠi
s that 
right? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Including purchases under the MEP, it was $750 
billion
.  But
, as I said 
in my remarks, it could easily be more.  P
eople might see that the e
conomy is expected to be 
weak for quite a while
; they might carry it out further into 2013 and get a bigger amount. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
For me, the obvious question to you, Mr. Chairman, at 
the press conference might be
, given the SEP and your views, wh
at does the SEP forecast imply 

in terms 
of ﬁi
mprove 
substantially
ﬂ?       
                
                              
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  My answer will be that 
we want to see
Šnot what we saw 
last 
Friday
.  We want to see increases in payrolls.  We want to see some progress
Šnot sh
arp 
progress, but some pro
gress
Šin the unemployment rate
.  And we want to have a sense that the 
economy is moving in a 
direction that will help labor markets get better. 
We used the word 
ﬁoutlook.ﬂ  So a pickup in GDP growth would certainly be a factor in the outlook for labor 
markets, for example. I think we have a fail
-safe here
, which is that if it doesn™t have any effect, 
then we have the efficacy clause here as well.
  But the idea would be that we want to see 
something different from the current 
waiting
-in-place kind of situation where there™s no 
progress, 
the 
unemployment rate stays about the same, and monthly payrolls are 100,000 and 

less. 
And I will emphasize that it
™s not a single indicator or a single trigger number; 
we™re 
looking holistically at the labor market indi
cators and, in fact, more broadly because it™
s the 
outlook for the labor market that matters, not just the current number. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you
™d have to see improvement in the labor market 
that you thought would be sustained in the future. 
CHAIRM
AN BERNANKE.  Right. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
For what it™s worth, the B
lue 
Chip forecasts 
for the 
unemployment rate going into the middle of 2013 are very flat
.  Then, in the second half of 2013, 
they™
re expecting to see a more noticeable downtilt in the unemp
loyment rate.  So that™s another 
way of 
looking at it. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So the market would presumably put in nine months 
or 
more
Šthat
 would be a reasonable guesstimate, 
I guess. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Again, it™s
 the outlook and not the actual. 
VICE CH
AIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Yes. 
                         
                    MR. PLOSSER.  I just want some interpretation of the word ﬁsubstantiallyﬂ here because 
the market is going to ask you that as well.  What constitutes substantial progress? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Substantial progress means that we are seei
ng ongoing 
progress in the direction of improved labor market conditions. 
MR. PLOSSER.  So it
™s not something about 
the magnitude of the rate of change. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It
™s not the magnitude, but really a 
movement in that 
direction 
that 
is, I m
ight 
say, persuasive or indicative that there is now progress in the right 
direction
, as opposed to simply remaining static or 
getting 
worse.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  This is on the same point. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  David Wilcox showed us employment in his forecast summary, and 
when they do all of the seasonal adjustment right, it looks as though half of the improvement we 

got in the labor markets this past winter or the winter before, was spurious, seasonal stuff.  

Would what we saw last w
inter suffice? Would we stop after that? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would think so.  It dropped 1 percentage point between 
August and 
April. 
MR. LACKER. I
™d be on board with that.  But his 
analysis suggests that 
that 
would be 
like another seasonal head fake. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we
™d look at a range of variables.  O
f course, there™s 
nothing that says if you stop, you can™t start again. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No
, but l
ast winter, though, it wasn™t really that 
convincing because, remember, payrolls were strong but GDP was weak, and we had this riddle. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We had this riddle.  Yes, that™s right. 
                    
          
     
             
     
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And so you could argue that you wouldn™t necessarily 
stop 
last winter
, because 
you didn™t have the GDP growth to support the 
labor market. 
MR. POTTER.  I don™t think our outlook changed that much.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We basically want to see progress in terms of the key macro 
labor market variables. 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  Well, let me ask Bill Dudley™s question again.  What do you 
want the 
USA 
Today
 headline to be? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
ﬁBernanke, 
the Hero
ﬂ? [Laughter] 
ﬁFederal Reserve 
Says 
It Will Support Economy.ﬂ 
MR. 
FISHER
.  That™s the 
sports section, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. 
PLOSSER
.  ﬁFederal Reserve All In.ﬂ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
ﬁFederal Reserve Will 
Provide Support to Labor M
arket.
ﬂ MR. 
LACKER
.  By buying 
MBS? 
MS. 
DUKE.  And housing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Housing.
  People understand that. 
MR. 
LACKER
.  Okay. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  D
id you have a question, 
President 
Pianalto? 
MS. PIANALTO.  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, you made some comments about the 
6½ percent unemployment trigger in 
alternative B, paragraph 5
. You said that some forecasters 
have slower progress on the unemployment rate, so they may view 
what is in alternative B 
as more accommodation than markets expect.  If you look at your page 1, 
ﬁAlternat
ive Monetary 
Policy 
Scenarios,
ﬂ that 6
½ percent rate, as you mentioned, is about mid-2015.  I know we™
re 
            
      
         
                      trying to get away from the date, but you made those points.  You didn™t say very much about the 
inflation rate, because here it says ﬁ
no more than a half percentage point above the Committee™s 

2 percent objective.ﬂ  When you look at those scenarios, with alternative B, we don™t get 

anywhere close to 2
½.  We™re just slightly above the 2.  At one point, we looked at some 
language that said ﬁclose to the Committee™s 2 
percent objective.ﬂ  And I see that 
alternative 
B, 
and even a
lternative A, is 
close to our objective.  What are some of your thoughts
?  J
ust as you 
had
 some thoughts about the 6½ percent being interpreted by some as being more aggressive, 
would that 2½ percent objective be viewed as, again, more aggressive, and is it necessary given 

the scenarios that you™ve laid out here? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLE
Y.  It™s not an objective, though, right? 
GOVERNOR YELLEN
.  It™s not an objective. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It™s not an objective.  
It™s just a tolerance level.  That™s 
quite different. 
MS. PIANALTO.  But it™s 
a matter of
 perceptions also.  We™
re talking 
about 
communications.  And we™ve made a lot of progress and laid out a 2 
percent objective.  What are 

the advantages? 
Using
 ﬁclose to 2 percentﬂ 
would still 
give
 us the 
flexibility that
™s laid out in 
these scenarios
, but we
™re not communicating to the pub
lic that we
™re throwing out ½ 
percentage 
point.  I
t seems 
as though 
we™re throwing out a number, 
whereas
, ﬁclose toﬂ gives us some of 
that flexibility. 
MR. ENGLISH.  I think the ½ percentage point buffer was intended just for clarity.  If 
you said ﬁclose t
o,ﬂ everybody would ask the Chairman at his press conference, ﬁWhat do you 
mean by 
‚close to
™?
ﬂ and t
ry to extract that information.
  People will be looking at the SEP, and 
the SEP shows inflation below 2 or at 2, roughly, but not going above.  So I don™t think they™d 
                                      
    misread the 
½ percentage point buffer as suggesting an intention to set out to push inflation 
above 2.  It would simply be seen as a buffer.  There could be transitory shocks that would 

change the inflation outlook for a time, and the Committee could look through those and say, 

ﬁOkay.  We™re going to go up as high as maybe 2½ 
for a little while, but after that
, we think 

inflation is going to come back.  In the end, we™re getting to our objective, and that™s okay.ﬂ 
But 
whether you want to say e
xplicitly ﬁ
½ percentage pointﬂ or ﬁclose toﬂ is a question of 
communications.  It™
s a little clearer to say the number and not use ﬁclose to.ﬂ  But this is a 
communications issue for the Committee. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Can I ask one more press conference 
question?  Suppose somebody says, ﬁWe get to the end of 2013, it™s December 2013, and we™
re 
exactly where we are today.
  So 
the 
unemployment rate, job growthŠeverything is pretty much 
exactly where we are today. 
Do you envision that we™
ll still be continuing asset purchases at that 
point?ﬂ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  As we go through time, as the balance sheet grows, as we 
observe the effects on the economy, we™
ll be 
continually reevaluating the efficacy of the program 
and the costs that it is imposing.  And if we feel that we
™ve 
reached that point and the program is 
not being effective, then we w
ill have to stop.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes. I
™ll just add on to what you said, Mr. Chairman.  This 
question is an important one, but I think there 
are 
just 
two ways you could end up being in the 
same place.  It could be that there were a lot of bad shocks and the asset purchases helped you 

stop that, or maybe not.  We™
ll have to make that call at that time. 
                                 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
We have overnight
.  If any genius around the table would 
like to come up with better language, I would be more than happy. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I counsel you against 
offering 
that
.  [L
aughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  Are we all set?  [No response] 
Bill, 
what do you want us to do with these handouts? Do you want us to take them home and bring 
them back? 
MR. ENGLISH.  You have lots of Class 
I informat
ion in your Tealbook, so you 
can 
keep 
them. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right. 

MR. ENGLISH.  But please don™t leave them on the subway.  [L
aughter]. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Don™t leave them on the subway.  So 8:30 tomorrow 
morning.  T
he reception is available at 5
:00 p.m. 
[Meeting recessed] 
        
    
           
     
      
           September 13 Session 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We should have a reasonable 
amount of time.  We need to get the statement in by 11:30 and close the meeting by noon.  But 
first
, to get started
, why don™t we begin our policy go-round
? I have President Williams first on 
the list. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B with the forward 
guidance on the funds rate in paragraph 5
.  The case for further action is clear. In the absence of 
significant additional monetary stimulus, progress toward our policy goals would remain stalled.  

Such an outcome is simply inconsistent with the notion of appropriate monetary policy and, in 

my view
, is unacceptable. 
We must aim for a
 path that brings us measurably closer to our goals 
over the forecast horizon, and we must take concrete actions that get us on that path.  
Open
-ended purchases of MBS represent a substantial step in that direction.  With this action, 

unemployment will fall more quickly and inflation will return toward 
2 percent faster than under 
the status quo. 
The flow-
oriented asset purchases in 
alternative B also provide flexibility that™s 
particularly valuable, given all the uncertainties of the economy, the fiscal cliff, and Europe.  

They serve as a useful automatic stabilizer as market expectations about the ultimate size of the 
program adjust in response to changes in economic conditions 
and
 the outlook.  
If the 
labor 
market shows signs of substantial improvement sooner than expected, the program can be 

curtailed.  In contrast, if the recovery falters, the program can provide additional needed support. 
There would be similar benefits from incorporating such an automatic stabilizer into our 
forward guidance of the future path of the funds rate.  The language in p
aragraph 5
 does just 
that.  Incorporating this language into our statement would allow us to finally get the calendar
-                   
                        
 date monkey off our back and provide better guidance on our policy reaction functionŠ 
importantly, at least, on economic conditionsŠ
for funds rate liftoff that 
is both clear and 
consistent with our dual-mandate objectives.  It™s also flexible enough to handle a variety of 

future paths for the economy and inflation.  Indeed, the beauty of this approach is it provides 

guidance for contingencies where our forecasts go wrong, which they inevitably do. 
Finally, I continue to favor lowering the interest on excess reserve
s rate, the IOER rate, to 
15 basis points.  We should be using all of our tools in the same direction.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
.  Thank you very much.  
President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support 
alternative 
B with the 
$40 billion per month mortgage purchase program and prefer option 5
 which moves us away 
from dates and fo
cuses on the economic outcomes we seek to achieve. 
Inflation is quite low, and 
unemployment is quite high, and most of our forecasts for the past nine months have 

overestimated how quickly we would see improvements in 
either element of our mandate. 
Altern
ative B embraces the sense of doing what it takes to move the economy at an 
acceptable pace toward full employment with stable prices. 
Alternative 
B continues to take out 
duration, provides some direct support to housing, which is just beginning to recover, and 

extends guidance on the funds rate liftoff, which, given our lack of progress toward our mandate, 

seems appropriate. 
I strongly support the $40 billion rather than the $30 billion monthly 
mortgage purchase program. 
I would also prefer to include economic targets rather than date targets in our guidance.  
Thus, I would prefer the conditionality language in 5
. The language has two advantages.  
First, 
the conditions for changing our policy stance are clear and observable to the general public.  

Second, 
date
-conditional language can be subsequently undercut by Committee members™ 
                 
                       
   
 comments that suggest a different date may be appropriate, thus altering the effect of policy 
relative to the intent of the consensus reached 
by the Committee. 
Because 5
 conditions the 
policy on observable outcomes, the public can adjust its expectations automatically to changing 

economic circumstances, and there is less likelihood of perhaps inadvertently diminishing our 

policies™ effectivene
ss due to Committee disagreement. 
There seem to be two arguments against taking action at least as strong as B at this 
meeting
.  F
irst, that it would be ineffective.  Estimates in Boston are that following 
option A 
would reduce unemployment by approximatel
y 0.8 percent by the end of 2015.  This is roughly 
in line with the Board staff memos and the consensus policy submissions from three other banks 

that reported a preferred policy that was close to A.  
If accurate, this implies creating more than 
1 million jobs relative to doing nothing at this meeting. I do not view that as de minimis. 
The second argument against more aggressive action is that it will cause inflation.  Again, 
the consensus forecast exercise is instructive.  Among banks that provided numeric submissions, 

those that assumed further easing assume underlying inflation will remain well anchored.  This 

assumption is consistent with the Boston forecasting model.  Two of the Banks that provided 

numbers and assumed earlier tightening than we do have 
virtually identical unemployment rates 
with and without tightening, but a dramatically higher inflation rate under the baseline policy.  

This is markedly different than the staff forecast, the DSG
E models that we have seen, 
and the 
models used by B
anks as
suming the need for easing.  It would be interesting to discuss the 
theoretical basis and empirical evidence for such an inflationary process, which I presume is tied 

to dislodging of inflation expectations.  However, absent a strong empirical basis for su
ch an 

inflation process and with inflation tracking below our target and roughly consistent with the 

staff forecast in models that assume expectations remain well anchored, I view the risks of 
                      
     
    
           
 inflation as being well contained through 2015, even with a more aggressive policy than in 
alternative 
B.  Thus, I support B but would strongly prefer the forward guidance in the language 
of 5
 and the larger mortgage purchase amount.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the Committee™s outlook 
and overall assessment of the economy, I would say that additional accommodation is 

appropriate.  I think the question then becomes what form that accommodation should take. 
Alternati
ve A and 
alternative 
B offer 
the Committee the opportunity to do large-
scale 
asset purchases.  As you said in your Jackson Hole speech, Mr. Chairman, and 
as the staff 

analysis indicates, the benefits of large-
scale asset purchases are still under study and 
still 
uncertain.
  And the question is, how do we deal with that?  How do we deal with the 
issue that 
we don™t know exactly how much the benefits are, even though we might feel confident about 

the sign?  Governor Yellen and the Vice Chair
man
 said the right things yesterday about this, 
which is to act forcefully 
and
 to enhance the benefits of our large-
scale asset purchases as much 
as possible. 
How do we enhance our purchases as much as possible?  Well, the stimulus from our 
purchases hinges critically on th
e forward guidance.  They work together.  If you buy assets and 
hold them for one day and then sell them the next day, they are providing no stimulus.  If you 

buy assets and hold them for 10 years, they™re providing a lot of stimulus.  T
he stimulus 
that 
the asset purchases are providing the economy depends on the timing of exit.  T
o enhance the benefit 
of our large-
scale asset purchase
s as much as possible, 
we need the best possible forward 
guidance, and I would say that B(5
) as opposed to B(5) provides that forward guidance. 
                 
  
              
       
  
      
         
 I talked yesterday about the ambiguities that come 
by trying to communicate our reaction 
function with a date.  Today I™ll focus only on the economic aspects of B(5
. One, 
it provides 
an automatic stabilizer against macro shocks.
  Two, 
it offers protection against inflation.
  And, 
three, I want to talk about the mechanism through which it™s offering stimulus. 
The automatic stabilizer feature of B(5
 is relatively clear.  We talk a lot about downside 
risks in this room.  We have a bad shockŠ
and there 
are 
many possibilities out there
, I won™t go 
through them all.  If unemployment goes up 
and we have B(5) in place, which is date guidance, 
people 
will
 wonder
:  What is the Fed going to do?  How are they going to respond to that shock? 
With B
(5
 in place, 
if 
unemployment goes up
, it means automatically it™s going to take us longer 
to get back to the 6½ percent.  That means that people know th
at interest rates are going to be 

low for longer, andŠ
this is important because the extra accommo
dation that™s going to be 
provided at this meeting is likely to take the form of asset purchasesŠ
the assets that are being 

bought are being held for longer.  So a bad shock automatically translates into more stimulus 

because of the explicit numerical marke
rs being provided in the guidance. 
I™ve painted this as an ex post story of why B(5
 is preferred, but it actually has an ex 
ante component to it.  Essentially we™re offering insurance to the economy against bad shocks, 

and that means that people have less need for saving 
to deal with those bad shocks, and that 
stimulates spending.
  We™ve talked a lot about uncertainty.  H
aving the Fed have a reaction 
function in place that 
it has 
communicated clearly helps reduce uncertainty because people know 
how the Fed is going to react to those disturbances.  That™s the kind of stabilizer property that™s 

in B(5. Let me talk a little bit about inflation protection.  It™s a part that matters a great deal to 
me.  I™ve been and remain concerned about the possibility tha
t the long
-run natural rate of 
            
     
   
                          unemployment may well exceed our current estimates.  Here™s how I™ve been thinking about this 
issue.
  Suppose we only had one mandateŠprice stability.  How would we go about 
operationalizing that goal?  Well, presumably we would choose monetary policy so as to keep 

the medium-term outlook for inflation close to 2 
percent. 
Now, we have to struggle a little about 
what ﬁclose toﬂ means, and I™ll talk a little bit more about this later, but for me I™m willing to say 

that 50 basis points is close enough.  I would say that if you had a price-
stability mandate, 
then 
promoting price stability means keeping the medium
-term outlook for inflation within 50 basis 

points of target, 50 basis points below or 50 basis points above.  
This is 
only the price-
stability 
mandate, and this is exactly the language about inflation in B.  In other words, the way I read 

alternative 
B(5
) is 
it™s saying that the Committee has the option of raising the fed funds rate if it 
ever perceives that it is not satisfying its price
-stability mandate because inflation exceeds 
2½ percent. 
Now, this is not a trigger, to be clear.  And we should be clear when we talk about this 
that it 
is not a trigger.  It™s a threshold, and it™s a threshold for conversation.  At that point, 
the 

forward
-guidance commitment is no longer operational.  In some sense, we™d be back to business 
as usual in this Committee.  The Committee would have to weigh the cost of violating its price
-stability mandate against whatever performance it™s ac
hieving on the employment mandate and 

decide what to do.  And those conversations would inevitably be interesting ones.  
I actually 
think that B slices through what might appear to be a very challenging problem.  It provides 

valuable accommodation while al
lowing the Committee to be able to protect its price
-stability 
mandate. 
Let me turn now to how it does that.  What™s the magic behind B(5
) that allows it to give 
us this protection against inflation as well as providing the accommodation? It comes from t
he 
                 
    
    
       
    
       
   
      
           fact that a lot of our estimated rules of past behavior, like a Taylor rule, have us raising interest 
rates just because unemployment is too low.  The mechanism behind B(5
 is to say we don™t 
want to raise interest rates just because unemployment is to
o low, w
e want to raise interest rates 
because we™re worried about inflation.  If it turns out that unemployment is low but inflation is 

under control in the sense that our medium-term outlook is within 50 basis points of 2 
percent
, there™s no reason to raise interest rates just because unemployment is too low.  The way B(5
) is 
providing stimulus is by saying 
the 
FOMC will tolerate low unemployment. 
There™s a lot of talk about how we should stimulate the economy by having high 
inflation.  That is not what™s going on in B(5
. What™s going on instead is 
that 
the FOMC is 
going to hold off on raising rates until unemployment is lower, and that provides stimulus 

because people know that we won™t be choking 
off 
the party
, as it were
, before it™s really under 
way.  This willingness to tolerate low unemployment is exactly how the optimal
 control 
exercise 
works in FRB/
US. 
If you look at 
the o
ptimal 
control exercise 
in 
FRB
/US, in the fourth quarter 
of 2015, unemployment is 5¼ 
percent
, the outlook for inflation is 2.3 percentŠthat™s not what™s 
providing the stimulusŠ
and you get liftoff at that time. The Committee in that FRB
/US simulation is holding off on raising rates, and that stimulates a faster return to low 

unemployment, 
to the natural rate. 
For those of you who are suspicious about FRB/
US, it™s 
obviously just one of many models, but you get exactly the same mechanism in a N
ew Keynesian model.  
Iván Werning 
has a great paper along these lines.  High future output after 
you leave the zero lower bound stimulates high output at the 
zero 
lower bound.  
There™s no extra 
inflation at all in 
Werning™s paper because actually prices are fixed. 
It™s all about the 
commitment to deliver on lower unemployment and higher output than you would otherwise 

think. 
               
       
        
                      
  If you™re liste
ning to me about the mechanism, you should be thinking
: If you™ve got 
such great inflation protection and low unemployment provides good stimulus, why not have a 
lower unemployment threshold than 6½?  I would agree with that.  I think we should be willing 

to consider that.  President Pianalto raised a concern that maybe 50 basis points was too large a 

spread.  As I said, I™m willing to go that far out, 50 basis points, but maybe one way of shaping a 

compromise along those lines is to have a lower unemployment threshold.  That™s a good thing
; it provides stimulus.  And then have a tighter inflationŠnot even tighter, j
ust say 
ﬁclose to
ﬂ 2 percent, which actually
 is vague enough 
that
 it could allow for 50 basis points.  But I put that 
on the table as possibly one way to shape a compromise.  I think B(5
 is very valuable in this 
context. 
Alternative 
B(5
 provides an economic stabilizer, it provides inflation protection, and 
it™s a credible mechanism. It™s a way to provide a credible mechanism to say we™re go
ing to be 
willing to tolerate low unemployment. 
Yesterday Governors Raskin and Stein talked about low expectations in the economy, 
that really what we have to be thinking about is ways to bolster expectations.  Communication 

along the lines of B(5
 is goi
ng to be very helpful 
in that regard
.  We often pay a lot of attention 
to the words in this room, and the words are important in what we say, but in something like 

B(5
 the numbers 
appropriately are 
going to be the main focus.  How do we explain these 
numbers to the public?  I certainly have thought about this.  I
t™s very easy to communicate the 
idea that we have a target, 
2 percent, but we need a tolerance around that target.  I think every 
businessperson, 
at least
, will understand you have targets for 
performance, but there™s some 
tolerance that you have around that as well.
  Some people are going to say 50 basis points is too 
large, but we should be able to make a case about why we feel 50 basis points is appropriate, 
                             
   
                   
 given the kinds of shocks that could hit the economy on an ongoing basis, but the idea of having 
a tolerance is a very reasonable one. 
Why 6
½ percent? 
As I™ve suggested, we could go lower, but I think 6½ 
percent says 
we™re trying to minimize the possibility of being in breach of our tole
rance range.  We have a 
tolerance range
Šit doesn™t mean we want to exceed it.  We™re very prudent about minimizing 

the possibility of any breach of that. 
I will wrap up at this point.  We™ll hear, I™m sure, from others that the LSAPs have costs, 
and 
I shar
e some of those concerns about those costs.  I think the response to that is to try to 
make the benefits as big as possible, and the language of B(5
 is the way to go along those lines.  
I offered a suggestion for changing B(5
 yesterday. I™ll offer tha
t up for the Committee™s 
consideration.  I do worry, 
as written in the draft statement that the staff circulated yesterday
, that t
he last sentence is a little confusing.  At least I found it so, but if we feel we could go out 

and explain it to people, I™m happy to live with that; however, I hope people are willing to 

consider my suggested alterations.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
We™re going through at a rapid pace. 
We™
re going to be done within the hour here, I think. 
MR. TARULLO.  Don™t bet on it.  [Laughter] 

MR. BULLARD.  I have just a few comments here on policy, so I just wanted to follow 
up on my comments from yesterday a little bit. I do not think that this is the right juncture to 

unveil a large and aggressive easing program.  I think the road ahead this fall and winter could be 

rocky.  We would be better served to take a more opportune time to take such an action.  
We are 

looking at economic data that 
are 
middli
ng.  We™ve got financial stress, which is relatively low, 
             
               
       
     
        
         
   at least for now.  Our counterparts in Europe, not us, are the ones in recession, and, in my view, 
should be the ones that are easing aggressively.  U.S. equity markets suggest continuing faith in 

U.S. expansion.  Long-
term rates are exceptionally low. 
We may also be playing down the costs around the table here of walking farther into the 
woods than we already have on balance sheet policy.  President Plosser has emphasized those 

costs, and I think rightly so, and he has done a good service to the Committee in emphasizing 

those costs.  One thing that hasn™t been mentioned very much 
is that there is a distinct possibility 

that we would be feeding into commodity price increases, which is part of what happened during 

the QE2 episode and was a bit counterproductive.  We could argue about that.  We haven™t 

talked about it a lot, but I am a little bit concerned about that based on the action that we are 

likely to take today. 
I am not one that buys into the critique that monetary policy has been a long ways off 
target in the 
past five years. It is true that the economy is not performing as well as we would 
like.  There is a clear hypothesis for that based on the fact that we are dealing with a collapsed 

housing bubble and the aftermath of a financial crisis.  
But the Committee, by all accounts, has 

done a lot.  Much of it has been quite innovative, and the call of the Committee and of the 

Chairman has been essentially correct during the 
past several years.  So 
I am not one that thinks 
that we are 90 degrees off from where we should be or could be at this juncture. 
For our action today, as encapsulated in option B, we can cite two things that do make 
some sense and that I am sympathetic with as a rationale.  One is that we do have a global 

slowdown.  I am concerned about it.  I think it is very legitimate to worry that that slowdown is 

going to 
affect the U
nited State more than it has so far, and that that is a compelling argument for 
getting ahead of that and tak
ing aggressive action here.  T
hat is one reasonable rationale. 
And I 
                           
     
                        also think we have some room to maneuver on the inflation front, but only some.  I think 
it is nothing like 2010 when all measures of expected inflation were down a lot and trending down 

further. 
We can cite these factors.  I don™t think we have as good a rationale as I would like to 
see for a move of this magnitude. 
Within alternative
 B, I do think it is a good moment to adopt a meeting-
by-meeting 
approach to balance sheet policy that I have been advocating for a long time.  I hope that this will 

put us more into a mode that is similar to the one we are in under normal interest rate policy 

where we
 can sensibly adjust the policy at each meeting, given the change in the outlook and the 

change in the economic situation.  T
his will likely serve the Committee pretty well going 
forward, and I appreciate that 
alternative B has that feature. I am satisfie
d with the formulation 
in B with respect to that dimension. 
On paragraph 5, I definitely support 5 and not 5
. As many of you know, I have argued 
that explicit mention of an unemployment number is a tactical mistake
 that may not serve the 
Committee very well.
  As Governor Yellen remarked yesterday, hysteresis in unemployment 
cannot be ruled out in the U.S.  And I might remind the Committee again that Europe has not 

seen 6
½ percent unemployment for a couple of decades.  Today it is over 11 percent in Europe, 
despite some major countries undergoing structural labor market reforms. 
I am concerned that 
we are telling the public that we can do more about unemployment than we really can.  It is more 

labor market policy than it is monetary policy, and it could possibly throw monetary policy off 

for a generation to tie explicitly to unemployment and to promise that monetary policy can do a 

lot about unemployment. 
The story in Europe is exactly that there are structural problems that 
developed over time.  Unemploym
ent 
has remained very high for a very long time, and the 
structural reforms have not been undertaken by the various governments across Europe.  It is one 
                 
      
                         
    thing to have bad labor market policy.  It is another thing to have bad monetary policy because 
you ha
ve bad
 labor market policy.  I am concerned about this, and I™d advise against going in 
that direction. 
In addition, I think there are hazards of tying to any particular measure of economic 
performance because all of our metrics have clear deficiencies, and many of them are mentioned 

around the table here.  One of the 
deficiencies 
for unemployment is that unemployment can fall 
for the wrong reasons.  W
e were just citing yesterday that the unemployment rate did fall, but it 
didn™t fall in a way that we thoug
ht was indicative of better labor market performance.  So you 
could have a situation where you feel like unemployment has gone down to 
a relatively low 
level, but you are not very satisfied with labor market outcomes, 
and you still feel like the 

Committee 
should be aggressive in that circumstance.  T
his is a problem that we have with all of 
the economic data that we look atŠ
that each piece of dat
a only tells a part of the story about the 
overall economic performance. 
We would be better off to preserve the 
Committee™s judgment 
on economic performance. 
Outside of the statement it™s fine for various members to say, ﬁI™d really like to see 
unemployment come to here,ﬂ or ﬁI™d like to see labor force participation come to here,ﬂ or 

whatever other metrics 
that you
™d like to see certain types of labor market measures hit certain 
thresholds.  But I™m not sure that you want to tie the Committee™s hands in making a judgment 

about overall economic performance.  So I™d have no problem beefing up the language on labor 

markets, if people feel like we maybe have been insufficiently attentive to this and saying that 

we are going to pay more attention.  That™s fine with me.  But I™m counseling against putting an 

explicit number on this or really any other data, to the extent w
e can avoid it, in the statement. 
         
                     
    
       
                   And, finally, on this paragraph 5
Šand then I have a few more comments
ŠI think 
thresholds or triggers like this draw lines in the sand that we may not want to be drawing.  W
e are all in agreement that if we are inside the 
boundsŠ
say, 2
½ percent and 6
½ percent
Šthat we 
are not going to raise rates.  But if you cross the bound, you are implicitly sending a signal that 
you are going to do something.  I™m not sure the Committee has really decided that we would 

actually do someth
ing in that circumstance.
  Putting on my dovish 
hat for a minute, you are 
creating this thing where you are saying you will act if the triggers are violated. I don™t think we 

have really discussed that or really think that that™s what we would do.  If inf
lation is at target, 
and unemployment comes downŠand President Kocherlakota was at least in part touching on 

this
Šthe Committee may not want to tighten at that juncture.  What if you don™t want to tighten 
at that juncture?  Then why are you giving that 
as the trigger? 
That part to me has not 
been 
formulated
 in a way that I can get my head around. 
Let me comment just for a few minutes on Mike Woodford™s Jackson Hole paper, which 
I do think was a seminal survey of monetary policy at the zero lower bound.  If you haven™t 

looked at itŠand I know many of you haveŠthe paper is divided into 
just 
two parts.  There is 

balance sheet polic
y, and there is policy 
to commit to stay at the zero interest rate for longer. 
If you know Mike, you know that he is very pessi
mistic about balance sheet policy, being an anti
-monetarist kind of guy.  He does not think balance sheet policy is very effective, except to the 

extent that it has a signaling effect and that the Committee is better served by doing something 

rather than j
ust promising to do something. 
I agree with the Chairman™s assessment that Professor Woodford is underestimating the 
effects of balance sheet policy.  I do think QE2 did have a significant influence on the United 

States and especially on expected inflation
 and actual inflation.  The effects to the real economy 
      
           
  
     
         
      
      
           
   are harder to trace out, but those are always hard to trace out.  So I think today™s 
alternative 
B action is a sensible way to manage the balance sheet policy going forward and that policy does 
have s
ome prospect of being effective, so I™m not going to argue against the efficacy of the 
policy. 
Professor Woodford thinks that the only way to provide accommodation, in large part, is 
to commit to stay at the zero lower bound for longer.  I agree also with 
the Chairman that the 

length of time that this Committee may be able to commit to stay at zero gets less and less 

credible as you go farther out in the future.  That is something that is not well captured by the 

model.  If you start going out many years, so many things can happen over that period, in reality, 

that it is not clear that you are communicating anything.
  But the main message I took from the 
paper, and an effective message, was this: 
If you are trying to make this commitment to stay 
lower for l
onger, it is a very subtle matter to get it right.  And he reviews a lot of central banks 
and a lot of central bank actions, some of which he characterized as counterproductive in terms 

of trying to get the right type of commitment from the perspective of 
the model on staying lower 
for longer.  
In fact, 
what 
I took away 
from it 
was
, the main danger is that continuing to commit 
to later and later liftoff could be sending this pessimistic signal
Šif we don™t do it correctlyŠ
that 

the reason we are staying lower
 for longer is not that we are trying to make up for the fact that 
we have been stuck at the zero lower bound, but instead it is that the outlook is deteriorating and 

is continuing to deteriorate in a very negative way.  And 
I think we have to be careful a
bout that, 
and that 
maybe
 we have sent that signal, unwittingly perhaps, in some of our actions. 
I am going to give a suggestion, not a policy suggestion, but a suggestion about the 
proper way to think about this from Professor Woodford™s perspective 
in my interpretation.  T
he 
whole point is you are constrained by the zero lower bound for a period of time.  Then, after you 
               
           
       
                    would otherwise raise interest rates, you stay at the zero lower bound for a time to make up for 
the fact that you were constrained duri
ng the earlier period of time.
  My example about how we 
should think about this is as follows.  Suppose the Committee was committed to a Taylor r
ule the 
way John Taylor likes to use itŠhis is a much more aggressive and 
hawkish 
Taylor 
rule, which 
would even 
call for raising rates today.
  And suppose everyone agreed on that.  This is just 
hypothetical, obviously.  And that rule would call for us to raise rates today, but we would say, 

ﬁWe are not raising rates today.  We are staying at zero today.ﬂ  The reason we are staying at 

zero today is exactly the Woodford reason, which is that we were constrained by the zero bound 

for a couple of years.  T
herefore, we have to stay at zero for a while
.  And it is exactly at that 
point that you gain credibility for the po
licy
.  You are trying to make up for the zero bound 
constraint by st
aying at zero
 even though the data are telling you, according to the standard 
Taylor rule or other Taylor
-type rules
, to be more aggressive at this juncture.  Y
ou are staying at 
zero 
because you need to make up for the fact that you were at the zero lower bound for some 
time. 
I do not agree with Professor Woodford that the nominal GDP targeting approach would 
do this.  My main complaint about nominal GDP targeting is that it ignores th
e possibility of 
what is likely an altered real GDP growth path.  And certainly, if you look at the data, as the 

Chairman was saying yesterday, on levels of real GDP or consumption, it looks like we are on a 

different path than we were. 
So to commit us to
 get back to the previous real GDP trend, which 
is partly driven by 
the 
bubble economy in the mid-2000s, I think would be a mistake. 
However
, for 
price
-level targeting
, I have looked at graphs and tried to get an analysis of 
where we are with respect to th
e price level.  If you look at the price-
level path established 
during the period from 1995 to 2005, which was a relatively successful monetary policy era for 
             
      
    
     
   
       
   
            
the Committee in terms of hitting our inflation target, we are actually very close 
to or right on 
that price
-level path.  And in that sense, that has been a great success of the Fed during this 
episode.  Unlike the U.S. in the 1930s, w
hen policymakers allowed the price
-level path to 
deviate from the previously established path, or Japan in the 1990s, in which, again, they allowed 
the price
-level path to deviate from the one that had been established, we did not do that.  We are 

right on the 1995 to 2005 price-
level path. 
In that sense, policy has been successful, and we have 
not committed the mistakes
 of the past.  That is also one reason why I think we have made 
essentially the right call over the 
past several years. 
I am going to stop there.  Those are my 
thoughts on monetary policy.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes, just a point of clarification.  I view the language of 5
 as a 
threshold, not a trigger.  Threshold language would be, 
ﬁlow rates appropriate, at least as long as 

the unemployment rate exceeds 6
½ percent.ﬂ  A tri
gger would be, ﬁA low rate is appropriate 
only as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6
½ percent.ﬂ  So I think it is written as a 
threshold, not a trigger. 
MR. BULLARD.  Can I respond to that?  I agree that that is the language in there, but I 
think mark
ets will interpret it as a 
trigger.  
Or let me say, as a fair
 way, I think there is a danger 
that markets will interpret that as 
a line in the sand or a t
rigger
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it™s pretty easy for the Chairman in the press 
conference
Šif we
 were to go this routeŠto explain what a threshold means.  I don™t think it is 
that complicated. 
MR BULLARD. If it™s not a t
rigger
, why put the number in? Put a lower number in. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s okay, too. 
       
                
           
               
     
   
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President 
Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to support 
alternative 
B. Having said that, I have some reservations about going down the path of a new LSAP, 
particularly the whole-hog approach that™s in a
lternative A. I am reticent on two
 counts. 
First, I remain unconvinced about the likely efficacy of expanding our asset purchases.  
As I said in the economy round, I think the conditions that made the first two LSAP programs 

successful
Ša lack of liquidity in MBS markets in the case of LSAP1 and elevated concerns 
about outright deflation in the case of LSAP2Šare not present in the current environment.  
This 

time around, it seems to me that we face a more conventional problem of inadequate demand, 

and I am not convinced that lowering general 
market rates will stimulate much credit expansion 
and spending.  
Furthermore, it is not clear to me that credit conditions in mortgage markets have 

eased quite enough to the point that more MBS purchases w
ill have a significant impact. 
Second, I have learn
ed to be humble as regards outlook certainty.  I have not completely 
abandoned the hypothesis that the willingness of businesses to hire and businesses and 

consumers to spend will improve on the other side of the election and fiscal cliff negotiations.  

As I commented yesterday, I believe there is some upside risk.  Though the European situation is 
not rapidly converging to a truly comprehensive resolution, I see some hope that the process of 

incremental steps may cumulatively lead to a large leap in overall confidence. 
I don™t have a 
whole lot of conviction that these optimistic outcome
s will be realized, so I accept the case for 
some policy response to current circumstances 
in the Committee™s outlook. That said, I will 
support 
alternative 
B™s modest pace 
of 
$30 billion per month.  That would be my preference 
for 
expansion of our MBS portfolio. 
      
     
                        
   
          
   
   With respect to the choice between paragraph 5 and 5
, I am sympathetic to the idea of 
replacing calendar dates with economic conditionality.  I have said that in e
arlier meetings. But I 
am not in favor of the formulation in 5
, at least today. 
I have views 
similar to 
President 
Bullard
™s.  The unemployment rate is a partial and potentially misleading indicator of labor 
market performance.  The pace of employment gr
owth needed to attain a given unemployment 
rate can be very sensitive to changes in the participation rate. For example, at current 
participation rates, it will take just over 200,000 jobs a month to get to a 7 percent 

unemployment rate by the end of next year.  I would consider 200,000 jobs a month over the 

next 16 months to be consistent with sustained significant improvement in the labor market. 
But the Board staff, and many on the Committee, have noted that labor force participation 
rates appear to be 
well below the levels that can be explained by demographic trends.  My own 
staff estimates that only 40 percent of the drop in participation rates since the beginning of the 

recession is due to labor force aging.  
If the participation rate were to revert t
o the level it was 
just last September, job gains of 200,000 per month would, everything else being equal, yield an 

unemployment rate that would be barely below 8 percent by the end of 2013.  And I would not 

be willing to say that such an outcome would con
stitute a lack of progress in meeting our 

employment mandate. 
Paragraph 5
, as it is written, contains no reference to broader labor market conditions.  I 
believe there was a reference in an earlier version, but it is has been removed.  I think that this i
s a significant omission, particularly with an unemployment threshold as ambitious as 6
½ percent
.  I™m not comfortable with a number that low, combined with a lack of any reference at all to our 

broader employment objectives.  T
here are enough facets of the 6
½ percent decision to consider 
that it feels a little rushed to me at this meeting. 
      
          
    
      
      
    
             
 As regards paragraph 4, I would include the reference to other policy tools. I think the 
meaning of this paragraph should be that if conditions don™t improve, the Commi
ttee will 
continue the MBS purchase program and may undertake additional asset purchases, 
employ 
other policy tools, or both.  If I misunderstand the meaning of that paragraph, then I would ask 
for a little bit more work on this paragraph and further clarification this morning.  
Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart, in 5
, the very last sentence does 
reference labor market conditions.  Did you note that? 
MR. LOCKHART.  Let me look at that.  I stand corrected.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Resource slack is large, labor market 
conditions lack momentum toward improvement, and the inflation profile in our projections is 

slightly below our long
er-run objective for the most 
part. 
I support strong and meaningful policy 
actions today to address these deficiencies. I accept that 
alternative 
B delivers on these 
requirements.  I think that the $40 billion of MBS and 5
 are very helpful in delivering 
that. I 
will simply note th
at the formulation of forward guidance in 5
 is not quite as strong as I have 
preferred in the past, but I do think that it is a good, careful approach that will in fact boost 

monetary policy accommodation, and I can certainly support that, if it is adopted. 
I think that the wording paragraph 2 is extremely important. It states the monetary policy 
concern 
as follows:  ﬁ
The Committee is concerned that
, without further policy accommodation, 
economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained improvement in labor market 

conditions.ﬂ  That is very important.  It follows through on the minutes from our July meeting, as 

well as your grave concerns
 and 
remarks expressed at Jackson Ho
le, so I favor that. 
                         
         
  
       
    I favor this combination of essentially open-
ended asset purchases, which are flexible 
when you put paragraphs 3 and 4 together, plus the enhanced 
state
-contingent 
forward guidance 
in paragraph 4.  
President Bullard went through this rationale a little bit. Let me just summarize 
and say I put a lot of weight on the research literature that Mike Woodford described.  I thought 

he did a terrific job.  In Woodford™s formulation, clear expectations of forward guidance are 

important and effe
ctive for delivering policy accommodation. 
In fact, I held my breath when I 
read the page where he described when I had talked about the 7
/3 thresholds, and I thought that 
Mike was kind and gentle in criticizing but saying that that type of forward guidan
ce did deliver 
more accommodation than what his best choice was.  In that sense, the language in 5
 would 
indeed be helpful.  The evidence for LSAPs that you mentioned yesterday, 
Mr. 
Chairman
, was 
very important.  The two reinforce each other very well. 
In paragraph 3, as I mentioned, I favor the stronger pace of MBS at $40 billion.  I think 
that paragraph 4 makes this essentially open-ended by conditioning further LSAPs on substantial 

improvement in labor conditions, joint with price stability, and 
with
 policy effectiveness, as you 
mentioned yesterday.  So there are important safeguards there.  It can be flexible and can turn 

around if in fact it is not working as best we would hope. 
In terms of labor market improvement, it would be unambiguously an improve
ment if we 
got something on the order of payroll employment increasing 200,000 per month for several 

months.  If the unemployment rate declined either with momentum or continuous improvement, 

and, indeed, we got 
GDP growth above trend, those would be all of the markers that we would 
expect for a strong recovery that would be associated with an 
improving labor market.  We may 
well not be lucky enough to see all three of those at the same time, so we will have to pay 

attention t
o that. 
       
   
                 
   
             
   
        
      
      
As you mentioned, the l
ast sen
tence
 in 
paragraph 
5 gets at this larger characterization of 
labor market improvement beyond just the unemployment rate, but the unemployment rate is a 
very important marker.  I think that 
the 
paragraph 5
 forward guidance is explicit
ly state 
contingent, and it allows us to remove the calendar date.  I
t is very easy for us to be against 
calendar dates.  I think that most of us are uncomfortable with this formulation, that policy can 

remain low until late 2014 or beyond.  But we are uncomfortable because of the ambiguous 

nature. Is it a forecast?  Is it commitment? It is easy to be against that, but you have to be in 

favor of something in order to actually take it out.  The state contingency in 5
 is very useful.  So 
the 6
½ unemployment rate marker, 
with the 2 plus ½ percentage point on inflation, is a useful 
safeguard.
  Presidents Williams, Rosengren, and Kocherlakota spoke well about how this works, 
and that it is critical to describe our attitudes about inflation above our goal of 2.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by saying something positive 
about alternative B.  [Laughter] I very much like the idea in paragraph 5
of replacing our 
problematic calendar
-based guidan
ce with language that is conditional on future economic 
conditions.  I think this is much needed change.  It focuses our communication, our forward 

guidance, on a reaction function, and reduces the danger that Michael Woodford very eloquently 

laid out that our forward guidance is actually just making people gloomier about the economic 

fundamentals. It™s a very real danger, and I think there is a very real possibility that that is 
the 
effect our forward guidance has been having over the course of the last y
ear. 
Okay.  That was my positive remark.  I would like to move on now to some improvement 
opportunities I see.  [Laughter] I think in 5
 that it would be better if we avoided using a specific 
numerical value for the unemployment rate as a threshold or tri
gger, whatever we are going to 
         
     
            
              
           
   
    do. I took a step back.  T
his is a large change in our statement.  This is a fairly dramatic change 
in the set of language we use 
to characterize our forward guidance. It™s an ambitious statement. 
In view of our experience with the forward guidance earlier this year, where we got 
boxed in for something that in hindsight we could have anticipated, I tried to think of ways in 
which this language could unexpectedly box us in or tie our hands in ways that we don™t 

anticipate now.  I think this numerical unemployment rate is one of them. 
President Lockhart 
was very eloquent about this.  This makes us hostage to labor force participation rates.  W
e would be vulnerable to a scenarioŠhe sketched it outŠin which employment picks up, and that 

starts drawing people into the labor force.  This is not an unfamiliar phenomenon historically, in 

which labor force growth that 
tails off 
and turns negative when the unemployment rate goes up, 
then picks up when employment growth starts rising.  Given the behavior of the labor force over 
the 
past several years, I don™t think we should have a lot of confidence in our ability to project 

how the unemployment rate would behave in a scenario in which employment growth picked up 

a lot.  I think this is a really serious risk.  I
t would be better to write the statement in terms of the 
qualitative language used earlier that President Lockhart was referring to. For example, we 

could say, 
ﬁThis exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least 
until the Committee has seen substantial ongoing improvement in labor market conditions.ﬂ 
I think that formulation would be preferable to the language that uses a specific numerical target. 
The s
econd opportunity I see has to do with the inflation language in the same statement.  
We used the phrase that 
ﬁthis 
exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate 
will be 
appropriate at least as long as
ﬂ blah, blah, blah, ﬁprovided that inflation at a one-
to two
-year 
horizon is projected to be no more than 
a half
 percentage point above the Committee™s 2 
percent 
objective and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.
ﬂ  So the logic is 
                
  
              
      
          
     clear, to give ourselves an out if the inflation picture deteriorates substantially.  Personally, I 
think the ﬁclose to 2 percentﬂ language would be better.  That™s more consistent with the kind of 

standard we described in our consensus statement.  Proliferating conditionality language can be 

confusing.  But there is a deeper problem with this language.  My sense is that it has been true 

for the 
past 20 years in which we have achieved price stability
ŠI believe it has been true
Šthat 
inflation over the medium term, the next couple of years, was projected to be close to 2 percent 

or below that.  I haven™t gone and checked, but I am virtually sure that™s true.  T
his was a period 
during which we achieved and maintained price stability.  I
t is essential to maintain that 
credibility because it can be co
stly to re
gain, but we started this period by moving preemptively, 
before the forecast of inflation moved away from that low rate.  And in the future, 
it is going to 

be important for us to be able to move preemptively. I
f this condition is violated, it is
 in some 
sense too late. 
It
™s not like we are going to go back to the 1970s right away if this condition is 
violated, but I think this sets too low a bar.  T
here is a way to word this that tightens this. 
We 
can say, instead of ﬁprovided that inflation at a one-
to two
-year horizon,ﬂ we could say, ﬁunless 
inflation, at a one-
to two
-year horizon, would be projected to be more than ½ percentage point 
above the Committee™s 2 percent objective.ﬂ  S
omething lik
e that makes clear that we would 
move to keep this condition true, that we are not going to wait until this condition is violated in 

order to move. 
The t
hird suggestion I have for improvement in B(5) 
concerns the last sentence. I suggest 
we delete it. I think it is quite confusing.  This represents the fifth different statement of 

conditionality on the second page, in two paragraphs. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Are you saying the last sentence in 5
?            
          
                                        MR. 
LACKER. 
Yes, , the last sentence. 
It is not clear if it only applies after we get to 
6½. Does it apply before or after that?  It is tempting to think, well, the second sentence is pretty 
strongŠthat must trump it.  But it™s not obvious.  And then, it
™s expressed in terms of the pace, 
and the rest of the conditionality is about the level of the unemployment rate.  So does this mean 

that if we get to 6
½ percent 
but unemployment is not continuing to fall rapidly enough, we are 
going to keep tightening po
licy
? I don™t think you mean that.  I
t just seems unnecessary and 
confusing to me. 
The f
inal suggestion I will make
 is, 
again, the lack of grammatical accuracy in the way 
inflation is referred to in 4 is unbecoming to 
the Committee.  We take a lot of care
 to 

communicate precisely. In something so critical, it is a little disturbing. It just seems like a limp 

and tepid sort of boilerplate reference to inflation.  ﬁ
In the context of price stability
ﬂ has always 
struck me as a little bit vague. 
Why not say 
ﬁunless doing so would compromise 
price stabilityﬂ? 
We are committed to price stability. It™s in the mandate. I would prefer to see something 
stronger like that. 
Let me take a step back here. 
If you look at this language, it™
s complicated.  The 
conditionality is expressed in four or five different ways in various parts of these two paragraphs.  

Just in terms of complexity, I think it™s going to be hard to boil it down and simplify.  
ﬁUntil 
labor market conditions get better
ﬂ is probably going to be the 
headline, but the nuances are 
going to be hard to parse out for people just reading it.  Your press conference is going to be 

really critical here. 
The broad thrust of the language of this thing is to very significantly intensify our focus 
on unemployment.  We have been moving in that direction for some time, but I view this as 

implicitly weakening our commitment to price stability
.  Taking this statement as a whole
, that™s 
        
              
                  
     how I view this.  I know the worry about price stability seems like a remote and distant concern 
right now.  I know that it looks like it is under control.  It looks like we have things covered, 

looks like we are far from breaking out, looks like we have gotten away with it 
the 
past couple of 
years.  We™ve seen inflation rise up and not have it trigger any erosion of expectations.  But the 

potential, if we lose it, is for far more costly effects on the economy than the incremental impact 

of the 1 
million jobs that the staff 
has shown might be associated with today™s actions.  I think 
that shift in focus represents a broad overconfidence about our models; a broad overfocus on 

point forecasts
, forecast means, mean forecast paths
, and their analytics as well as a lack of 
humilit
y that would be appropriate here. 
As for the deeper issues of the day, I cannot support a new asset purchase program.  W
e are fluctuating around a sluggish growth path, and I don™t think we should react to the downside 

wiggles that are of this magnitude.  F
urther stimulus at this time is unlikely to improve 
economic 
growth much without causing an unwanted increase in inflation.  I have talked about that before.  

This will complicate risks, 
creating 
greater complications in our exit strategy. 
The larger we 
make the balance sheet, the more vulnerable we are to small miscalculations in policy along the 

exit.  It just provides so much scope for expansion in bank lending and deposits that it makes us 

very vulnerable.  And the larger we make it, the more vulnerab
le 
we are
. I strongly oppose purchasing more mortgage-backed securities.  Central banks should not 
choose which economic sectors to support.  Doing so, if it has any effect at all, restricts credit 

access in other sectors. And I don™t see how we can defen
d that.  Such allocational initiatives go 
far beyond our mandate.  They undermine our claim to deserve independence for the conduct of 

monetary policy, and threats to our independence have been growing recently.  I think these are 
                                 
    
     
             just going to heighten th
ose threats. 
Buying MBS is bad policy and bad politics.  The only 
circumstance in which I
™d support it is if there weren™t enough T
reasuries out there to buy.
 One final comment.  T
here was some discussion at the last meeting of the slogan ﬁWe™ll 
do what it takes.ﬂ I think we haven™t given enough thought to the possibility that what it takes is 
patience.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I want to comment on one of your observations, 
President 
Lacker, about the last sentence of 5
. I read it slightly differently than you do, and I 
don™t know how 
other people read it. I read the sentence preceding it 
as saying 
that we currently 
anticipate that th
ese are 
the right metrics, but then the last sent
ence says that that current 
anticipation 
could be modified by what we see over time.
  You are basically saying that you are 
not completely locked into the first thing, regardless of what economic information you see in 

the future.  So I think the sentences 
actually do work together in a reasonable way. 
MR. LACKER
.  So the policy we™re adopting here is that an exceptionally low rate for 
the funds rate is going to be appropriate as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6½ percent, 

inflation is well contained,
 or we decide that some other indicator of labor market conditions 
is more appropriate. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We currently anticipate that this is the right range, but 
our view is going to be modified by future information about a broad range of indicators.  
That is 

how I read it.  T
hat seems to be more intelligent than saying we are locked into this, regardless of 
what happens, regardless of what we see, and we are not allowed to learn about anything as the 

economy evolves.  I
t creates a little nuance, 
which is reasonable in terms of how one would 
expect the Committee to operate. 
                 
    
    
     
    
       
         
        MR. LACKER.  Well, then, why not soften the 6½ and use 
more general 
labor market 
conditions. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Because 
you are trying to give guidance about what the 
Commit
tee
 thinks 
at the time, what we think today that might be modified 
or might not be 
modified by future information.  But clearly it would be unintelligent not to modify your view if 
the information strongly contradicted your prior view.  That™s how I read i
t. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Despite massive monetary policy 
accommodation over the past four years, a stronger recovery has not yet materialized, and last 

week™s labor market report was a frustrating remi
nder of this long slog.  Like others, my forecast 
accounts for any number of risks related to Europe, the U.S. fiscal cliff, and 
the 
regulatory 
environment, and does recognize that policy accommodation may need to remain in place for 

some time in order to 
support the recovery.  I understand the case for taking action in order to 
spur the recovery and bring down unemployment faster.  To that end, the Committee agreed to 

undertake additional balance sheet actions only a few months ago.  Today, we contemplate doing 

more.
  Certainly, the data flow since the last meeting was a bit softer than I had expected, but not 
sufficiently so to warrant a further expansion of our balance sheet.  In that regard, I note that the 

Tealbook had pulled forward the timing of the f
irst rate increase since our last meeting. 
As I weigh the cost of action versus 
the 
status quo, I have appreciated the thoughtful 
analysis of Board staff and a number of my colleagues around this table about the effects of 

another asset purchase.  Unfortun
ately, I find 
that the risk
s associated with further action carry 
less precise measurement, but, to the extent they are possible, pose significant cost if realized.  

Impairing market functioning in certain financial markets, the potential for the Federal R
eserve 
                 
             
               
      to experience financial losses in the future, and risk
s to financial stability 
due to the extended 
low rate environment all strike me as significant when weighed against potential benefits.  A 
larger balance sheet also has the potential to further c
omplicate an exit strategy. 
Another LSAP also may have near-term adverse consequences.  Given the recent rise in 
gasoline prices, additional asset purchases could generate a further rise in oil and gasoline prices, 

which would weigh on middle- and lower-
income households and, thus, partially offset 
estimated benefits. 
I also remain concerned that a balance sheet expansion could at some point raise inflation 
expectations.  Longer-
term measures of inflation expectations
, or breakeven inflation, 
appeared 
to re
spond strongly to past LSAP announcements.  Given that current longer-
term breakeven 
inflation measures are consistent with our stated goal, I am concerned that another LSAP 

program could push longer-term expectations above a level consistent with our obje
ctives. 
If this were to occur, we would face a difficult tradeoff between allowing longer
-term expectations 
to drift higher or reversing course by reducing the size of the balance sheet.  Either option strikes 

me as damaging to both the real economy and o
ur credibility. 
In terms of the forward guidance, I agree with those who note the time-contingent 
guidance has been problematic.  And so conceptually I agree that the state
-contingent guidance is 

preferable as long as we can articulate this guidance in a m
anner that is fully consistent with our 
January 2012 strategy statement, including our assessment of risk to the financial system.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 
         
    
  
                 
   
    
        
          MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I mentioned yesterday when I made very 
short comments about the economy, 
I would interlocutate today at greater length 
[laughter], 
so I 
ask you to bear with me. 
We seem to be mesmerized by the siren call of LSAPs. I can™t sing like Orpheus, and I 
know I will have no success in tying you to the mast or stuffing wax in our crew™s ears.  So what 
I am going to do is simply give my very best advice as a loyal officer on your ship.  I believe we 

are getting further off course. I believe we were misled by our navigati
on equipment.  
We have 
very sophisticated models, and we have a superb crew of analysts but, as you yourself said 

yesterday
Šand I quoteŠﬁnobody really knows what is holding back the economy, and nobody 
really knows what really works.ﬂ 
One thing I learned as a midshipman at the Naval Academy was that great battles at sea 
or on land are fought with modern tools, but they are decided ultimately by judgment.  AndŠ 

always
Šone listens to and respects the elements. I think everybody agrees at t
he table that 
inflation is not an immediate or presently foreseeable threat.
  Our desired port, given our 
mandate, is increased employment. I happen to believe personally we are way off course. I 

believe we are ignoring, at our peril, the elements. I ha
ve reported from my watch station again 

and again that the very people we wish to stoke consumption and follow demand by creating jobs 

and expanding business fixed investment are not influenced by our policy initiativesŠ
that is, by 

our LSAPs. 
Small and med
ium-sized businesses are job creators, and yet the soundings, as mentioned 
yesterday by President George, 
of the 
National 
Federation of Independent Business
™ s
urveys and 
others, tell us that over 90 percent of those businesses are either not interested in borrowing or, 

as I mentioned yesterday, 
have no problem accessing cheap financing.
  Monetary policy is not on 
           
            
  
     
    
   
   
        
      
        
 their radar as a concern, except that it raises fears among some 
of future inflationary 
consequences.  Their principal concern, as President Georg
e mentioned yesterday, is with fiscal 
and regulatory uncertainty. 
With regard to fixed investment and job creating 
cap
-ex, as I said yesterday, the math is 
pretty straightforward.  Big businesses dominate that theater, and again and again I have reported 
to this Committee that with some exception
ŠDisney, for example, being one led by a very 
clever contrarian CEO
Š90 percent or so of those I survey will simply not be motivated by 
further cuts in the cost of capital to invest in job-
creating cap
-ex beyond their maintenance needs.  
And 
this 
is 
due to 
the uncertainty of taxes and final deman
d and federal spending prospects. 
This time, as I mentioned yesterday, I asked my CEO contacts if 
their 
cost of borrowing 
were to decrease by some 25 basis points or more, how 
they would 
react. 
Would this induce 
them
 to spend more on expanding payroll or job-
creating cap
-ex?  And the answer 
from
 9 out of 
10 was, you could cut the cost of borrowing by 1 full percentage point 
and 
we™ll use it to buy 
back stock.  That™s what we™r
e being directed 
to do by our board.  Governor Stein mentioned the 
Duke™s Fuqua School survey yesterday, which is even more comprehensive. 
But one of my CEO contacts, by the way, reminded me of the work I used to do for him 
and the company he then managed 
going back to 1975, and our recommendations for strategic or 
green
 field investments.  We focused on ROI:  As long as you get paid back and as long as you 
earn a profit
, you can justify it to your shareholders.  And presentlyŠ
and perhaps because of 
what we 
have already initiated
Šthe cost of capital, as President Dudley mentioned earlier, 
unlike the conditions of 1975, 
is just not part of the calculation.  And if they are going to be 
buying 
back stock, as they are being directed 
to by their boards, there is, 
to be sure, a wealth 
effect.  But 
based on 
the people I talked to, it just does very little to result in
 job creation sooner 
        
        
  
   
   
                       
      rather than later. I™ll give you a specific example. 
This is inside information and off the record.  
A company that ordinarily h
as cap
-ex expenditures between $15 
billion 
and $20 billion a year 
and has the option presently to either lay cable and facilities that would expand their 4G network 
to 90 percent of the country or buy more stock has been directed by their b
oard of 
director
s to 
buy more stock because of the economics that these low interest rates make possible.  Even 

though it strengthens 
their balance sheet, it defers their 
job-
creation capacity. 
Again, I am suggesting, as one of your loyal crew, respectfully, that the effi
cacy of the 
course you are leading us upon is questionable.  M
y best guess is that we will end up this 
program, if we proceed with B, with excess reserves that exceed $2 trillion and money lying 

fallow, unused, and underutilized toward achieving our goal o
f increased employment. 
When we last talked, it was suggested that perhaps my interlocutors were unsophisticated 
and didn™t see the whole picture.  I note now that some sophisticates have come to question the 

efficacy of this LSAP cruise, among them Mr. Woodford, who has been talked about excessively 

at this meeting [
laughter], and my friend and respected economist Bill White, who has not been 
mentioned whatsoever.  Using monetary policy to overcome bad fiscal and regulatory policy is, 

to my mind, not only faulty but a 
pyrrhic
 strategy. It won™t work, and it may be used against us 
in a backlash and lead us onto the rocks. 
Now, all of that said, Mr. Chairman, you™re the captain of the ship.  It appears that you 
and many of our colleagues wish to now plot a course with coordinates outlined in B.  We have 

decided to proceed, and we have instructed our boiler room, 
as we say in the 
navy
, to pour out 
another $750 billion or so in steam, and the boiler room has replied, ﬁ
Aye
, aye.ﬂ
  This is doable, 
and 
the staff h
as indicated that 
ﬁt
he challenges posed by exit remain manageable
,ﬂ though I do 
sense some timidity in their confidence.  There are warnings in the 
memos on LSAPs that exit 
                
    
  
            
      
  
                 following an even larger pro
gram
 can probably not be accomplished without violating what the 
Committee has heretofore said is our exit strategy principle. 
The engine room has replied, ﬁYes, 
we can do it.ﬂ  But there are murmurs among the crew that their conclusions are subject to
Šand 
I am taking words out of the LSAP 
memos
Šﬁsubstantial uncertainty,ﬂ and they c
ouch their 
responses with qualifying phrases like ﬁcurrently judgesﬂ and ﬁwould likelyﬂ and ﬁseems 
plausible.ﬂ  And as I said, listening to Seth very carefully yesterday, his qualifications or his 

disclaimers sounded very much like an Allegra commercial.  But, again, you™re captain of the 

ship; you™ve decided to proceed on a course.  The course is outlined in B.  Bill tells us that it may 

aggregate to another $750 billion or so depending on how much time we let this run.  
I am a 
member of your loyal officer corps.  And even though I doubt the efficacy of what we wish to 

do, and in fact feel that this is most definitely not the right course, and feel that this course may, 

as President 
Lacker just said, compromise the Fed™s security with regard to its independence, m
y job is to give you the best advice I am capable of rendering.  Your decision is to steer us along a 

course outlined in B.  I would say that the least worse of the options in Tealbook 
B is alternative 

B, 
reg
ular B, the first paragraph 5. 
I sent around a memo earlier in preparation for this meeting, and I argued that one could 
make the case that this could help offset the drag from higher GSE fees, 
lower 

mortgage
Treasury spre
ads, even though they are quite low, and help one of the three positive 
durable goods sectors that is assisting the recovery, the others 
being aircraft and motor vehicles
.  It is still operating below long
-run potential, so there is very little danger, in my view, of 
inducing cyclical mal
-investment. 
In addition, the general effects of inducing more refinancing 
may aid housing and households in ways that we can™t quite quantify. 
          
       
          
    
         
  
            
   
 may be laudable in the minds of some at this table.  We™ve heard good 
arguments for it.  But I agree with President Lockhart, andŠ
I believe
ŠPresident Lacker, that it 
is going too far too fast, that we are rushing it, and I would recommend against it.  I am referring 
specifically to the 6
½ percent unemployment rate 
and 2½ percent inflation cap over the one- to 
two
-year horizon
.  You have the phrase that ﬁlong
er-term inflation expectations 
continue to 
remain well anchored
ﬂ attached to that, but my guess is just ooching the now commonly 
accepted medium
-term or longer
-term t
arget of 2 percent 
by o
ne-half percent
age point would 
raise eyebrows and doubts amongst our skeptics, and some question marks, no matter how we 

state it
, in the marketplace. 
If you wish to proceed on this course, Mr. Chairman, my advice is to go with 
the 
Tealbook™s alternative B, not B
. Specifically, I would go with $30 billion, the lesser number.  
As Bill English said yesterday, it allows some ramping up in case the Committee decides, against 

my adviceŠand others™ 
like me
Što do more.  A $30 billion program, if I understood the Desk 
yesterday, 
on a flow rate basis means we are already taking down 60 percent of supply. 
I would edit paragraph 4 to take out reference to ﬁadditional asset purchases.ﬂ I would 
leave it more vague by simply referring to employi
ng 
ﬁits other policy tools as appropriate.ﬂ 

And after the phrase ﬁin the context of price stability,ﬂ I would add ﬁand well anchored,ﬂ another 

great naval term, ﬁand well anchored inflation expectations.ﬂ We have it in B
. I don™t see why 
we don™t have 
it in B
.  This is enough, in my mind, to bind the hands for some time to come for 
all of those who are with you in the wheelhouse of the ship we™re steering.  It is going to make it 

very hard to raise short-
term rates, as I mentioned yesterday, even if we 
end up with a stronger 
recovery 
than we currently foresee or imagine. 
       
     
       
     
   
         
                    
   
      I would recommend, as I suggested in my memo of last week 
and 
discussed yesterday, 
that in your press conference you emphasize that this is to help along the recovery in housing.  I 
would advise that you say that the majority of the Committee concurs, but emphasize that the 

Committee, as you said yesterday you would, will be constantly scrutinizing the efficacy and 

costs of the program.  In other words, Mr. Chairman, I would take ownership of this issue.  It is 

one of the distinct areas of recovery. It is an area where I believe we have had impact. I did 

support the MBS program when it was originally announced.  I think it is vital for regular 

people, not just for economists. 
The headlin
e you should be seeking in 
USA Today
 should be ﬁBernanke Acts to Support 
Continued Housing Recovery.ﬂ  You mentioned yesterday you plan to speak in different terms 

than usual, making it more simple and directed to what you refer
red to as the ﬁaverage perso
n.ﬂ 
I think that™s good.  You™re a great teacher.  I saw you do that most forcefully and effectively 

when you visited Fort Bliss.  And as I mentioned in our phone conversations last week, your 

objective should not be to communicate to a few dozen sophisti
cated economists 
about 
this 
model or that model.  It should be to convinceŠ
what was referred to in the last meeting
Šthe 
unsophisticated interlocutors who run America™s businesses, and the consumers who buy the 

goods and services produced by those businesses, and the press, particularly 
what
 the consumers 
read as opposed to 
the reference literature. 
So, in summary, Mr. Chairman, I disagree with this course.  I think it is a mistake.  I
t steers us closer to the rocks.  But I have offered you my best advice un
der the circumstances. 
I wish you luck.  I will do my very, very best in my public appearances in the upcoming week to 

support what we are going to announce, even if I have to take Allegra to do it.  [Laughter] 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
         
            
   
        
     
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
  Thank you.  President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There are two policy actions under 
consideration today.  One is additional asset purchases, the other is an effort to extend and 
strengthen our forward guidance.  I would like to make 
a few comments about each of these. 
As I explained in the earlier go
-round, I am not in favor of undertaking a new round of 
asset purchases today.  In my view, the forecast has not changed enough to warrant further 

action.  Indeed, many of the Tealbook™s simple rules on page 2, Tealbook B, including the 

outcome-
based rule, suggest that policy is approximately well calibrated. 
Just like President 
Bullard, I do not see the urg
ency 
for large, aggressive actions at this time.  I™ll remind the 
Committee, we didn™t move earlier this year 
as the economy brightened and the outlook looked 
better
.  We did not take action.  We were patient.  
It t
urned out to be the right decision.  The 
econ
omy then weakened.  But we seem to be anxious to do further accommodation every time 
we see weakness and not do the reverse as the economy strengthens.  The message I take from 

that is that 
we 
need to be patient, that we need to not react to short-
run fluc
tuations. 
The recovery is frustratingly slow.  
The u
nemployment rate is uncomfortably and 
tragically high.  But, again, we have been told and we understand there is reason to expect this, 

given the size and nature of the economic shocks that have hit the economy.  The slow recovery, 

in my mind, is not evidence that our monetary policy stance is inappropriate.  The benefits of 

further asset purchase
s in curing what ails the economy are imprecise and tenuous at best.  
Indeed, the Board staff memo lays out numerous caveats and assumptions necessary in assessing 

the possible benefits of further asset purchases. 
While financial participants may be chomping at the bit for a new program, many 
economists throughout this country have raised doubts about the efficacy of such a policy 
       
                     
         
              strategy.  Despite sizable purchases and zero interest rates for four years, unemployment remains 
elevated.  But rather than question the efficacy of the policies, which would seem natural, our 

strategy seems to be to double down.  Now, th
e further sizable expansion of the balance sheet 

carries costs and will greatly exacerbate the challenges we face when it comes time to exit, as I 

talked about yesterday. 
In my view, embarking on another asset purchase program at this time is 
a highly risky strategy.  The consequences may prove very disruptive to the U.S. economy and 

harmful to the reputation and credibility of this institution for years to come.  We should not 

ignore these risks, even for the 
best
-guess outcomeŠa 50 basis point drop in the unemployment 
rate over two years. 
The proposal in 
alternative 
B is for a flow
-based program.  But to me, this seems to run 
counter to the theory of how such purchases are purported to work in the first place and the logic 

we have used in the past. If we 
believe that the effects of purchases are through a 
portfolio 
balance channel, then the public needs to understand the stock of securities the Fed intends to 

buy.
  The Board staff memo on the flow-
based balance sheet policy says
 that the conclusion of 
the 
simulation exercises
, and I quote, ﬁreflects the strong assumptions that investors, price-
setters, 
and 
wage
-setters all understand the Committee™s goals and its
 stopping rule for the flow 
LSAP
.ﬂ  How do we communicate that when we ourselves don™t even know what that stopping 
rule will be? It is remarkable to me that the Committee has not been able to communicate to the 

public our reaction function for setting the funds rate even in normal times.  And now it seems 

we expect the public to believe and unders
tand what our reaction function will be for LSAPs and 
balance sheet rules
.  LSAPs are not a nimble instrument.  If this program doesn™t produce the 
desired results or the predicted outcomes for 
the 
unemployment rate, what will we do? 
I would 
predict that with a 
flow
-based program, if we don™t get the results, we won™t stop.  We will 
            
                
   
        
     
   
   continue.  How will we know when to stop? W
e seem to have convinced ourselves that such a 
policy is effective and important.  Maybe so.  If it proves not to be, and we don™t g
et the desired 
results, will we just keep on buying assets, reevaluating, and say, ﬁOh, yes, it™s going to work.  
We just have to do some more.ﬂ I am not terribly confident of our ability to manage that 

effectiveness and give us a stopping rule. 
If we get
 the reaction function wrong, and we find ourselves with ever-
more larger 
balance sheets, the Fed may face balance sheet losses, no returns, no flows to the Treasury, or 

unacceptably large losses of some kind or another.  This could undermine our ability to 

implement an appropriate monetary policy in the future, to the detriment of both households and 

businesses.  Now, 
if the purpose of the balance sheet expansion 
is as a commitment 
device to 
keep rates low for longer precisely because it makes it harder to exit, then we need to be 

explaining this.  
We don™t tell this to the public.  We need to be more communicative about what 
we expect our policy to achieve and why 
we are 
doing it, and we™re not doing 
that
.  How do we 
expect the markets to understand this 
when we are reluctant to say so directly
 ourselves? 
This leads me to the issue of forward guidance, the other policy tool under consideration, 
either in conjunction or separately.  The intent of our forward guidance is for the Committee to 

commit to holdin
g interest rates lower longer than it normally would after the economy begins to 
recover.  The idea, as President Kocherlakota said, is 
that 
the commitment to do this is supposed 
to signal to households that the future is going to be brighter.  The future is going to be more 

economic 
growth, higher spending than they otherwise might anticipate.  And this helps 
stimulate less saving and more spending today.  The strategy works well in many of our models.  

Agents are completely forward
-looking.  Many of those 
have expectations that are right. 
But 
implementation, in my view, is very tricky. One needs to get the expectations right. 
                   
  
                   
                      We wouldn™t want the public to believe that we will let inflation run away from us, of 
course.  Michael Woodford has argued that t
here are 
way
s to implement this strategy
.  He has 
given us two examplesŠ
an earlier 
one is 
a price
-level
-targeting strateg
y and, of course, recently 
at Jackson Hole, 
nominal GDP targeting. I see the problem with this strategy in implementation, 
not the conceptual idea.  First, it presumes that households and businesses will correctly inter
pret 
our guidance and what it means, and that it means future growth will be higher.  
But it seems just 

as reasonable to assume, and perhaps so far that has been the react
ion, 
that 
they will read our 
actions as a signal that we believe the economic outlook is going to be a lot worse for longer.  

The public does not have that positive outlook, and if we don™t convey that to them in very 

strong language, the strategy won™t work.  It will not bring spending forward. 
This strategy requires us to manipulate the public™s expectations in a very particular way. 
That
™s the communication challenge with this strategy.  To follow th
e strategy requires placing a 
lot of weight on our abi
lity to communicate. You will recall that this Committee decided not to 
adopt price-level targeting not too long ago and did not adopt nominal GDP targeting when we 

had the opportunity to do so.  And we rejected those for a variety of reasons, one was 

com
munication and, of course, 
with nominal GDP targeting
, one of the major issues was 
defining what the right level of real GDP needed to be.  We found those both either risky or 

diff
icult communication strategies. 
What do we think that we have done now that will overcome those problems? Why do 
we think that the thresholds w
ill overcome those difficulties? We seem to be willing to 
implement the strategy in a half
-hearted way.  I™d note that I have been a strong advocate, and 
continue to be a strong advocate, 
for systematic reaction functions. It is very important to this 

Committee. 
But 5
 is not a reaction function.  

 says nothing about what happens, for 
              
          
      
       
   
        
                example, after we pass one of the thresholds.  And this is very important, 
because the 
public 
doesn™t understand what our reaction function is in normal timesŠor we don™t know what they 
perceive it to be necessarily
Šand we are not telling them what it is going to be afterwards
.  L
et™s 
suppose, for example, that the public believes that after 
we reach the 6
½ percent threshold, and 
we say nothing about what we will do after that, they presume we may go back to the Taylor 

rule.
  Well, if that™s what they expect to happen, it would lead perhaps to a view of 
very fast 
tightening of policy after we get to the 6
½ percent unemployment rate.  That would undo some 
of the positive effects that we are trying to gain by this forward guidance.  If that turned out to be 

the case, then this strategy won™t work.  How do we make that commitment?  The public has to 

believe, beyond just the thresholds, how we are going to conduct policy, and as 
of 
now we 
haven™t explained 
that. 
I don™t think we agree amongst ourselves enough about what our policy 
reaction function is, and as much as I desire a more contingent eco
nomic-
based reaction 
function, I don™t think the thresholds help us very much there.  
The language in 
alternative B
(5

 again, says nothing about 
how we will behave afterwards. 
In the end, I agree with Woodford that LSAPs are perhaps ineffective.  But if 
we are 
going to adopt forward guidance and use that as our powerful tool, we need a much more 

deliberate and extended communication strategy to lay the groundwork to explain how our 

reaction function and how our policy strategy 
are 
going to work, and a com
munication strategy 
that convinces the public that we are serious about it, so that they understand how it works, 
if we 

are to get the outcomes that we want. 
Obviously, I am not in favor of B.  But if I had to choose, at this point I would choose 
5 over 5, not because I don™t like the direction that 5
 is headed, I™m just not sure it is ready for 
prime time yet. 
I™ve never 
been in favor of the calendar date.  It has created many problems for 
      
   
          
           
           
           
   us over the last year, and I am anxious to get rid of it.  But we need to get rid of it not by a one-
time change in a statement. 
It is going to take more preparation and more analysis. 
Thank you, 
Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Unlike some of my colleagues, my policy 
statements have usually been on the shorter side because I have generally been supportive of the 

version of the policy alternative that the Committee has eventually adopted.  I™m finding today™s 

policy decision much more of a strug
gle.  So I™m going to take a little more time than usual to 

explain my policy position and to share my views on the benefits and risks of additional policy 

action
s. 
With the unemployment rate at 8.1 percent and the August employment report as 
disappointing as it was, I would like to see the expansion proceed at a faster pace.  I know that 

we all would.  So the question on the table is:  Can additional monetary policy accommodation 

spur economic growth and improve labor market conditions?  And if so, which actions would be 

most beneficial and pose the least risk? 
I agree with the staff assessment that large
-scale asset purchases have been effective. 
Our first LSAP program was effective at the early stages of the financial crisis when financial 

markets were i
n severe distress.
  Our second LSAP program was effective when it was launched 
in 2010, a time when financial stress was still significant, the risk of falling back into a recession 

was high, and the risk of an outright deflation was very real.  
Our LSAP p
rograms provided 
strong support to financial markets and helped to appropriately realign inflation expectations.  In 

today™s circumstances, I see the benefits of another LSAP program as being far more limited. 
                    
       
                       The circumstances that prevailed when we init
iated our previous LSAPs are not evident today.  
Financial markets are not in disarray, and deflation is not a serious risk. 
I also worry that another large
-scale asset purchase program carries the risk of 
complicating our ability to withdraw policy 
accommodation smoothly and in a timely manner, as 
well as the risk of exposing us to reputation risk in the event that we incur large financial losses. 
I commend the staff for doing yeoman™s work to develop exit tools, to identify some of 
the potential 
complications of operating with a very large balance sheet, and to simulate our 
balance sheet under various assumptions.  I know that we™ve taken precautions, but it is 

impossible to be fully prepared for the environment that we might actually face three y
ears from 
now.  So after putting together my thoughts about the benefits and risks associated with the 

available tools and considering my economic outlook, I was not in favor of launching another 

large round of asset purchases along the lines of 
alternativ
e B as it was originally proposed in the 
Tealbook.  That option called for the immediate launch of an asset purchase program until labor 

market conditions substantially improved, and the purchase program was committed to run at 

least through mid
-2013.  That option also called for an extension of the forward guidance on the 
fed funds rate through mid-2015. 
I recognize that the strategy behind this policy option is predicated on the theory that 
additional monetary policy accommodation will only reduce the une
mployment rate substantially 
if this Committee actually commits to act aggressively and persistently until that goal is 

achieved.  I understand why the commitment strategy works so well in theory, but we have not 

had much practical experience to learn from
.  I understand the value of commitment, but 
commitment can take many forms. I think there™s value in waiting a little while longer before 

deciding to initiate another large
-scale asset purchase program. 
The Committee™s better choice 
                  
           
      
   
  
    
           at this juncture is 
to find a way to commit through forward guidance about the federal funds rate 
liftoff and not to launch a significant asset purchase program.  
I™m of 
the 
view that easing 
monetary policy through forward guidance has also been a powerful tool for reducing long-
term 
interest rates. 
As I noted, I think that our first two LSAP programs were successful in countering 
financial market stress and deflationary pressure
s. We may yet encounter a crisis
Šeither from 
the fiscal cliff or from Europe
Šthat once again 
cause
s serious financial market distress or 
deflationary pressures.  We would be better served by using asset purchases in response to these 
kinds of threats or the threat of a recession than to try to eke out a little more 
economic 
growth in 
the current circumstance. 
In coming months we may know more about the prospects for fiscal 
policy and for Europe and about the outlook.  It™s valuable to have the option to respond directly 

to these situations
, and launching a full-blown LSAP program today reduces our flex
ibility. 
For all of th
ese reasons I have preferred to wait for the completion of our maturity 
extension program at the end of the year before deciding whether to purchase more long-
term 
assets.  However, it was clear at our last meeting that many other Com
mittee members judge that 
additional policy accommodation might likely be warranted even sooner, and last week™s 

disappointing employment report seems to have been the decisive piece of evidence for some 

members who have been waiting for more proof of the economy™s lethargic condition. 
While I still have reservations about some of the specifics of the proposal, the version of 
alternative 
B that is now under discussion offers the possibility of an acceptable way forward.  
For one thing, even though 
alternati
ve B does call for expanding our holdings of long-
term 
securities in the next several months, it does so through the acquisition of MBS
.  Because some 
research does suggest the MBS purchases can be more impactful than Treasury purchases, I like 
        
     
                     
    
     
           
this aspect 
of 
alternative B.
  But I would also prefer the smaller amount of MBS purchasesŠ
that 
is, the $30 billion per month. 
One option in 
alternative B also allows for the possibility that the Committee might 
deploy tools other than, 
or at least in addition to
, large
-scale asset purchases if in coming months 
we conclude that additional easing steps are warranted. I was going to suggest some changes to 
the second sentence in paragraph 4.  I preferred that we delete the mention of ﬁ
additional asset 
purchases
ﬂ and in
stead state that 
ﬁthe Committee will continue its purchase
s of agency 
mortgage-
backed securities
ﬂ and is prepared to ﬁemploy its other tools as appropriate until such 
improvement is achieved in a 
context of price stability.
ﬂ  But I do like President Lockha
rt™s 
suggestion that we insert ﬁmayﬂ in front of ﬁundertake additional 
asset purchases and employ 
its other policy tools.ﬂ I think this flexibility of phasing in more accommodation in various ways as 

needed could prove to be helpful. 
In addition to beginning MBS purchases, 
alternative
 B eases policy through forward 
guidance. I like, as many others have already indicated, the state
-contingent concept in 

paragraph 5
, but I regard the 6½ unemployment rate and the 2½ inflation rate to be much too 
aggressive and risky.  If 
the natural
 rate of unemployment turns out to be 6 
percent or larger, I 
think that not lifting the fed funds rate until the unemployment rate falls to 6
½ percent risks some 
build-up of unacceptable inflationary pressures.  I know there 
are safeguards built into the 
forward guidance to prevent 
an unacceptable increase in inflation expectations, but we should be 
more humble about our ability to forecast these conditions with much precision.  
Presidents 

Lockhart and Lacker both laid out so
me risk
s to
 using a number for the unemployment rate, and I 
agree with their thoughts.  But if we decide that we have to include a number, a better approach 

is to set the unemployment rate to 
ﬁat least as low as 
7 percent
ﬂ and to keep inflation at ﬁ
close t
o                                   
  
     
    
    2 percent.
ﬂ  T
hese settings give us more flexibility.  Without that extra flexibility, I do not 
support p
aragraph 5
 and instead I support the language in paragraph 5. 
In conclusion, even though my preference is to wait, I can support a
lternative B with 
paragraph 5 today.  Even though some MBS purchases would begin right away, expanding the 
scope of policy accommodation even further is going to require the Committee to vote once 

again in coming months on the size and the structure of the policy change.  This buys us some 

time to determine exactly what the Committee means when we say 
that we want 
ﬁthe outlook for 
labor market conditions to significantly improve.ﬂ It also buys us some time if the outlook does 

not significantly improve to decide whether additional asset purchases would then be the best 

course of action.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B.  My preference is for 
purchases of 
$40 billion MBS a month, and with respect to forward guidance, my preference is 
for 5
. The data we have received since our August meeting provides yet further confirmation 
that 
economic 
growth is proceeding near or slightly below the economy™s potential, and 
downside risks continue to be substantial.  For quite some time, the Committee has been in 

watch
-and
-wait mode.  We™ve patiently monitored the economy to see whether the MEP 
and
 our forward guidance would be sufficient to produce a stronger recovery.  The verdict now seems 

clear.  Absent further policy action, I see little chance that unemployment will decline in the 

foreseeable future.  We should not delay action any further.  Indeed, I hope we will send the 

message loud and clear that we intend to provide additional accommodation through new asset 
            
                                
   purchases until we observe substantial and sustained improvement in labor market conditions, 
and will maintain policy accommodation for an extended period as the recovery strengthens. 
I support the open-
ended 
and conditional nature of the asset purchase program in 
alternative B. I think it™s very helpful to spell out the goal of the program and to articulate the 
economic conditions we™ll need to observe before halting those purchases.  
In particular, we 
should promise to add accommodation through asset purchases until the outlook for labor market 

conditions has improved substantially, and we would stop doing so only if our outlook for 

inflation or assessment of the efficacy and costs of the program change
s sig
nificant
ly.  The 
challenge with such an open
-ended program is that its effectiveness will depend on market 
expectations of the ultimate size of our asset purchases, and we™re offering no clear guidance on 

how long we expect them to continue.  
In addition, 
we™ve included some escape clauses relating 
to efficacy and costs.  I, therefore, think it™s important that our public communications, including 

the Chairman™s press conference, emphasize our commitment to continue the program until we 

have seen ongoing and sustained improvement in labor market conditions. 
Even though the open-
ended nature of the program creates challenges in shaping 
expectations
, it also has the very desirable property that market participants should adjust their 
expectations about the size of the program in response to changing economic conditions.  And 

this means that the program should induce stabilizing movements in financial conditions as 

expectations adjust automatically to incoming data indicating a stronger or weaker economic 

outlook. 
There™s been quite a bit of debate both inside and outside the Fed about the likely 
economic impact of asset purchases, and there is sizable uncertainty about the effects of LSAPs. 

I appreciate ongoing staff e
fforts 
to refine our estimates of these effects.
  Nonetheless, in light of 
       
     
   
  
              
              the evidence that I™ve seen, I™m persuaded that this program can be a 
helpful 
tool 
for achieving 
our objectives.  And while I™m mindful of the implications of further asset purchases for capital 
losses and remittances down t
he road, these concerns pale in comparison to what I view 
as the 
potential economic and human costs of failing to reduce the unemployment rate as aggressively 

as we can. 
I™m hopeful that a determined commitment to continue providing accommodation 
until we
 achieve more rapid and durable progress in attaining our employment goal may bolster 
household and business confidence 
and
 spending.  Any stimulus provided through this channel 
will boost its 
effe
ct relative to the staff™s estimates. 
I think it makes sense to direct our new purchases to MBS to provide additional support 
to the housing market, and I support purchases at the higher rate of $40 billion per month, which 

is a rate that in the 
Desk™s assessment could be sustained for the next year or two.  Consi
stent 
with the open-ended approach, I™d be prepared to scale the flow of these purchases up or down as 

the economic outlook evolves.  If this flow of purchases is maintained through the middle of next 

year, our holdings of longer-
term securities would incr
ease by about 
$800 billion, which I think 
is large enough to have a substantial economic effect. 
Paragraph 4 of the statement spell
s out the conditions under which we will provide 
additional accommodation through asset purchases.  Paragraph 5, in contrast, 
concerns the 

conditions under which we will maintain the level of accommodation that™s reached when our 

asset purchases end. 
If we end up adopting 5 
rather than 5
, I consider it critical to make clear 
that an extension of the expected calendar date to m
id-2015 is intended as a policy shift to 
improve the economic outlook, and that it does not convey a downgrading 
of our outlook in the 
face of disappointing new data.  Whereas our previous language tied exceptionally low levels of 
               
    
   
      
          
    
 the funds rate to economic weakness, the new language incorporated into the beginning of B(5) 
is much more positive, and I think it™s a very significant improvement. 
As between the alternative versions of 
paragraph B
(5), while I can support B(5) today, 
I strongly 
prefer 
version 5
. We contemplated a formulation along these lines when we introduced 
calendar
-date guidance in August of last year, and we have discussed this formulation 
extensively for many months now.  President Evans, 
in his speeches
, and Presidents 
Kocherlakota, 
Williams
, and Rosengren have explained in detail and very persuasively why a 
formulation like this makes sense.  I don™t want to go over the arguments again that they have set 

before the Committee. I simply think that clarifying the economic conditionalit
y of the funds 
rate path is useful for precisely the same reasons that it™s useful to tie our asset purchases to 

economic conditions.  
And I also think
Ša point that President Kocherlakota emphasizedŠ
that 

the language has the possibility of bolstering household and business expectations about their 

future incomes, and this would be a very important mechanism potentially for supporting 

additional spending. 
In summary, I support the provision of additional monetary accommodation.  I anticipate 
that continuing our additional purchases w
ill be warranted
 well into 2013.  I also support 5
 today 
and hope that if we end up going with 5, 
we will make further progress in future meetings on 

refining our forward guidance. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I prefer 
alternative B.  As I™ve been saying for 
some time now, I believe it™s important for us to take stock of our remaining tools and make sure 

that they™re used to maximum effect.  I do not view reducing the IOER or any sort of discount 
         
    
   
     
           
        window program to promote lending to be viable options.  So for me, 
that leave
s us at asset 
purchases and future guidance about the fed funds rate. 
I find the idea 
that the MEP has just as much efficacy as the LSAPs to be plausible, an
d I 
supported both the original program as well as its extension through the end of this year as an 
accommodation move.  If the MEP does the job on long-
term rates
, without increasing the size of 
our balance sheet or drawing the same criticism as LSAP
s, so much the better.  But in not 
drawing criticism, the MEP might also be less visible and thus less likely to engender a 

confidence effect.  So it™s important to not only use the tool, but to be quite vocal about our 

estimates of its potency. 
In addition to continuing the MEP, I™m in favor of adding purchases of MBS.  There have 
been many discussions in this building about how LSAPs work and the extent to which long-

term rates affect equity prices.  I™m not, frankly, quite sure about the equity effect, but I™
m 100 percent certain that interest rates have a direct effect on real estate prices, and house prices 

are important components of household wealth.  They 
affect the 
number of households 
underwater on their mortgage, 
and, most important, rising prices help
 instill the confidence to 
buy a house either to live in or as an investment. 
Reductions in the yield on mortgage-
backed securities have not necessarily translated to a 
one-
for
-one reduction in home mortgage rates, 
as the primary
Œsecondary rate spread rema
ins 
unusually wide.  So our purchases of MBS could very well translate into additional profit to 

lenders rather than cost reductions to homeowners, but ultimately, 
that addition
al profit should 
entice additional capacity and competition into the market tha
t will reduce the cost and increase 
the availability of mortgage credit.
  And while much has been made of the benefit to the 
economy as homeowners refinance into lower payments and free up cash flow for spending, that 
          
   
          
             
   
       
       
   
 reduced payment for the homeowner translates into reduced income for an investor, and it takes 
some pretty heroic assumptions about the differences in propensity to spend for that channel to 

make a big impact on consumer spending.  Still, I think the confidence 
and wealth effects
, along 
with t
he incentive for increasing capacity
, make this a step worth taking.  I confess that I might 
have been on the fence with this if the employment numbers had been better, but given their 

weakness, it™s hard to argue that we™ve been watching closely and still haven™t seen any reason 

to take action. 
For m
y policy preference, 
I start with the desire to finish out the MEP rather than throw it 
overboard and replace it with something else.  Although it™s something of a coincidence that the 

MEP runs out as we approach the fiscal cliff, it™s also something of an advantage.  It gives us a 

logical point to take stock of 
the consequences of reaching the cliff and its resolution.
  To be 
clear, I don™t view it as a potential stopping point.  On the contrary, I think it hig
hly likely that it 
will need to be a point of escalation, 
and I want to make sure that we have some additional fire 

power left
.  I know this goes against the grain for those of you who believe we should launch 
everything we have as early as possible in ord
er to strengthen the economy enough so 
it can 
withstand potential shocks, but those who subscribe to that idea are probably a lot more 

convinced than I am about the actual power of our tools.  I, frankly, don™t believe these tools are 

powerful enough by themselves to strengthen the economy enough so that it will withstand those 

shocks, but I do believe that, 
in announcing their use, there™s a confidence effect that can change 

expectations and halt or slow a downward slide. 
I a
m willing to entertain the possibility that we are approaching the point where we 
resemble the wizard behind the curtain.  [L
aughter] 
If so, I want us to continue to appear great 
and powerful in the face of economic weakness for as long as possible.  
That
 is, I believe that our 
        
                   
   
     
               
 actions still have the potential to inspire confidence over and above any other possible channel 
through which they can work.  But if confidence is the most potent channel, 
the when
 and how of 
new announcements becomes a tool in its
elf. 
The Chairman was telling us at dinner last night that he had the opportunity to go and 
visit the Washington Nationals
™ batting practice and meet the players, and one of the players 
came up and
, upon finding that he was the Chairman of the Fed, said, ﬁHey, how about that QE3, 
man?ﬂ  [Laughter] 
I think this is evidence that there™s a whole world of people out there who 
have no idea what QE3 actually means or what monetary policy is.  They don™t know the Taylor 

rule, and they haven™t spent much time thinking about the Woodford paper.  [Laughter]  They 

won™t read the whole statement or tune into the press conference, but they will likely know that 

the Fed did something and that that something should help the economy. 
In the spirit of conserving some fire p
ower for what I view as a potential two
-step action, 
I prefer to add only $30 billion per month in MBS purchases.  It establishes the 60Œ
40 split that 

was assumed in the capacity memos and leaves room to escalate the amount of MBS, add 

Treasury purchases, 
or commit to a $1 trillion program as levers to be pulled if conditions 
deteriorate, as I fear they might in coming months. 
My own judgment is that a commitment to a 
large program will prove to be a stronger action, but that we can always change from open
-ended 
to a stock commitment.  It would be much tougher to try to go in the other direction. 
In paragraph 4, I prefer to exclude the mention of other policy tools, as those other policy 
tools could be interpreted as an intent to use the IOER or a lending p
rogram, 
neither of which I 
support. 
I prefer 
paragraph 5 over 5
, especially at this meeting.
  The action of adding MBS 
purchases to the MEP is already going to be a little complicated to communicate.  Have we or 
         
     
     
      
                  
  have we not launched QE3?  So our communication focus should certainly be on that action in 
this meeting. 
Use of a date 
in the forward guidance is familiar and it™s expected.  While I™m sure 
there™s going to be an ongoing discussion, I would still continue to use the date, but over time, 

explain t
hat it represents a departure from our standard policy rules and our own historic reaction 
function.  I found the memos about delaying liftoff until there was a greater certainty about the 

likelihood of return to the zero bound to be very reasonable and explainable, and it would be 

helpful to convey that we are also anxious to get back into a more normal environment. 
I have real concerns about expressing our policy in terms of specific triggers.  We worked 
hard on the statement that put the 2 
percent target out there, and I™d hate to create an impression 

that we™re now raising it. I™m especially reluctant to specify the unemployment rate 
as the single 
employment data point guiding our actions.  First, there™s always the risk that it™s perceiv
ed as 
too high or too low, and one has only to look at the most recent employment report that clearly 

showed weakness, even though the unemployment rate dropped 
two
-tenths, 
to get a little nervous 
about tying fed funds expectations to that single number.  
Indeed, last year as we saw a full 
percentage point decline in the unemployment rate, we were only kind of pleased about it, 

because it didn™t happen in the way we expected. 
Someone commented yesterday that we should begin to focus on how the general publi
c receives our messages, and this is a really important point.  I question whether the public will use 

this guidance formulation to adjust their expectations about policy.  I think they™ll hear these 

numbers as our targets.  But if the consensus is to move to conditioning on economic outcomes, 

we should, 
at a minimum
, take some time to set the table for its introduction. In addition, we 

should agree to leave this set-up task to the Chairman, and the rest of us should refrain from 

taking our own disagreements on the finer points public.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
                 
   
    
   
         
   
                  
  
   
      
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and I™d like to point out 
that 
the 
player™s 
financial portfolio is probably bigger than anybody at this table.  
[Laughter]
  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My reaction when you told me about the 
player in question was he has an awfully good financial advisor.  [Laughter] L
et me begin by 
saying that some people have basically asked the question, why act now? For my own 
perspective, I don™t think there is a particularly compelling reason to act at this moment, but that 

is only because I would have thought that action at any of the p
ast several meetings would have 

been equally appropriate.
  Charlie, in response to your questions, why wasn™t I or why weren™t 
others inclined to act earlier in the year when there was a trio of pretty good employment 

numbers? 
The answer 
is that
 they didn™t seem sustainable, 
just as the little bursts in the last 
couple of years hadn™t 
seemed sustainable. 
If they had been sustainable, that would have called 
for some action.  But here I think we are all seeing that the basic diagnosis of a bogged-
down 
economy over the p
ast few years has become a pretty persuasive one. 
The second thing I would say is I don™t think it is reasonable to oppose further action on 
the grounds that action taken in the past has not produced the complete, 
fast recovery that 

everyone would like to see.  T
he real question is the counterfactual one
: In the absence o
f action, 
in the absence of the LSAPs, what would be the situation now?  And there I think, 

notwithstanding 
the efforts of some to deny that there has been any effect
ŠI am not talking 
about people in this roomŠ
while one can debate reasonably and at length 
the actual amount of 
effect of the last couple of LSAP exercises, it is really hard not to see that there has been an 

effect
, and the 
disagreement seems to be 
over how much. 
Of course, we would all be happier if there had been a more aggressive set of poli
cies to 
deal with underwater mortgages and housing a couple of years ago.  I think in retrospect, as 
         
          
      
   
              
  
           people write the history of the Great Recession following the financial crisis, the failure to 
move 
more aggressively on housing is going to be seen as the biggest of the policy mistakes, even 
bigger than maybe not going for a larger stimulus package.  
But
 it is not up to us to determine 
what everybody else does.  We have to take the world as it is presented to us, and then balance 

the costs and benefits of the actions we can take in light of the good and bad decisions that other 

parts of the government and consumers and firms are themselves taking. 
As Jeremy was suggesting yesterday, there is in any set of LSAP proposals an anticipated 
combination of what he 
termed the ﬁhydraulic
ﬂ effects and some confidence or quasi
-commitment effect. 
I think it is hard to disentangle the two, even as we look retrospectively at 
the first couple of LSAPs.  T
here is some case to be made, as some of the skeptics have 
suggested
, that the conditions 
that obtained at the times of the LSAPs made what I have termed a 
confidence or quasi-
commitment effect particularly salient at those moments.  And th
at may not 
be quite as powerful right now. 
But, again, in the face of all of this uncertainty, which the Chairman alluded to yesterday, 
we do have to make a choice.  And it does seem to me that the costs suggested to date, while 

nontrivial, don™t seem overwhelming.  That is, they are a little bit more speculative than they are 

concrete. 
People are saying
, ﬁwe worry that there may be some effect on market functioning
,ﬂ without specifying exactly what that effect would be, or 
ﬁwe worry that there may at some point 
be some effect on inflation or on our exit capacities,ﬂ 
without telling a somewhat more filled
-out 
story as to what they think those might be.  While I would be shocked if there are not some 

unintended consequences, even of the LSAPs we™ve done to date, that is part of policymaking.  

There are always going to be some unanticipated 
consequences, and the best you can do is try to 
dig in as deeply as possible to spin out as many plausible outcomes as possible, and then make 
         
   
                
      
            
   
  
           that balance. 
Obviously, from what I™ve said here, that balance is in favor of taking further 
action
, as it has been before
.  And so I support 
alternative B.  But I just want to make clear to 
those who have questionsŠSandy and Dennis and othersŠthat I share a lot of the uncertainty, 
and I don™t have enormous conviction that anything we do now is going to be, as Eric put it, a 

game
-changer. 
It is going to be something 
that
 helps, not something 
that
 resolves all problems. 
On the 5 versus 5
 issue, Narayana laid out the two key considerations extremely well.  
First, that the use of the more-
specified forward guidance could maximize the effect of LSAPs. 
That is a very important consideration.  Second, and this was an extremely important point, he 

pointed out that 2½ 
could easily be consistent with a price
-stability
-only mandate just because of 
having toleranc
e around any goal that one is ever trying to achieve.
  To me, that might have 
suggested that perhaps, 
because we do have a dual mandate, there might be a different set of 

targets that would be adopted.  But it seems to me, 
at the very least
, Narayana™s rea
soning 
suggests why 
2½ shouldn™t be problematic. 
I don™t find the potential h
yste
resis argument or the potential rise in labor 
force 
participation to be dispositive here.  I don™t think Janet actually disagreed with me yesterday 

when I said that I had been
 surprised that we haven™t seen h
yster
esis.  And given that we haven™t, 
it™s probably less likely than we all thought.  But even if you thought it was, how would it 

manifest itself? Presumably, it would manifest itself in tightness in the labor market and rising 

wages, which are going to pass through into our inflation projections.  At that point, you™d say, 

ﬁOkay.  We are now seeing that the trigger or threshold has been breached.ﬂ 
There is something to what Charlie Plosser said about the market™s anticip
ation of what 
happens as we approach the thresholds.  When Charlie Evans was talking about this publicly, a 

very acute market observer commented offhandedly to me that he was somewhat sympathetic to 
              
                  
            this approach, but his concern was that there may be some expectation of pent-up and rapid 
increases, which markets would think would be coming depending on 
the circumstances as we 

approached
ŠI think, 
at that time
, Charlie™s numbers w
ere
 7 and 3.  I don™t think that is 
something to disregard.  It is probably something to take into account. 
These are all good arguments piled onto the ﬁwhy we all hate the dateﬂ argument for 
trying to develop something like what is in 5
. Having said that, I would remind all of you of the 
fact that I was initially
Šlate last year an
d early this past year
Šhesitant to move in that direction 
for a couple of reasons.  One, the communications issues, which severalŠ
most recently Betsy
Š have alluded to, are significant here.  But I thought they were significant last spring, even in the 

absence of an LSAP initiative
, which is going to take a little nimbleness to explain. 
The 
confusion with the policy statementŠ
what do these numbers actually mean
Šis a real 
consideration.  T
hough I should say
, at the time, I had some hopes that a revised S
EP could fill a 
good bit of the role of these thresholds or targets.  Those hopes have subsequently been dashed.  

[Laughter] I now see the costŒbenefit calculus somewhat differently, which is to say that the 

available alternative may not be as much of a s
ubstitute as I had hoped.  I would say that, 
notwithstanding my strong 
sense that 
this 
is 
the right direction for us to goŠfor the reasons 
Narayana stated
Šand that optimally we would have been prepared to go that way right now, 
I don™t really think the groundwork has been laid.  C
ertainly not externally
ŠI do think some 
underestimate the communications challenge that will exist. 
Second, I™m not totally positive that we have laid the groundwork internally
.  Maybe we 
did eight months ago, but all of those memos and things are in the archives instead of right in the 

front of our computer screens.  It would be a tougher case for me if everybody had converged 

around 6½ and 2½ 
because in those circumstances I might be inclined to say, ﬁAll right. 
         
       
    
         
           
          Communications ch
allenge
ŠMichelle is going to have a tough week, but let™s take the 6½, 2½, 
which is probably, in the end, right, but that™s not where we are.  I would say that not taking an 

employment number means that you are not actually communicating very effectively a
t all 
because otherwise it is just qualitative verbiage. 
You don™t really achieve what you are trying to 
achieve. 
In addition, 
saying a little bit over 2 is going to create even more communication 
problems because everybody is going to 
ask
,  ﬁWell, how much over?ﬂ I
t doesn™t really solve 
much, if anything at all. 
There is not agreement on these propositions right now.  
It is clear that we don™t have a 
consensus even among those who are going to vote in favor of a
lternative 
B on the numbers 
themselves
, so we are probably not prepared to move in that direction.  But I don™t think that 
should dissuade us from doing a lot of memo writing and communicating over the course of the 

next couple of meetings to see if we can move in that direction together.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Incoming data have been consistent with my 
expectations, reinforcing my view that additional policy stimulus is needed.  The inflation 

outlook is subdued, and the employment outlook is unsatisfactory, so a balanced approach 

requires the providing of significant additional stimulus. 
My comments will, again, focus on the communication channel.  First, I think that some 
marginal monetary stimulus could be 
delivered
, without incurring the costs associated with an 
LSAP
, through the use of forward guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook.  
While I 
appreciate the fact that an asset purchase program and forward guidance are not perfect 

substitutes, I 
like 5
 because it is close to a costless way of providing some accommodation. 
          
      
                    
   But even if we were not in agreement that more accommodation is necessary, I see little 
downside in shedding our adherence to a calendar date.  The calendar date, as we have heard, is 
working against us.  It is communicating that we are continuously downgrading our assessment 

of the future.  Why not, instead, show households, businesses, and markets what we are looking 

for in terms of particular economic outcomes?  Why not offer 
a sneak preview of what we need 
to see before we begin contracting?
  With such a preview and credible delivery, households and 
businesses and markets figure out how we are going to react.  Providing that window, and 

keeping the panes of that window clean, 
reduces volatility and pessimism about our commitment 
to support a recovery.  I
n mitigating this volatility and pessimism, as argued by President 
Kocherlakota and others, we maximize the effectiveness of the oth
er actions being contemplated. 
But we have be
en down this road before, so we ask, why now?  Why move to forward 
guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later? We should 

consider forward guidance 
that is 
dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later 
because 
there could be costs to putting this off.  The primary cost is the permanent downward 

shift in expectations that becomes more probable the longer we wait.  The longer we put off 

these contentious decisions, the greater the probability that we let stand the 
perception that there 
is a new
, lower, slower trajectory of economic growth that we are comfortable with; the greater 
the probability we let stand the perception that the FOMC doesn™t adhere to the statutory 

directive of a dual mandate; the greater the pr
obability we let stand the perception that we act 
forcefully when we are off the price
-stability mandate but not when we are off the 
maximum
-employment 
mandate; and the greater the probability we let stand the perception that 2 percent is 

a ceiling. 
      
           
                               Forwar
d guidance that is dependent on an economic outlook counters these otherwise 
pervasive and erroneous interpretations and perceptions.  The longer we postpone correcting 
such interpretations and perceptions, the more pervasive, credible, and intractable the
y become. 
In short, we want to oxygenate the forward guidance before households and businesses 

permanently harden their expectations about both the future path of the economy and our future 

reaction to it.  All of this argues for moving away from a calend
ar date sooner rather than later. 
We still may not know what the right numbers are for insertion into a formulation like 5
, but we have all seen that in optimal control simulations under commitment in the FRB
/US model, the unemployment rate is around 6 pe
rcent at the time of liftoff, and inflation never rises 
above 2½ percent.  We have seen justification for these particular thresholds.  Moreover, 

6½ percent is still above the Committee™s view of the long
-run rate of unemployment.  The 
forward guidance in 5
 has come a long way since we discussed it in August of 2011.  It now 
contains a firm, definitive, non-vague inflation proviso.  A problem 
we 
debated in the August 
2011 meeting was the risk that moving the forward guidance from a calendar date to one bas
ed on economic conditions would dislodge inflationary expectations.  In the current version of 5
, that possibility seems extremely unlikely. Instead, if inflation at a one
-to two
-year horizon were 
above the small 
½ percentage point threshold of 2 percent, the Committee would be required to 
reengage on the federal funds rate debate, even if unemployment still exceeds 6
½ percent. 
It is, 
to use President Kocherlakota™s phrase, a threshold for conversation.  These are hardly putting in 

place conditions by which inflation can brew silently, unchecked, and unaddressed. 
At the end of this round, there are still some who say that the egg hasn™t been cooked 
long enough.  I might have to disagree, noting that I am not sure what we are waiting for.  


 could be in a form close enough to convince the public that the FOMC is following 
                
       
     
      
      
  
    
  
       
 a different strategy; one that tries to achieve its employment mandate more forcefully than the 
public has perceived thus far; one that more credibly delivers accommodation and, at the right 

time, contraction, than the markets have understood thus far; one that has none, if any, of the 

costs associated with an LSAP; and one that may be necessary now to make the MBS purchases 

in 
alternative 
B more effective. 
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B. I will just comment on 
a few of the specifics.  First of all, in terms of the flow rate of purchases of MBS, I would go 

with 
$40 billion per month, though I can™t say I have a particularly strong view on this. 
With respect to the trigger
- or threshold-
base
d policy described in paragraph 5
, I am 
quite sympathetic to the strategy. 
It has the potential to be of significant help.  I appreciate and 
find quite compelling the arguments that President Kocherlakota and a number of others have 

made. 
There is really quite an appealing intellectual case to be made. 
Now, having said this, I find myself in very close agreement with Governor Tarullo in 
terms 
of whether now is the right time to move forward.  As he pointed out, there 
are
 two issues.  
There is the internal issue.  We have to get this right internally.  We have to really agree on the 

design and on the parameters.  T
he numbers really matter here. 
If we don™t coalesce around a 
reasonably strong version, one in which we make it clear that we have, as President 

Kocherlakota suggested, an ambitious unemployment threshold and some tolerance for a 

symmetric loss function on inflation, the intellectual c
ase for it in some sense starts to disappear.  
That™s one issueŠwe have to get that right. 
Second, the external issue is also challenging, and the communication here is crucial. 
To 
give one example, something that is not clear in
 my own mind is, how would we respond to the 
                       
     
            
     following question?  Have we really deviated from our previous forward guidance in the sense 
that now we are making more of what is really a commitment
, in the spirit of optimal control
, to 

do something that we would stick with, even if 
it™s, in a sense, time inconsistent?  Or
, is it just a 
statement, well, that we™ve introspected, we have thought about our reaction function, and we 

have discovered in our souls that we have a different reaction function than we previously knew 

ourselves to have? 
These are challenging things to explain, and it™s absolutely important to get it right. 
The 
concern, then, would be that if we throw something this consequential and tricky into what is 

already a hard
-to-parse statement in other areas,
 it could end up being somewhat 
counterproductive.  Again, I very much have sympathy for the underlying idea and the 

principles, and I would hope that we could further develop and do more work on it.  My own 

preference would be not to push it out the door in the next hour or two. 
With respect to paragraph 4, this is the part I had in mind when I said it was already a 
little bit hard to parse. 
You get a flavor of this in some of the comments that have already gone 
around.  In other words, it seems like it is really open to different interpretations.  Some of you 

have, as I hear it, read paragraph 4 as a quite strong and open-ended commitment to continue 

doing asset purchases as long as it takes until the labor market improves.  
At the other extreme, 
the way I heard Pres
ident Bullard reading the paragraph was, ﬁWell, it doesn™t really say much 
more than that we will do this for several months and then reassess where we are.ﬂ  Y
ou can 
certainly point to various forms of wiggle room in the phrasing.  I suppose the truth is sort of in 

between and a little b
it in the eye of the beholder. 
For my part, I would align myself quite closely with President Pianalto.  I appreciate the 
commitment arguments. I like the idea of having wiggle room, and that is 
because of
 my own 
        
         
        
    
                    understanding of the costs and the benefits, and that in spite of the fact that I do believe the 
benefits of past programs have been significant, I sense that we are verging into diminishing 

returns territory. 
Moreover, flexibility may be particularly warranted with MBS because there is 
a particular kind of market feedback that we might get reasonably quickly, which is to sayŠand 

Governor Duke mentioned thisŠthere is this issue about the pass-through from MBS spreads to 

primary mortgage rates. 
We will see
, presumably in a few months, whether that pass-through i
s weak or strong
, and one might want to update one™s policy based on that. 
In any event, as we talked about yesterday, given the language in paragraph 4, this makes 
the press conference important.  F
or what it™s worth, Mr. Chairman, I thought that the trial 
balloon answers that you were floating yesterday struck a good balance here, so I was certainly 

comfortable in that dimension. 
Given these two 
earlier
 points, one being that I think it is worth giving serious further 
thought to 5
, and the second being that there is some virtue to not getting overly locked in on 
asset purchases, I also
Švery similar to President Lockhart and to President Pianalto
Šwas 
thinking about whether 
there 
is 
an alternative fra
ming that would work here?  And my thought 
was maybe we can lean just as far forward, or even a little bit further, on the general principle of 

giving accommodation if the economy doesn™t strengthen but be more open as to whether that 

accommodation would t
ake the form of asset purchases or a change in our guidance. 
This could be done, in principle, either by rewording paragraph 4 of the statement or 
simply by
 the way the press conference is handled.  In the former case, if it™s done via the 
statement, you c
ould rewrite the two key sentencesŠ
it™s just a suggestion
Šas follows: 
ﬁIf the 
outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue to add 

further accommodation as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a 
context of price 
               
      
                       
   stability. In determining the nature of such accommodation, the Committee will, as always, take 
appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of the tools at its disposal.ﬂ I
t is less precise
, and I take that to be in the spirit 
of what you 
all 
were thinking as well.
  The intent is not to back 
away from being supportive but to be a little bit more flexible in the tools that are used to 

provide that support.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will vote in favor of 
alternative 
B.  My 
support for 
alternative
 B leans heavily on the language in paragraph 4 requiring us to consider 
the likely efficacy and cost of further actions when and if they are proposed and considered, and 

I join strongly Governor Stein and Presidents Pianalto and Lockhart in an editing of paragraph 4 

that moves very much in the direction that Governor Stein just read. 
I am a supporter of paragraph 5.  I think that the arguments that have already been 
raised 
and vetted about 5
 are dispositive at this time.  I will say that the two things that need to be 
doneŠthe good news is there are only two things.  The bad news is those two things are, first, 

the Committee has got to reach agreement on the desirab
ility of moving to a state
-contingent 
forward guidance. I™m very open to the intellectual appeal of that, but going around the table, 

it™s quite obvious that we don™t fully have that, particularly around the levels in the language and 

the conditionality. 
The second is clearly the public communication aspect.  There™s nothing about it in the 
Jackson Hole speech.  There really hasn™t been any supportive discussion of it by the Chairman 

lately that I™ve seen. 
We could get ourselves to a place where this could be announced.  I
t would 
be the work of some months both internally and externally, in particular explaining how it does 
          
         
     
   
   
  
                   
 fit in with the principles that we adopted in January
.  I
t™s 
not something that 
can happen in the 
next 45 minutes. 
I will also vote in
 favor of extending the guidance to mid-2015 as proposed.  My own 
view of this is that the market moves the estimate of the liftoff date every day, and our proposed 
guidance doesn™t contain any surprise element. 
The idea that the date can contain a negati
ve, 
contractionary aspect is certainly
 plausible in a different setting, but not on the facts we face 
today. 
Let me say a couple of comments
 about LSAPs.  As I look back on the use of LSAPs so 
far, I too believe that the evidence supports the view that the 
effects of any LSAP are highly 
dependent not only on some mechanics, but also on the setting in which it is launched.  The main 

driver of real effects is probably that of enhancing confidence, confidence that bad outcomes will 

be avoided, and that there is reason to hope for good outcomes. 
In this view, it is really our credibility, the design of the program, 
and the setting that 
make it work.  For me, an argument in favor of 
alternative 
B is that it is limited to MBS at a time 
when the housing market is consistently surprising on the upside.  This alternative can be well 

explained and understood by the public as welcome support for housing as well as for the 

broader economy.  
So presented, it stands a decent chance 
to actually be noticed and appreciated 
by people who are neither Fed watchers nor professional market participants nor economics 
bloggers.  I encourage an emphasis on support for housing in our public communications around 

this action. 
My view is that alternative 
B can have positive effects on the 
economy but 
that these 
effects are likely to be quite modest, and I do come to that view without a great deal of certainty.  

It does seem clear to me that LSAPs have affected asset prices, and to deny that does call for
Šas          
                   
                 
   was done in a certain well
-ment
ioned Jackson Hole paperŠ
that most hackneyed of all economist 
jokes that while it may be observed in reality, it will simply never work in theory.  [Laughter] 
But of course, affecting MBS and Treasury prices is just the beginning.  We need translation to 

rates that actually matter for private economic activity and then translation to the real economy. 
Looking at the channels through which we believe our policies operate and 
the caveats, 
confidence intervals, headwinds, 
and multiple uncertainties that surround the estimates so well 

addressed in yesterday™s meeting, my strong sense is that the 
real effects will be quite modest, 
and it is all too easy these days to find credible private forecasts that agree. 
The last two 
forecasts that I™ve seen both from well known, credible sources who happened to be broadly 

supportive of accommodation, point to estimates of unemployment effects of around 20 or 

30 basis points for a program the size of QE2Šuse that as a rough proxy for this.  That would be 

300,000 to 450,000 jobs under those forecasts.  That might be equivalent to bringing the 

recovery forward by a couple of months. 
As far as the costs, I certainly agree that they appear manageable in the near term. 
There™s enough risk and uncertainty about the medium and long term that if the view of the 

likely benefits is right, one 
would have to believe further that the likely costs are close to nil to 
want to proceed with a large LSAP.  I also agree with President Bullard™s point earl
ier in the 
meeting that the problem has not been the lack of aggressive monetary policy.  As a separate 

matter, taking the Chairman™s points from yesterday, I do not feel that additional aggressive 

monetary policy is likely to provide much of a solution. 
I know that every member of the Committee struggles to balance these highly uncertain 
costs and benefits.  I™m supporting 
alternative 
B with a certain lack of enthusiasm, and I am 
somewhat uncomfortable with the road that we are on.  As others have mentioned, this is not 
      
            
          
       
        
  
   
   
          2008, 2009, or 
2010.  We™re now using LSAPs as a straightforward jobs program.  There is no 
credible threat of deflation, recession
, or financial crisis
, any of which could present a 
compelling case for action and the use of all of our tools, including LSAPs if appropriate.  Again, 

these are concerns about the medium and the long term, not the next six months.  My concern is 

that for very modest benefits, we are piling up risks for the future and that it could become habit-

forming. 
Thank you
, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  My preference would be to act forcefully at 
this meeting.  I™d favor a
lternative B, 
paragraph 4 as written, p
aragraph 5
, and $40 billion per 
month of agency 
MBS.  Let me just talk about each of these a little bit. 
With respect to the thresholds, what I hear around the table is that there™s really a strong 
sentiment that thresholds can trump date guidance, and the thresholds that we even have today in 

5 in my 
mind
, trump date guidance. But I do accept the view that maybe we can even do better, 
and so in my mind the tradeoff is really between is it better to do something today to have a 

bigger package or is it better to keep working on 5
 to try to improve the communication and 
have it come later
? I would prefer to do it all today as a pack
age
 because if you do it as a package, it™s going 
to have more force in terms of its impact, but I accept the fact that the Committee is not really 

quite there yet.  I would 
hope that at least that the Committee would commit that we™re going to 

bring 5
 home in the next one or two meetings.  It would be very disappointing if we didn™t do 
that because I think most people around the table view the date as really quite problemati
c. The thresholds, 
as President
s Williams and Kocherlakota pointed out, 
are 
more powerful 
than a date.  The date creates a lot of uncertainty. When are we going to move it?  Why are we 
                     
                             
           
going to move it? When we move it, why did we move it?  Thresholds provide more 
information.  The date implicitly rests on some unobserved variables, and so people essentially 

have to look at the date and then infer what the things 
are 
that lie behind the date.  Why not just 
tell them what those variables are? 
Some of the problem 
with
 the thresholds 
is the limits of the statement.  The statement can 
only carry so much water, and we can™t specify all the parameters that would go into our 

decisionmaking as the economy actually evolves.  W
e have to recognize we™re not going to 
get 
to a perfect 5
 because the statement just can™t carry that water. 
We need to do the best we can 
and see what we can come up with.
  Then lastly, the dynamic nature of the thresholds far trumps 
the date guidance.  The market will adjust automatically, 
and as people have said, that™s an 
automatic stabilizer.
  So I™m reluctant to abandon 5
 at this meeting because it would make the 
action more forceful, but I do accept the pretty strong sense that a lot of people who don™t want 

to do it this meeting would
 actually be pretty inclined to do it subsequently once the work on the 
communication was complete and once they were convinced that they got the best 5
 version that 
they could possibly get.  I think we should keep going on that. 
With respect to the rest of the statement, I would not want to alter 
paragraph 4 because 
it™s critical to 
ensure the paragraph is forward leaning and implies the 
commencement of a new 
LSAP program should the economic situation not improve in a meaningful way. 
As I see it, we need 
to decide now what we will do if the economy continues to 
disappoint.  We™ll do more and how we™ll do more, and communicate this decision now because 

that will reduce uncertainty and support confidence, and that will support the recovery.  In my 

view, if we postpone those decisions about what we™ll do in the future if the economy 

disappoints, we just create more uncertainty about what our future policy actions are going to be, 
                  
   
         
       
            
   
   
   
  and that really undercuts the efficacy of the policy choices.  Deciding today so that people know 
that there™s more coming will actually create greater confidence about the Fed™s willingness to 

support the economy.  That reduces the downside risk and actually means, at the end of the day, 

the prospect i
s that 
we™ll
 have to do less rather than more because we™ll be acting today and 
supporting confidence today by communicating what our future actions will be. 
All that said, I am very sympathetic with a number of people™s remarks that don™t put a 
very high weight on the power of additional LSAPs.  I think L
SAPs have modest effects o
n the 
level of long-term rates, and the drop in long-term rates does feed through partially to the equity 

market and the foreign exchange market but not one-
for
-one as in the staff projections because 
that would contradict the whole portfolio balance framework, which is the basis for LSAPs. 
In assessing the 
effe
ct of past LSAPs, I™m not particularly a big fan of event studies.  I 
think the event studies are too focused on the reaction on 
particular days
.  T
he expe
ctation of 
LSAPs evolves more slowly, and it™s very hard to disentangle all the factors that affect financial 

asset prices.
  When we say that we™re going to do an LSAP, that not only affects people™s views 
of what™s going to happen in terms of financial 
markets,
 but also signals a view about our view 
of the economy, and both 
of 
those things affect financial asset prices.  So trying to disentangle 
what the effect 
is 
of the LSAP from what the effect is of our judgment that we need an LSAP is 
very difficult to determine. 
I also agree with Governor Stein and others that probably one of the more powerful 
aspects of LSAPs is the confidence channel and the signal that we™re willing to do as much as it 

takes.  During the heat of the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009 when we were rolling out all of 

these special liquidity facilities, I was very impressed by how much our policy actions supported 

confidence in market function just because we were showing up, just because the fire trucks were 
       
        
                 
  
    
            
    rolling.
  People, as I think Governor Duke noted, don™t necessarily understand exactly why we™re 
doing what we™re doing, but they feel more confident when they know that we™re acting. 
Some around the table have argued that our tools are not very effective and the core 
problems lie el
sewhere
Šin fiscal, the household balance sheet, housing problemsŠand so we 
shouldn™t act because by acting we™re somehow removing responsibility from others where the 

responsibility more rightly sits, and I think there is some truth to 
that argument. 
In an ideal 
world, other things that are outside our purview would happen that would help the economy.  But 

I don™t think that argument carries the day for arguing against action for two reasons. 
First, nothing in our mandate says that if our tools aren™t powerful, don™t use them; defer 
to others.  There™s nothing in our mandate that says that.  It just says this is your mandate.  Use 

your tools to try to achieve your mandate the best you can.  And second, if we don™t act, it™s not 

as if
 that somehow is going to cause others to act. I really don™t accept the premise that 
somehow our inaction would spur action by others.  If you really believe that, then maybe you 

could actually advance this argument.  But I don™t think many people around the table believe 

that our inaction will somehow spur action by others that will improve the economic outlook. 
On the agency MBS, I strongly favor the $40 billion per month over the $30 billion.  
Being more forceful makes sense. 
At the end of the day the staff has concluded that we have the 
room to do $40 billion rather than $30 billion without i
mpairing market function
, so I don™t 
really see the reason for holding back.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you, and thank you all very much, as always, 
for your good advice. 
Let me make a couple
 of comments.  I think that action is needed.  I don™t think we™re 
being precipitous.  We extended the guidance in January.  In June, we extended the MEP.  Both 
       
                     
     
              
    of those things were viewed essentially as temporizing moves and were discussed in that way 
around 
this table.
  The evidence is that while we are not necessarily facing recession or crisis, it™s 
also true that we seem to have stalled
, and that very serious problems with unemployment are not 
improving.  Given our mandate, I think that requires at least a consideration of action. 
The action that
 is proposed here, and it should be very clear, is a cautious action.  
Governor Duke was very helpful in helping me think about this.  What this a
lternative B actually 
does is make a down payment of X per month of MBS for the rest of the year, and then three or 

four job market reports from now we will consider at that point what the job market outlook 

looks like, and then respond appropriately.  
So it is
, in that respect, emphasizing the 
conditionality of the progra
m and the fact that we will be looking
Šin a way that wasn™t 
conveyed adequately by our fixed-
size LSAP programs
Šat what™s happening in the data and 
what™s happening in the economy.  But I do think there is a basis for expressing our support for 

the economy at this point, to help support confidence and to help give the economy a bit more 

strength in case we do face shocks from Europe or from the fiscal cliff. 
So, again, obviously I propose a
lternative B. I™ll come back to the body of it in a 
moment.
  On 5 v
ersus 5
, there was a pretty clear consensus around the table that there™s a lot of 
hunger for moving away from the date toward some kind of state-contingent guidance.  I think 

one of the lessons of the paper whose author™s name will not be mentioned was t
hat clarity about 
future rate policy is a very powerful tool and one that we should make use of.  I would advocate 

that we continue to work on this because the other part of the consensus today was that we™re not 

quite ready for prime time on this issue. 
So I would propose for now that we retain paragraph 5, 
but with a very strong injunction to the staff and to colleagues that we work to figure out how we 

can put language like 5
 in soon. 
        
              
       
              
              In paragraph 3, I™d like to make the following proposal.  I™d like to propose that we do 
$40 billion a month, but I™d like to add the words ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ 
where it says 
$85 billion a month three lines from the bottom.  T
he 
$85 billion, which is the MEP plus the 
$40 billion
Šof course the MEP runs out at the end of the year, and that™s about the time we™ll be 
looking at how we™re going to proceed from here. The advantage of doing $40 
billion
 is, 
first of 
all, that 
$30 billion 
feels a little underwhelming to me in terms of what we announce today, but 
also it s
eems to me that one of the options we might have in January, 
if we are looking at it
, would be just to continue the $40 
billion
.  To me, $40 
billion 
seems like a more plausible number 
there.
  And we have talked about it with the D
esk
, and the
ir view is that it™s consistent with both 
our operational capacity and with market functioning even if extended for a long period, longer 
than I expect 
that
 we would actually do it. 
In paragraph 4, I would proposeŠand there were views on different sid
es here
Šwe use 
the 
second language, ﬁundertake additional asset purchases and employ its other policy tools.ﬂ 

Governor Duke spoke against this because she mentioned IOER and discount window lending.  

Of course, those are Board tools, but the other tools 
that the FOMC has 
are the statement 
language and the guidance, and certainly that could be part of additional steps that we take in 

January or whenever it is that we begin to review the situation.  If no one has too strong an 

objection, I™d like to use that second phrase 
with
 the understanding, which I will make clear if 
asked, that what we mean by that is communicationŠwhich is the other topic I talked about in 

Jackson Hole.  I don™t want to make any other changes.  We do have the phrase ﬁas appropriate.ﬂ 

That already convey
s the notion of conditionality, the fact that we may or may not take action.  It 
depends on what the economic outlook is, and I think that™s very important. 
           
                
          
         I forgot to say, by the way, on 5Ša point that Governor Raskin madeŠ
that I think the 
reason that there has been in the SEP, as well as in th
e guidance, a fairly sharp movement into 
the future of the expected takeoff date is not really because there™s been a massive deterioration 
in the outlook, but 
that 
the Committee has come to the view that a somewhat 
more extended 
period of low ratesŠfor reasons articulated by the artist formerly known as Michael Woodford 

[l
aughter]
Šcan be helpful in a zero lower bound situation, and I will try to make that point also 
in the press conference. 
To summarize
Šand I look 
around the table, if there are any voters who are extremely 
bothered, please let me knowŠI would propose to choose $40 billion and $85 billion from the 

third line from the bottom, propose to insert the phrase ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ after ﬁeach 

month,ﬂ and then in paragraph 4, I propose to take the second option, ﬁunder
take additional asset 
purchases, 
and employ its other policy tools as appropriate.ﬂ 
Are there any comments? 
President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  May I just ask a question? When we say ﬁin a 
context of price stability,
ﬂ we also mean well
-anchored inflation expectations
, is that correct? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We do.  That™s the phrase.  I recognize it™s not completely 
grammatical as President Lacker pointed out, but the implication is that, of course, at all times 

we™ll maintain that conditionality as we undertake our policy. 
MR. FISHER.  And you will work that into your press conference if it™s appropriate. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, yes.  Absolutely. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  P
resident Lockhart. 
                      
   
                          
         MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
In paragraph 4, just a thought to throw 
on the table, and that is take the last sentence of 5
, inject it after the word
s ﬁprice stability,ﬂ so 
that the effect of the last two sentences would be t
o frame this whole question of continuing 
accommodation
Šin effect, framing the way we™re going to deliberate over this over the next few 
weeks. 
It seems to me comprehensive.  It refers to improvement in labor market conditions 
generally, and also of cours
e, efficacy and cost and all of that.  I can see combining those two 
sentences.  Each begins, for what it™s worth, with ﬁIn determining, –
ﬂ and that might make that 
paragraph a good set-up. I
™ll
 also point out that in all likelihood, the 
minutes 
are going
 to portray 
that we have given some consideration to threshold thinking, and so this would serve to frame 

that for the market reaction over the next few weeks.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Because 
it refers to the time horizon, wouldn™t th
at kind of 
language be more appropriate as we look toward the language of 
5?  In other words, I thought for 
a moment you were suggesting taking that and putting it at the end of 5. 
MR. LOCKHART. I™m actually thinking it might fit in 
4.  I put this on the 
table a little 
bit off the top of my head.  T
he Committee will continue its purchases, undertake additional asset 
purchases
, and employ its other tools until such improvement is achieved in the context of price 
stability.  In determining how long we™re going to do that, we™d take into account the pace of 

labor market conditions and so forth.  In determining the size, pace, and composition, as always, 

we™d 
take into account efficacy and cost.  I just saw that as a boxing of all of the things we would 
take in
to consideration if we go to essentially an open-ended kind of approach. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
In my press conference I™m going to be very clear that 
obviously this is not a numeric objective, and we™ll be looking at a range of employment and 

output indicato
rs, which all bear on the outlook for sustained improvement in labor market 
       
         
  
           
     
     
        conditions and declining unemployment, and I™d rather convey that breadth verbally.  I™m afraid 
we™re getting a little complicated. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Fair enough. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Ye
s, I had the same reaction that you had. I didn™t see 
how it would fit in 4 because you hadn™t really explained the forward guidance yet.  One could 

take the last sentence 
of 
4 and the last sentence
 of 5
 and make a new 
paragraph 6 and sum up.  
Then you™d have the statement about asset purchases, the statement about forward guidance, and 

a summary paragraph that said
, ﬁin determining both these things.ﬂ  That would be more logical. 
MR. LACKER.  A paragraph full of escape clauses, in other words. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Essentially. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I was going to ask a question about something else. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead. 

MR. LACKER. 
In the forward
-guidance lan
guage, we deleted the economic conditions 
clause there.  We™ve had a lot of discussion of Professor Woodford™s paper.  We™ve talked  a lot 

about that in the context of 5
 and that language, but I™m thinking that what you had in mind by 
deleting the economi
c conditions clause was in part motivated by his critique as well, the idea 
that by saying it™s conditions that are pushing the time horizon out, we were focusing on how bad 

things 
are
.  The intention, as I read you, is for us to be communicating more about our reaction 
function. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s right. 
      
    
      
          
         
        
    
     MR. LACKER.  I want to re-
ask a question I asked earlier this year.  When
 we adopted 
this 
language
, we never really got clear on whether it™s a commitment or not.  W
e wrestled with 
different versio
ns of what that meant.  Is this signaling that we™re going to pursue an action that 
later on we would not want to pursue then? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it™s still conditional because it obviously depends on 
the timing of the recovery and so on. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  So it™s contingent. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I mentioned the SEP changes and so on
.  I think we 
around this table have moved to the view that communicating low rates for longer 
in a way that 
may require some credibility is an approach to dealing with the zero lower bound, not in an 

extreme way, but I think there is some of that now in the statement. 
MR. LACKER. 
We have a statement
, and we can walk away from this and each interpret 
it in our own way, 
or we can have a Committee sense of what 
we™re doing. Is policy in the 
future to be conditioned on this?  In other words, as Woodford suggests, is policy going to be 

history-dependent? 
Is t
he fact that we said 
this going to alter future policy
? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In my Jackson Hole remarks, 
I talked about the guidance.  I 
said it was conditional, dependent on the state of the economy.  B
ut in explaining the time, I said 
we look at rules and optimal control and those sorts of things, but we also take into account some 
other factors such as downs
ide risks, the effects of the 
zero lower bound, and implicitly I said the 
possibility that the equilibrium real rate of interest is lower than normal
Šthat is,
 headwinds.  So 
I am conveying, I think, some sense that in order to achieve more stimulus today, 
there™s a bit of 

a commitment element there
ŠI don™t think we™ve gone too far out on a limb on this. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 
              
   
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
                      
                                                              CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Can we go ahead? 
MS. DANKER.  This vote is on alternative B, as amended by the Chairman, and the 
associated 
directive. 
Chairman Bernanke 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
Governor Duke 
Yes 
President Lacker 
No President Lockhart 
Yes 
President Pianalto 
Yes 
Governor Powell 
Yes 
Governor Raskin 
Yes 
Governor Stein 
Yes 
Governor Tarullo 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
Governor Yellen 
Yes 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
We have a few other items
.  We™re going to 
hear a little bit about the implementation
, we™re going to do very quickly the forecast, but if 
everybody is okay, why don™t we just go ahead and tak
e a 15 minute coffee break? 
[Coffee 
break] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don™t we 
recommence
? Let me turn the floor 
over to L
orie 
Logan, who will talk a bit about the operational aspect. 
MS. LOGAN.
8  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I will offer a brief descrip
tion of how 
the Desk plans to implement the Committee™s decision regarding the 
SOMA 
portfolio.  
Consistent with recent practices, the Desk intends to release a statement 
with operational details on this initiative at the same time as the release of the FOM
C statement.  A draft of the Desk statement is provided in the handout for your 

reference, with the exception that we will add the clause ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ 

into the second sentence of the second paragraph. 
Based on the directive, the Desk inten
ds to expand the SOMA™s holdings of 
agency MBS by 
$40 billion per month and maintain the existing policy for 

reinvesting agency principal payments.  Our current projections indicate that through 

the end of the year, paydowns on the agency debt and MBS port
folios will result in 
average monthly reinvestment purchases of roughly $30 billion.  Thus, combined 
8 The materials used by Ms. 
Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 8). 
                                   
  
       
    
        purchases will initially total around 
$70 billion per month and constitute about three-
fourths of monthly TBA gross issuance. 
Should the purchases extend for 10 months, as was considered in Tealbook B, we 
anticipate that the SOMA™s ownership share of the outstanding fixed-
rate agency 
MBS market would grow from about 18 percent to 27 percent, and that™s over a 

10-month horizon. 
In line with the current practice for reinvestment operations, the Desk plans to 
conduct the additional purchases 
in the newly issued securities in the to
-be-announced market, or TBA market.  These securities represent the most liquid sector 

of the MBS market, allowing purchases to be made in large size and are most closely 

tied with the primary mortgage rate. 
The Desk may purchase other agency MBS if 
market conditions warrant. 
The Desk intends to conduct these additional purchases internally as we™ve been 
doing for some time rather than relying on an investment manager to conduct the 

trades on our behalf.  We expect to be active almost every day
, and purchase 
operations will continue to be conducted in a competitive auction format with the 

primary dealers.
  Further, the Desk will continue the practice established at the end of 
last year of margining the unsettled MBS transactions with the primary dealers. 
Given the substantial portion of issuance being purchased and the uncertainty 
associated with MBS supply, the Desk will continue to conduct dollar roll 

transactions when necessary to facilitate the settlement of our purchases. 
Dollar rolls 
can be used to postpone or accelerate the delivery of purchases based on indications 

of the availability of agency MBS for settlement. 
In the reinvestment operations to 
date, the size of dollar rolls needed to postpone settlement have been fairly small, at 

about 5 percent of purchases, though this amount is likely to increase with the 

additional asset purchases. 
We will al
so use coupon swaps, 
if needed
, to facilitate settlement, as was the case 
in 2010.  A coupon swap would allow the Desk to exchange unsettled purchases in a 

given agency MBS coupon for other coupons more readily available for settlement.  

However, we do not envision needing to conduct such transactions, except in very 

rare cases where persistent supply problems suggest that settlement of purchases
, even over several months, is unlikely. 
The purchases of agency MBS securities under this new asset purchase pro
gram 
will begin tomorrow.  We plan to have two separate announcements for MBS 

operations going forward, one for the new purchases and one for the continued 

reinvestments.  The Desk will publish the monthly asset purchase amounts along with 

the announcement of the Treasury MEP operations around the last business day of 

each month.  Given there are only 17 calendar days remaining in September, we will 

purchase a pro rata share of the monthly pace in September of about $23 billion. 
           
   
                    
      
          In addition, we will continue to publish around the eighth business day of each 
month the planned amount of reinvestment purchases for the next month.  Thus, there 

will also be a new reinvestment purchase amount target posted today at the same time 

as the Desk™s operating statement is released.
  That concludes my comments.  Thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
Any questions?  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. 
Help us interpret financial market data going forward.  What do you 
expect?  Because
 our purchases don™t include TIPS, should we factor something in about TIPS 

yields?
  Are they in the habitat, out of the habitat? 
MS. LOGAN.  In our MEP purchases, we purchase TIPS today. 

MR. LACKER.  You do? 

MS. LOGAN.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  O
kay. 
MR. POTTER.  The MEP is still ongoing. 

MR. LACKER.  But we weren™t proposing to do it in the overall asset purchase program, 
were we? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Sorry? 
MR. LACKER.  Include TIPS. 

MS. LOGAN. If we 
had added purchases under a new asset purchase 
program for 
Treasuries, we would have done so. 
MR. LACKER. 
Okay.  You would.  Sorry.  I misread something then.  I apologize.  
Let 
me ask another question.  How linked is the private-
label MBS market to agency MBS yields? 
Do you anticipate this pushing that spread apart? 
MS. LOGAN.  I think 
the way we™ve been estimating these effects is that the MBS 
purchases would affect the Treasury term premium, and to the extent that the 
pass
-through from 
the lowering of interest rates moves other asset markets, equities
, or the private-
label market
Š                
      
   
                  
  we t
alked about what that pass-through is.  There™s some uncertainty, but we would expect the 
channel to be through that form.  I guess there could be some other form because it is MBS, and 
private label is a little bit more closely connected than maybe from T
reasuries to private label, 
but overall we have been expecting the pass
-through to happen through lowering interest rates 
more broadly. 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  R
elative to buying Treasuries, we™re tilting credit from the 
private-
label market to the agency market.  Thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  I™d just like to say something about the private label 
because there has been 
almost no issuance of private label in a number of years because there™s just not much supply out 

there.  There is 
a little bit of jumbo issuance.
  Again, in the spirit of things that are cooking out 
there, the Federal Home 
Loan Banks, particularly I think the H
ome 
Loan Bank of Chicago 
is 
now looking at consolidating jumbo securities from banks across the country, not 
just that are in 
the Chicago 
district
, and feeding them through Redwood to try to generate some more broader 
private-
label issuance
, for
 jumbo and more broadly. 
I would expect that to the extent that that 
happens, it certainly wouldn™t be unhelpful.  It 
might be helpful. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, but what they™re saying is that compared 
with 
buying Treasuries 
only, this is reducing agency MBS yields by moreŠTreasury yields will fall, but not as much as 

what they would fall if we bought Treasuries only.  T
hey™re 
tilting the playing field away from 
everything priced on Treasuries toward agency MBS. 
MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we™re still buying $45 billion of long-
term Treasuries 
in the MEP right now. 
                                                                                                     MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, I know that, but the apples-
to-apples thing 
is 
$40 billion agency 
MBS versus 
$40 billion Treasuries in this setting, and comparing those two, private-
label MBS 
yields are going to be higher, given that we™re buying agency MBS, than they would be if we 
were buying Treasuries only. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDL
EY.  They™re not going to be higher.  They™re not going to 
drop as much, presumably. 
MR. LACKER.  Exactly.  They™re going to be higher than they would in the alternative. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In that respect we don™t care because they™re not being 
created. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, they would be even less created now. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I don™t actually think we know very much about what would happen to 
private-
label MBS yields because there™s so little issuance; there™s so little pricing information. 
It™s conceivable 
that pushing down agency MBS would also push down private-
label MBS 
yields, but I don™t think we know because there hasn™t been much issuance there and we don™t 

have information. 
MR. POTTER.  The stronger the housing market is, the more it should support t
he 
private-
label market coming back and having more capacity. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
9 Let™s go on to the consensus forecast.  This, of course, is 
still an exercise.  We™re still working to figure out what we™re going to do. 
You have in front of 
you the consensus forecast.  If you turn to page 3, and we look at the forecast inclusive of the 

policy action today, that would be best approximated, I guess, by the line 
that 
says, ﬁPlus 
$750 billion LSAP program.ﬂ  That™s the post-
action
 policy forecast, and note th
at it includes the 
jointly determined federal funds rate at the bottom.  What I™d like to do is ask each person to say 
9 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 
6).       
   
                           
            one of three things.  Either you broadly agree with the forecast as given or you agree with 
reservations
Šlet me go back a second.
  As part of our exercise 
the staff, I believe, is intending to 
write up our discussion as if it were a quarterly monetary policy report, and what they will do is 

if you agree but with reservations, they will write up your reservations in minutes 
style 
descri
bing without attribution what the concerns were that people raised about the forecast.  
The 
other possibility is if you just disagree with the forecast, you should say so and explain why, and 

then they™ll write up the monetary policy report with attributio
nŠthat™s the plan
Šand say, 
again, what it is that you disagree about.  Y
es, President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  I don™t understand.  Are these two different plans or are these two 
different options for us? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Two different options. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
  You have three choices.  When I go around the table, you 
have three choices. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  We 
can disagree anonymously or 
with attribution? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree modestly and anonymously. 

MR. LACKER. 
Mod
estly and anonymously. 
CHAIR
MAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree violently and for attribution.  [Laughter] 
MR. 
LACKER
.  And there™s a threshold.  
[Laughter] 
Or is it a 
trigger? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Can I bring up just one more thing? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  For those people who strongly disagree, we™re also asking 
them to submit in the next few daysŠby MondayŠa paragraph or so explaining why, and we 

will eventually put this into a document and then circulate it back to the Committee. 
                           
  
      
  
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is everybody o
kay? 
MS. DUKE.  Can I just ask one question about agreeing with reservation?  I
f we™re 
comparing it with 
the 
$750 billion 
LSAP program
, and in voting for alternative B, I didn™t 
assume that the purchases went past the
 end of the year, w
ould that be a reser
vation? 
I just want 
to know how to characterize 
it.  What does ﬁwith reservationﬂ mean? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
I think you assume
 that you should take the Tealbook 
assumption here, the $750 billion, and say:  Would the economic path shown here be a 
reasonabl
e approximation of what you would anticipate, given the policy action taken?  And if 
not, why not? 
MS. DUKE.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay?
  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Am I agreeing that this is a consensus forecast or am I agreeing that 
this is ac
tually my forecast?  Because I submitted my forecast
. And you can see point for point, 
you know, where they™re different and where they™re not. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We™re trying to determine if it is a consensus, and therefore, 
we™re asking if you yourself find itŠ 
MR. EVANS
.  Is it close enough? 
MR. BULLARD.  I think it™s a good consensus.  It™s not as accurate asŠ 

MR. 
FISHER
.  I™m trying to remember my specific numbers.  All I remember is that 
I was in the central tendency. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So why don™t 
you just report what you reported and say if 
you think it™s broadly consistent with this or not? 
            
            
             
     MR. WILCOX.  This is an effort to ascertain the extent to which participants can affiliate 
themselves with the consensus forecast. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Preside
nt Fisher. 
MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry. 

MR. TARULLO.  I think it™s not unlike what we do with policy statements, which is to 
say everybody would have written it somewhat differently, but in the end can you kind of go 

along with 
it? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Ye
s, that™s what it is.  That™s right. 
MR. FISHER.  You said there were three questions.  Do we agree with the forecast?  Do 
we have reservations?  If so, what are they?
  What™s the third? 
MS. 
DUKE.  Do you disagree? 
MS. YELLEN. Do 
you have a fundamentally different view? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you fundamentally disagree with the forecast?  And 
remember it™s not about whether you agree with the policy action or not.  This is conditional on 

the policy action.  Conditional on the policy action, do you agree more or less with the forecast 

that™s been presented? 
MR. FISHER.  And if we have reservations, we should submit them.  Is that what you 
were saying earlier? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, Janet, would you like to 
comment? 

MS. YELLEN. I
f you broadly agree but have some reservationŠyou™re slightly more 
optimistic about the forecast
, you have a different view on oil prices, but aside from that you 

basically agree this is a reasonable forecast contingent on the policy path
Šthen say you agre
e                  
                   
         with reservations.  And 
the write
-up, as in the minutes, 
will say 
people have expressed some 
reservations, but nevertheless associate themselves overall with the view. 
The staff will write up 
the discussion of what the reservations were.  But those who 
just have a basically different view 
of the forecast should say so, and then there will be a few paragraphs they™ll submit, 
and that will 

be included in the document 
with attribution
.  This would be a portion of a monetary policy 
report where there would be a discussion of the diversity of views.  Think of this as a diversity of 

views and say 10 people supported the forecast without reservation.  Several people had 

reservations of the following sort, and four had essentially different views.  Here are the 

submissions.  In your paragraph, 
you™d describe 
and 
explain why your views are essentially 
different. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Let me just make sure I understand.  We™re assuming the 
policy path, this policy action? 
MS. YELLEN. Yes. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes, tha
t™s what we are doing today. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  So we™re not having individual ﬁappropriate 
monetary policy.ﬂ 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
No.  It™s just given what we passed today, is this a reasonable 
forecast
? MR. LACKER.  Wait.  That™s different than a policy path. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I™m going to suggest something slightly different from what 
Chairman Bernanke said, which is:  Given the policy decision today, if you look at the numbers 

that go along with that 
$750 billion LSAP programŠforget about whet
her the 
$750 billion is 
correct or not because you may think it will end up being $500 b
illion or 
some 
other numberŠ 
                              
     
    
              
 do you think that™s a reasonable forecast? I
s it close enough for talking purposes?  But if you 
think this is the wrong model of the world, the economy is just going to look a lot different, so 
much so that you want to, in effect, dissent, then you™re in the third category.  The middle 

category is a little tougher, but I think the two ends are very clear. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Everybody, this is a trial run.  [Laughter]  W
e™re trying to 
find out what works and what doesn™t work.  We may have already found out what doesn™t work. 

President Fisher, did you have a comment or question or you™re okay? 
MR. FISHER.  I™m fine. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You™re 
fine.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
My question was would it be better to try to have a little 
bit better understanding about what ﬁclose toﬂ is or would 
it be everyone™s personal view of what 

ﬁclose toﬂ is? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It™s your judgment of whether you 
sufficiently disagree that 
you want to have your name 
identified. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it does matter if people disagree
 or have different 
parameters in terms of how close is ﬁclose to.ﬂ  
We can do it either way, but you could argue th
at 
if you think the standard error is more than X, then you should disagree, or you could be a 

perfectionist and you disagree for very minute changes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So all of this is about reporting.  We™re trying to report the 
sense of the Committee
, and so how you would 
like the sense of the Committee reported 
is 
basically the question. 
MS. YELLEN. 
Right.  I
f we were really doing this
, the Chairman would be 
wal
king out 
into a press conference
 with these numbers, explaining the policy action, and pu
tting these 
      
     
                        
             
   
      numbers out to the public and saying, ﬁThis gives you a description of how we envision the 
economy unfolding with the policy decisions.
ﬂ  And the question is:  Would you be comfortable 

with these numbers as what he walks out into a press confer
ence 
with
? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I understand all of that, but let™s imagine that there™s half 
the people on the Committee who disagree for very small tolerances and
 half the people 
have 
very large tolerances. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Then no.  It should be 
meaningful tolerances. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It would be better if we had a more common metric 
about what 
the tolerances are. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, put it this way
:  Are you willing to write two paragraphs for Dave 
Reifschneider?  [Laughter]  That™s it, right? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, no, that™s different.  That™s 
a fundamental 
dis
agreement. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
The way I would put it is this.  I
f the consensus forecast came 
out like this
, and you were the sort of person who 
in a speech 
would say, ﬁI want to make an 
important point that my 
personal 
unemployment rate forecast at the end of 2015 would be one-
tenth lower,ﬂ then you should say you have reservations.  [Laughter]  But if you perhaps feel 

uncomfortable about making a big distinction abou
t one-tenth or so, thenŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There™s a standard error
, though, 
implicit in that. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I think there 
are
 two things.  One, there™s obviously a huge 
confidence interval around this, and so one way to look at 
it is 
that 
many 
differences just blur. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course. 
There will 
always b
e fan 
charts
.          
   
      
             
             
   
  MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  But does it make it a material difference f
or monetary policy, 
and the question might be if it™s 
one-tenth or so off on inflation or unemployment, you would say 
probably not. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s a good way of phrasing it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans, did you have a comment? 

MR. EVANS.  I was just thinking we should probably start [l
aughter]
, and then we™ll 
figure outŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNAN
KE.  Excellent suggestion.  All right.  Who would like to go 
first?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART. I endorse it.
  [Laughter and applause] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Very good.
  Anyone? President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Is it a good consensus?  I do think it™s a good consensus.  T
here are 
issues here about the mix between the forecast and the policy assumptions.  The way I did it was 

I had more inflation coming in the out years, and then I applied the outcome-based policy rule, 

which would then have the funds rate moving in a different way from here, and so the policy 

assumption then starts to also look different.  So I™m not quite sure what to make of this exercise.  

It™s fine as a statement of where the Committee is, and I would endorse it in that sense
.  As a general rule on this whole process, I don™t think 
that it
™s a good thing to get into 
the 
business of 

trying to dissent on a forecast because there are
 zillions of points here and a lot of subtleties here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
This is why we™re having a tr
ial run. 
MR. BULLARD.  Mildly different, I guess. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Broadly endorse. 
       
   
          
    
  
           
      
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Conditional on the policy path, I broadly endorse. 

CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Duk
e. 
MS. DUKE.  I actually normally would endorse, except that the reservation I would 
express at this point is that I think 2013 will be significantly lower because of the fiscal cliff. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MS. DUKE. 
That would be a reservation. 
CHAIR
MAN BERNANKE.  That™s a good example of a reservation.  Very good.  
Anyone else?  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Broadly endorse, but I have a weaker outlook.  So that™s my only 
reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor 
Yellen
. MS. YELLEN.  Broadly endorse. 

CHAIRMAN BE
RNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I see what I would term modestly more inflationary pressures 
than what are in this forecast, maybe one-tenth or two-tenths or three-
tenths more in inflation. 
With that said
, it comes 
back to what the Vice Chairman
 was talking about, that the choices of 
the Committee seem to be averse to those kinds of upticks in inflation.  For my own view, I think 

I would say I see modestly more inflationary pressures than what are in this. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fine.
  Governor Stein. 
MR. STEIN.  
I broadly endorse the baseline.  I™m not sure if I would be a weak deviator 
on the conditional effect of policy in the sense that I think that the incremental effect of the 
          
   
           
               LSAP is going to be roughly half of what it™s projected to be.  I™m not quite sure where that puts 
me. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  You sound like a ﬁ
two
ﬂ to me. 
MR. STEIN.  That feels like a 
ﬁtwo
ﬂ to you? 
PARTICIPANT
.  Do you want to write two paragraphs? 
MR. 
STEIN
.  No, I don™t want to write 
any para
graphs.  I want to hide in the weeds.  
[Laughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren said he broadly endorses.  President 
Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  I modestly endorse it.  It might scare people in terms of my forecasting.  I 
was within the central tendency.  They might want to change their forecast based on where I 

would be, with the exception of the funds rate, and I™d have to think about that.  But generally, 
I endorse.  
I will say this, Mr. Chairman
: Fiscal cliff, no fiscal cliff, et cetera
Šand I said this in 
my write
-upŠgoing beyond the first part of 2013 is largely pure guesswork. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In some positive sense, that™s true.  In a normative sense, 
we do need to find some kind of plan. 
MR. FISHER.  I understand that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We h
ave to have some kind of projection to base our 
thinking on. 
MR. FISHER.  With that caveat, it™s a wonderful exercise. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Obviously, yes.  O
ne of the benefits of this exercise
, I hope, 
is that we will be able to show fan charts that will g
ive some sense of the uncertainty. 
President 
Pianalto. 
        
             
  
       
   
  
               
   MS. PIANALTO.  I broadly endorse the forecast, although my forecast is slightly weaker 
for 
GDP growth and unemployment in the later years 
partly because
, like Governor Stein, 
the 
effectiveness of poli
cy is just a little weaker in my forecast. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good.  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  I broadly endorse, but two things about the process as opposed to th
e substance
.  One, the issue that arose at the outset that Betsy mentioned is somethin
g that people 
are going to have to think about, which is, what if we emerge from a meeting with a policy 

action that really isn™t any of the ones that are listed there?
  And, secondly, this 
category 
two
ŠI have a feeling
Šis going to be problematic in the fo
llowing respect. I have heard several people 
already who might have fit themselves into 
category 
two, a
nd if you end up saying, ﬁWe™ve got a 
consensus forecast
Š14 of the 17 members of the FOMC had qualifications on it,ﬂ I™m not sure 
how powerful 
it becomes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, the interesting question is whether or not a number of 
them had the same qualification. If they™re all nitpicks, 
that™s one thing, but if everybody said, 
ﬁThis doesn™t take enough account of the fiscal cliff,ﬂ then that would be something that should 

be communicated I think. 
MR. TARULLO.  Fair enough.  T
here may be some utility in thinking about moving to a 
binary 
system 
as we do with the statement.  You are either endorsing or you are not, but giving 
people a chance 
to comment, so if they say something like Betsy said a minute ago, it could be 

included in the explanation of the consensus. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s fine. 

MR. TARULLO.  But that™s just something to think about. 
                 
    
     
                  
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  Thank you.  We are looking for suggestions.  Anyone 
else?  Vice Chairman
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I agree with Governor Tarullo.  You don™t have to frame 
it as a reservation.  You can just frame it as where people would prefer to tilt the forecast.  I™m 
with Betsy on the f
iscal restraint. I am assuming that 
we will get some fiscal restraint 
next year
, and it will be more problematic to the outlook, so we have somewhat weaker growth in 2013.  

That said, I think this is a pretty good forecast.  T
hat is why I was getting at t
he point of, how 
much do you disagree? I am pretty confident that the economy will be weaker in 2013 than this 

forecast, but if I take this whole thing in its entirety, I wouldn™t really quibble about it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I 
have a tiny reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, the question is, would you object to my 
hypothetically taking this, putting this on the screen, and saying, ﬁThis is the Committee™s 

consensus forecast of what the economy is going to look likeﬂ? 
VICE CH
AIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it would also be good, though, to say, ﬁA few people 
thought that 2013 could be a little weaker becauseﬂ blah, blah, blah.  But I would do it in 

Governor Tarullo™s two-
bucket camp
 rather than three-
bucket camp. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agr
ee. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thanks.  Anyone else? 

MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 
               
  
    
             
       
               
     MR. PLOSSER.  I would say my forecast differs from this, obviously, and I think it is 
likely to show up 
in the assumption about current policy.  We are going to see more inflationary 
pressures and less positive outlooks on output and employment. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 
MR. LACKER.  I still don™t have a clear, coherent sense of what policy I am supposed to 
be conditioning on.  Am I foreca
sting the Committee?  I think I am.  So on that basis, I might 
provide a good test case here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MR. LACKER.  First of all, coming into this, on appropriate policy, I was weaker in 
2013 by a couple of tenths.  And I saw inflation a couple of tenths stronger, closer to 2 
percent 

over the next 
year 
or two, getting to 2 
percent 
next year. 
So I would have put policy to 
rais
e rates earlier. 
Modifying that in terms of making it a forecast of the Committee™s action, I would 
mark up inflation in 2014. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sounds right.  Anyone else? 

MR. FISHER.  Can I ask a question on that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Forgive me.  I™m slower than everybody else at the table.  In releasing 
this, we would be releasing the funds path? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Releasing what? 

MR. FISHER.  The funds path, 
the fed funds rate forecast as well
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes
. MR. BULLARD. If you are a year earlier, is that a significant reservation?  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I™m sor
ry. 
                       
  
                
   
         MR. BULLARD.  A year earlier on the funds rate, is that a significant reservation? 
MS. DUKE.  But is that a difference in the policy path?  Because the policy path assumes 
2015 liftoff. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
  You could have 
a different reaction functio
n. MR. 
BULLARD
.  But then you™ve got to do your presumably out
come
-based
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
Based on the original line of comments where we asked you to 
condition on the forecast, and you submitted something 
that
 had higher inflation, I would have 
said t
hat you were a 
ﬁthree
ﬂ because you showed that, conditioned on sticking with the August 
statement
-type policy, you had much higher inflation than this forecast, and that should be 
exaggerated more based on the policy.  So I would have said that you™re a 
three. 
MR. BULLARD.  But I don™t think I am outside of these confidence bands. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I don™t think that is relevant.  It goes back to the question of, 
do you think that your forecast, from a policy perspective, would be materially different? 
MR. BULLARD. 
Again, I just don™t think getting into dissenting on a forecast is a 
sensible thing to do.  Has the Chairman done a good job of characterizing the center of the 

Committee?  Yes. I think yes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Lockhart. 

MR. 
LOCKHART.  I want to make sure I understand.  The next step is to write up a 
mock quarterly monetary policy report or something like that? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  I™m sorry.  Just a description of this discussion. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Right.  But we see how 
it is going to be communicated, how it is 
going to be implemented, is that right? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  That™s 
the purpose. 
                        
      
            MR. WILCOX.  Just the diversity of views portion. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  Okay. 

MS. DUKE.  For the mock exercise, in addition to my own fiscal cliff reservation, can I 
sign up to Sandy and Jeremy™s reservation about the effectiveness? 
MR. 
REIFSCHNEIDER
.  Oh, sure. 
MS. DUKE.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else?  [No response]  All right.  Yes? 

MR. POWELL.  I™m on that line b
etween the one and the two for exactly the same 
reason
.  I went with the one, but of course I do have the same reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
A question to be thinking about here is
:  What would 
Governor Powell do if he thought that the policy action is 
weaker than we anticipate, but the 
underlying economy is stronger, so that the outlook looks okay for him? 
MR. POWELL.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Because we are not showing a comparison, right?  We are 
just showing the ex post. 
MR.
STEIN
.  Oh, you™re just showing the ex post. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that™s the question.  T
hat™s what we™re discussing 
here.  We haven™t asked the question whether or not you think the baseline is adequate. 
MR. FISHER.  You might 
have to prepare for your press conference. 
CHAI
RMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Do you have a question or a comment? 
MR. FISHER.  Well, the plan is, once we get this nailed down, that you would then refer 
to it in your press conference. Is that correct? 
                             
   
     
            CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And then, we are hoping at some point t
o have a monetary 
policy report. 
MR. FISHER.  Which you would still refer to the consensus forecast in. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nothing is nailed down.  One possibility, which Governor 
Tarullo alluded to, is that we can™t do this in a timely way because we don™t know what the 

policy action is going to be soon enough, in which case it might be something that only appears 

in publication with the minutes, for example, three weeks later. 
MR. FISHER.  I agree with Governor Tarullo, by the way.  H
e makes an excellent
 point.  
My next question would be:  Could you summarize what we just discussed as though we were at 

a press conference? It probably would be difficult at this juncture. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would say that this is the forecast 
of the Committee.
 A few 
people disagreed, thinking that these policies would lead to higher inflation.  Most people 
agreed with the broad contours, except they pointed out a few issues related to the fiscal cliff and 

the efficacy of policy.  
President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. I™m a lit
tle confused.  Someone used the phrase ﬁa diversity section.ﬂ 
But you, at the beginning, describedŠI think you did in this contextŠ
a minutes
-like document, 
and in the minutes, of course, when they discuss participants™ views, the different views are sort 

of woven into the main narrative.  I wasn™t quite clear on what you guysŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I just learned about this five minutes ago myself. 

MR. LACKER.  Okay. Great. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I think the plan is to have a document that describes the 
consensus forecast, gives its main feature, 
and shows 
it in 
a minutes
-type discussion: ﬁ
The 
Committee discussed it. Most agreed with it
 but raised the following points anonymously.  
            
          
 President Lacker thought that it was
 a bunch of garbage.ﬂ  [Laughter]  And that would be the 
content. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay
, we will just have to start. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I hope this was helpful to you 
all
.  [Laughter]  Just 
so you have something to look forward to, our current plan is to talk about this exercise in 
October, so be sure and make your plane reservations now.  [Laughter] 
The next meeting is 
TuesdayŒWednesday, October 23Œ24.  
The press conference 
is 
at 2:15.  There will be a 
TV in 
the Special Library
, and lunch is available if you would like to stay.  No presentations are 
planned.  Thank you very much. 
END OF MEETING 
             
                                                
  Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
 on September
 12Œ13, 2012 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, September 12, 

2012, at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Thursday, September 13, 2012, at 8:30 a.m.  Those present 

were the following: 
Ben Bernanke, Chairman 

William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 

Elizabeth Duke 

Jeffrey M. Lacker 

Dennis P. Lockhart 

Sandra Pianalto 

Jerome H. Powell 

Sarah B
loom Raskin 
Jeremy C. Stein 

Daniel K. Tarullo 

John C. Williams 

Janet L. Yellen 
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, and Eric 
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Ko
cherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively 

William B. English, Secretary and Economist 
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary 

Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 

David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 

Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, Wil
liam Nelson, David 
Reifschneider, Glenn D. Rudebusch, William Wascher, and John A. Weinberg, Associate 
Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Govern
ors 
                                                                                                              Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; 
Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, 

Board of Governors 
Andreas Lehnert,
1 Deputy Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, 
Board of Governors 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Di
rector, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
Brian
 J. Gross,
2 Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 

Eric M. Engen, Michael G. Palumbo, and Wayne Passmore, Associate Directors, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Fabio M. Natalucci, Deputy 
Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Edward Nelson, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
Kelly J. Dubber
t, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, respectively 
Cletus C. Coughlin, Troy Davig, 
Mark E. Schweitzer, and Kei
-Mu Yi, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Cleveland, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 
1 Attended Wednesday™s session only. 
2 Attended Thursday™s session only. 
                                                               Lorie K. Logan, Jonathan P. McCarthy, Giovanni Olivei, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,
3 Vice 
Presidents, Federal R
eserve Banks of New York, New York, Boston, and New York, 
respectively 
Michelle Ezer,
4 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
3 Attended after the discussion o
n potential effects of a large
-scale asset purchase program. 
4 Attended the discussion on potential effects of a large
-scale asset purchase program. 
                           
                   
            
                                                          Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
September 12
Œ13, 2012 September 12 Session 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  Our first item is 
a staff report 
on the potential effects of large-
scale asset purchases.  Seth Carpenter will lead, but Vice 
Chairman 
Dudley would like to introduce the other presenter. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would like to introduce Michelle Ezer from the 
Markets Group.  Michelle and I actually had the interesting experience of writing a paper on the 
case for TIPS
, right in the heart of 
the financial crisis, along with Jennifer Roush
. I am not really 
sure how I managed to do that during that period, but, obviously, Jennifer and Michelle did most 

of the work.  So she is a coauthor. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay
, thank you.  Seth. 
MR. 
CARPENTER.
1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the 
material that™s 
labeled ﬁPotential Effects of a Large
-Scale Asset Purchase Program
.ﬂ  The Committee received three memos from the staff discussing various aspects of 
potential new large
-scal
e asset purchase (LSAP) programs.  I will discuss some 
considerations about how LSAP programs might be structured, and Michelle will 

discuss the balance sheet and income implications, along with the associated exit 

issues. 
When considering the financial and economic effects of LSAPs, the staff analysis 
starts from 
a term 
structure 
model that embeds Treasury and MBS supply factors as 
determinants of 
the yield 
curve.  
These effects depend on market participants™ beliefs 
about the entire trajectory of the SOMA
 portfolio™s holdings of securities and the 
types of those securities.  The FRB/US model assumes that declines in the 
10-year 
Treasury yield pass through roughly one-
for
-one to 
other market rates. 
In addition, 
the lower Treasury rate reduces the discount 
factor in pricing equities, boosting stock 
prices.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar falls as well.  For LSAPs that 

include purchases of MBS, there is an additional assumed reduction in MBS and 

mortgage rates.  Finally, the changes in these market 
variables are 
used to simulate 
the macroeconomic effects of these 
purchases using the FRB/US model. 
Of course, the results depend critically on the models used and a wide set of 
assumptions, any of which could be challenged.  First, in the staff models, the one-
1 The materials used by Mr. Carpenter and Ms. Ezer are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 
                   
             
                    
  
                     
      for
-one pass
-through from the 10-
year Treasury yield to other market rates could 
misstate the connection 
among 
these rates
.  For example, frictions like 
capacity 
restrictions 
for originations may prevent mortgage rates from fully adjusting
, at least 
in the short run.  Another source of uncertainty concerns the embedded effects on 

equity prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar.  Some event studies of 

previous unconventional balance sheet actions point to smaller effects than 

incorporated in
to staff analysis.  Finally, the macroeconomic effects of the changes in 

asset prices are calculated using the FRB/US model, and other models would 
of 

course 
yield results that could be larger or smaller. In short, while the projections 
represent the staff™s best assessment, the effects are clearly subject to considerable 

uncertainty. 
Buying either longer
-term Treasury securities or MBS should, in principle, put 
downward pressure on longer-
term interest rates and
, so, stimulate the economy. 
Although staff models suggest that purchases of MBS have 
a somewhat smaller effect 
than Treasury purchases on most longer-
term interest rates, they have somewhat 
larger effects on mortgage rates, and when translated into estimated macroeconomic 

outcomes, the differences 
are fairly small, especially relative to the substantial 
uncertainty that surrounds such estimates.  As a result, the staff memos did not 

provide clear guidance regarding the allocation of LSAPs between purchases of 

longer-
term Treasury securities and purchases of MBS. 
Looking at your first exhibit, to illustrate the macroeconomic effects that are 
implied by the staff models, we compare a projection in which the MEP, the Maturity 

Extension Program, is continued as plannedŠ
the solid
, dark blue lineŠ
to a 
projection that assumes 
that 
the Committee instead ends the MEP and purchases $600 
billion in Treasury securities and $400 
billion in MBS by late next year
.  That™s 
labeled 
option 1 
as in the staff memo
 and it™s the dotted blue line.  In addition to 
lowering term premiums from LSAPs, this option is also assumed to put downward 

pressure on longer-
term rates by pushing off the first increase in the federal funds rate 
by about six months.  This LSAP program is projected to boost real GDP, 
lower the 

unemployment rate, and increase the inflation rate somewhat.  As a consequence, 

more rapid progress toward both of the Committee™s goals is made.  The staff 

memorandum provided prior to your last meeting concluded that the purchases under 

such a 
program would not likely lead to a deterioration in market functioning.  

Michelle will 
later 
discuss some of 
the anticipated effects of the program on the 
Federal Reserve™s balance sheet and income. 
As I noted 
before
, the estimated interest rate effect of 
an LSAP depends on the 
public™s understanding of the FOMC™s intended plans for purchases and exit.  This 

consideration is particularly important for a flow
-based
 or open-
ended program that 
continues until a certain economic outcome is achieved.  If the public understands the 

FOMC™s stopping rule and has the same forecast for the economy as the Committee, 

and the economy evolves according to those projections, then our models would 

suggest that the flow-
based LSAP is 
roughly equivalent to a stock-
based LSAP 
of the 
same ultimate size.  Of course, the economy would likely not proceed exactly in line 

with expectations, so under a flow-
based LSAP, the anticipated total amount of asset 
             
      
        
         
          
                                 purchases would 
likely 
be more state dependent and evolve as the economy evolves.  
Option 4 in the memo entitled ﬁOptions for an Additional LSAP ProgramﬂŠ 

presented here 
as the dashed red lineŠwas intended to correspond roughly to such a 
program when the economy faces an adverse shock, and, as a result, purchases end up 

at a level tha
t is higher than originally assumed. If the ultimate size of purchases in 

this case is $2 trillion, our models suggest that the net effect would be somewhat 

smaller than if, from the beginning, a $2 trillion LSAP had been implemented.  

However, a flow-
bas
ed approach, if communicated clearly to the public, also could 
boost business and consumer confidence by reducing the odds of adverse tail 

outcomes and limiting the expected variance of economic outcomes.  This confidence 

effect is not captured in the staf
f projections but could be important
.  Alternatively, if 
the 
stopping rule is not clear, and the public believed that the Committee might stop 

purchases somewhat earlier than the Committee actually intended, then the interest 

rate effect 
could be reduced relative to what our models suggest.  
However, a
s the 
public came to understand the Committee™s stopping rule, the expected size of the 

SOMA portfolio would revise up, and the interest rate effects would become larger.  

Michelle is now going to discuss the 
balance sheet projections and some of the issues 
related to the exit. 
MS. EZER. 
Thanks, Seth.  As Seth mentioned, I will be discussing the balance 
sheet and income projections described in the LSAP options memo and associated 

exit issues.
  I plan to focus on the same two LSAP options Seth discussed, though the 
memo presented several options.  Turning to the top-left panel of exhibit 2, you can 

see the path of the portfolio under a baseline scenario in which MEP is completed and 

options 1 and 4 from the memo.  Under the latter two options, the portfolio grows 

significantly as a result of the asset purchases. 
Consistent with the exit principles, we 
assume that 
6 months prior to the first increase in the target federal funds rate, 
securities are allowed to ma
ture without reinvestment, and 6 
months after that first 

increase, sales of agency securities begin. These actions normalize the size of the 

portfolio through time.  The addition of a new LSAP program extends the period of 

time between the start of asset sales and when the portfolio normalizes in size. 
For 
example, under option 1 it takes 41 months for the portfolio size to normalize after 

the initiation of MBS sales.
  This is 6 months longer compared 
with 
the MEP 
scenario. 
In terms of Federal Reserve income, cumulative remittances to the Treasury over 
the projection period are lower than in a scenario with no additional LSAP.  
The 

lower remittances reflect higher inte
rest expense and the larger capital losses from 
MBS sales. 
Looking at the top-right panel, until 2016, remittances are higher under 
the LSAP scenarios, because of the higher interest income from the larger portfolio 

and minim
al additional interest expense
.  Thereafter, income is lower as a result of 
higher interest expense and larger capital losses. 
Under option 
1, annual remittances 
are projected to bottom out near zero.  By contrast, under option 
4, remittances fall to 

zero for more than 5 years, and a 
deferred asset is created. 
Of course, income and balance sheet projections can be sensitive to interest rate 
projections, and those projections are subject to uncertainty.  
One gauge of the 
               
          
       
   
              
       
    
  
           
              interest rate risk in the portfolio is presented in the middle
-left panel. Here, we 
present the projections of Federal Reserve remittances under an assumption that 

1 year after federal funds liftoff, the federal funds rate and 10
-year Treasury yield are 
100 basis points above the baseline levels, and these higher levels 
persist for the 
remainder of the projection period.  Under all of the LSAP options shown, the higher 

interest rate paths result in a period of no remittances to the Treasury and the creation 

of a deferred asset, as shown in the middle-right panel.  Under option 4, 
remittances 

to the Treasury would cease for a considerable number of years, and a substantial 

deferred asset would be created. 
The portfolio projections highlight two implications that an LSAP may have on 
the exit strategy.
 First, as shown in the bottom panel, the level of reserves would be 
higher at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate.
 Second, in order to 
remain consistent with the existing exit principles, MBS sales would need to take 

place over a shorter period than 5 
yea
rsŠthe period currently assumed in the 
projections.  
Absent a shorter MBS sales period, or other changes to the exit strategy, 

the size of the portfolio would not normalize within 2 to 3 years of the initiation of 

asset sales as anticipated by the exit strategy principles. 
Starting with the first point, under option 
1, reserve balances will be about 
$2.3 trillion at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate
Šabout $1 
trillion 
larger than expected under the current policy
, and also $1 trillion
 larger than assumed 
in June 2011.  
While increasing the IOER rate will raise short
-term market rates by 
itself, reserve
-draining tools can help to ensure a closer connection between the rates, 

and greater use of these tools may be needed
, given the increased quantity of reserves.  
The memo entitled ﬁThe 
Effect of an 
Additional $1 Trillion LSAP on the E
xit 
Strategyﬂ discussed the status of each of the different draining tools.  However, it is 

too early to provide specific details of a drain
ing plan
, because such a plan will 
depend on how markets evolve and the lessons learned once these tools are used in 

large scale. 
Turning to the second point, the exit strategy principles themselves will not have 
to change as a result of a new LSAP. The e
xpectation
, however, 
that the size of the 
balance sheet would be normalized within 2 to 3 years of assets sales might not hold, 

depending on the size of the 
asset purchase
 program.  Under option 1, by reducing the 
period of asset sales to 
3½ years from the
 5 years assumed in making the projections, 
the portfolio size would normalize within the assumed 2 to 3 
years. 
The s
taff 
currently believes that the faster average pace of MBS sales would likely be 

manageable from a market
-functioning perspective.  
That said, reducing the sales 
period would concentrate capital losses and result in Federal Reserve remittances 

declining to zero for a few years and create a deferred asset. 
In contrast, assumptions 
associated with the exit strategy principles would need to b
e altered under a $2 trillion 
LSAP like that under option 4.  Agency sales alone would not be enough to normalize 

the size of the balance sheet within 
2 to 3 
years of the initiati
on of asset sales in this 
case. 
Moreover, sales of securities in the volume envisioned under option 4 over a 
three
-year perio
d may cause market disruptions. 
          
                       
                  
In any event, the Committee may wish to review its exit principles periodically, 
particularly if the Committee implemented a flow
-based LSAP program, where the 
ultimate size o
f purchases would be unknown.  Adjustments to the principles could 
include more heavily relying on asset sales as a tool to drain reserves, for example, by 

expanding it to include a moderate pace of Treasury security sales. Asset sales could 

also occur so
oner.  
On balance, although the current exit strategy principles remain 
valid, additional analysis will be useful to determine 
whether alternate strategies 
might prove more helpful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Seth and I will be happy to 

answer any question
s. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Of course, this is just a summary of 
a lot of work that the staff has 
been doing on all aspects of asset purchases. You have received a 
number of memos.  Also, let me just mention that a little bit later this morning we will talk about 
the consensus forecast, which gives, in more detail, the staff projections of the effect
s of 
programs of different sizes on the economy.  
Let me now open the floor in case there are any 
questions 
for staff.  President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  I appreciate all of the 
work that went into this.  It has been quite helpful to me in thinking about what is going on.  Seth 

has made 
a good summary of the uncertainties and the range and assumptions that are needed to 

get the po
int estimates. 
I want to focus on two things. 
One has to do with the assumptions about market segmentation and 
pass
-through.  In 
some sense, the FRB
/US assumes
Šas you mentioned, SethŠ
that the 
pass
-through from the 
reduction of Treasuries to corporate and mortgage-
backed securities is one
-for
-one, which 
suggests, as you alluded to, that there is more segmentation across duration than there is across 

asset classes
, in the case of the models.  So one question I have would be, suppose that actually 
there was more segmentation across asset classes than across the term structure?  In other w
ords, 
if 
5-year 
Treasuries
 were a better substitute for 10-
year 
Treasuries
 than mortgage-
backed 
securities or corporate bonds are for 10
-year securities
Šwhich is the way it is kind of structured 
in the modelŠhow would that change your analysis of these e
ffects?  That is one question. 
                           
   
       
      
          
             
  
 And the second question is, you talked about the assumptions that are made and 
the 
uncertainties, and yet what we really got
, at the end of the day, w
ere 
some point estimates. 
So if 
I had to push you and I wanted to think about standard errors on these point estimates, how big 
do you think they are truly likely to be
?  Can we tell the difference, given the uncertainties 
among these different strategies
?  W
hat 
is 
your assessment of 
that? 
So those are the two 
questions I have. 
MR. CARPENTER.  Okay. 
The first question, what if there were more segmentation 
across asset types than across 
maturit
ies
? I think pretty clearly what you would see in that case 
is that we might have an effect on Treasury yields if we are buying 
Treasurie
s, and that would 
tend to push down 
Treasury 
yields and widen the spread relative to other asset types.  And to the 
extent that it™s other interest rates that have a direct effect on economic activity, you would get a 

smaller effect.
  So I think, in principle, that™s the way it would go. 
The hard part there
, I think, 
is there has clearly got to be a little bit of that going on.  And 
the previous memo about market functioning that we sent around said we might get to the point 

where you are buying so much that you are dislocating the 
Treasury 
curve from the rest of 
market interest rates. I think we are very sensitive to that possibility, and I think the staff 

conclusion so far is that we haven™t gotten to that point.  And I think some of the other studies of 

LSAPs and how they work also point to pretty substantial spillovers to other asset classesŠ
some 

Fed studies and some academic studies.
  So I think that™s a reasonable hypothesis to maintainŠ
I think 
it™s something that we will want to worry a lot about, esp
ecially if the purchases were so 
large that they were to somehow disrupt market functioning.  But my reading so far is that we are 

not there yet
, for some of those reasons. 
             
               
      
      
             
    
   Another reason isŠespecially if you go back to some of the previous LSAPsŠ
as the 
Desk has made clear what segment of the market we are buying
, there ha
ve been some pretty 
clear adjustments in interest rates at different points along the curve
.  This
 suggests 
that the 
maintained hypothesis that we have
, that the maturity matters a lot
, is coming through in some of 
the event studies.  W
hen the Desk helped the market understand exactly what the maturity 
distribution of purchases 
was 
going to be, we saw some movements of yields at the long end 
relative to the belly of the curve that suggest t
hat people see this sort of segmentation across 
maturities.  In addition, I think some of the reaction 
to the MEP caused us to feel 
a little bit better 
about that assumption.  The movement in the short rate relative to the long rate, once you control 
for e
xpectations, seemed 
to conform reasonably well with some of the inte
rest rate models that 
we have. 
So I think the short answer is you would get a widening of spreads, and to the extent that 
Treasuries are
n™t 
the thing that matter
s for economic activity, you would get less of an effect.  
On the other hand, if you were to do mortgage-
backed securities purchases, and the same 
hypothesis came up, then presumably you™d get a bigger effect just on the MBS rate, and 

presumably mortgages a
s well.
  And so the scenario you bring up might be an argument for 
having both asset classes
Šan argument
 that we didn™t cover in the memo.  I
f there is 
this 
segmentation across asset types, then buying both 
Treasuries
 and MBS may be a good thing to 
do, because then you will be able to affect both of those 
rates
, instead of relying on the purchases 
of 
Treasuries
 to also push down mortgage and MBS yields along with it. 
MR. PLOSSER.  To interrupt just a second on that point, though, that begs the question 
about 
buying MBS
Šlet™s say, 
even if it might help the mortgage market
.  You don™t have any 
evidence on whether that pass
-through 
to corporate and other asset classes is either differential or 
            
      
      
                 
the same or less than it would be with 
Treasuries
? Are you assuming 
that other asset classes 
would follow the same amount then, in that kind of story? 
MR. CARPENTER.  Right.  So I was trying to go into the counterfactual world where we 
are assuming this asset segmentation
.  And so there, 
there are 
lots of other hypotheses.  O
ur 
models sort ofŠ
and they are empirical models, where we get the results based on actual data
Š suggest that the purchases of MBS do have the same general effect on longer-
term interest rates 
by pulling out the longer-term assets and pushing things down.  I
f we had a different model, we 
would have to confront all of those same questions that you asked, including
, if there is a 
segmentation, what sort of 
pass
-through would there be?  But the models that we have, and the 
estimation that we have done, sugge
st that we are getting more or less the same effect on longer
-term rates of MBS and Treasuries
.  I was just saying, in the alternate version of the world, 
where 
there is a segmentation, 
it might be an argument for buying two different types of assets that 
we 
didn™t discuss in the memo. 
Your second question about standard errors is a really good one, and it is hard.  There are 
lots of different models that we have coming together, and I think Dave can probably speak 

really knowledgeably about the standard errors, especially from the FRB/US model.  But there is 

layering
, model upon model, 
to try to get these effects. 
I think we feel pretty good that we know 
for sure the sign of the first derivative, which is in what direction these things would happen.  

We pr
esented a lot of results, though, for different-
sized LSAPs in the memos, as Michelle 
pointed outŠ$750 
billion
, $1 trillion, 
$2 trillion. 
I think we can™t say with any confidence that 
we know the difference between a $750 billion LSAP and a $1 trillion LS
AP.  We are pretty sure 
we know that the 
$1 trillion
 one does more, but those are so close to each other that I don™t have 
       
              
      
                      
     
     
   
         much confidence in being able to differentiate.  
It™s t
hat sort of uncertainty 
I see, b
ut I don™t 
know if you want to talk about the 
macro effects. 
MR. PLOSSER.  I™m sorry.  Just to push it just a little bit.  So rather than the difference 
between 
$750 billion 
and 
$1 trillion, let™s just take one of them, the 
$1 trillion
 one.  And you 
estimate, what was it, 62 basis points on the unempl
oyment rate after two years?  Was that it? I 
can™t remember the exact number.  Whatever that number was, can you give me a standard 
error 
on that point estimate? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I™m going to come to that directly.  
First
, just to reiterate what 
Seth s
aid, your logic is correct.  To the extent that you think 
that the 
pass
-through 
from buying 
Treasuries 
into corporate 
bond yields
, stock market prices
, the exchange rate, 
and 
things like 
that
, are 
less than in the model simulations
, you are going to get smaller results. 
Second, I agree with Seth that the 
pass
-through 
effects 
that 
we have in there
Šas we have 
been saying right from the start back in 2008, early 2009Š
are
 highly uncertain.  And as time has 
gone on, I think the one source of uncertainty that has gone down is the 
concern
 about whether 
purchases 
would have any effect
.  At least we 
now 
think they ha
ve an effect. 
But having said 
that, 
there is 
still 
much uncertainty around these estimates. 
In terms of actually coming up with a confidence interval, I can™t do that, but I c
an say 
the following qualitative things that 
I think 
are helpful. 
First, take the model that Min We
i and 
Canlin 
Li 
developed that we are mainly using for pricing the effects on Treasuries
 and MBS.  
Now, that model kicks out a standard error.  I don™t know what it is, but it does not 
have 
tight 
error bands.  There is considerable width 
to the confidence intervals.  That said, we think the 
number is reasonable.  But could the number 
be somewhat smaller or somewhat bigger?  Yes. 
One point on why 
it could be bigger is, if you go back to the first LSAP, the event studies 
                                        
          
           suggested 
the LSAP
 might have lowered 
Treasury 
yields by 100 basis points.  
In the analysis that 
Min and 
Canlin
 are doing, it™s 50.  So that™s an example, 
where they are not necessarily taking 
the highest-
side estimates. 
There are other studies that suggest that we could be getting lower effects on financial 
markets than in the FRB/US analysis.  On the other hand, 
FRB
/US ignores some things, 
such as 
the 
potential 
pass
-through to house prices
; it has no effect 
in the simulations
.  And, there 
are 
confidence effects
 that Seth alluded to.  Even if you knew what the financial effects would be, 
there would still be a subs
tantial confidence interval for the economic effects
.  I don™t have them 
off the top of my head, but we have generated confidence bands for FRB/
US 
impulse responses 
over the years.  They are a lot like 
those in other models.  They are fairly significant 
around what 
the unemployment rate 
effect 
would be.  
The effect
 could be considerably closer to zero, or it 
could be bigger.  L
et™s say that
, for 
a given LSAP, the point estimate is a half a percentage point 
on the unemployment rate after three years
Šthat™s t
rue 
for the way we are scoring 
alternative 
B. Could it be a quarter?  Yes.  A quarter 
is certainly inside the 
70 percent 
confidence interval
.  Could it be three-quarters of a percentage point? Yes.  That would be inside the 70 
percent
.  So 
that™s just sa
ying what
, I think
, everyone agrees upon: there are v
ery wide confiden
ce intervals 
on these effects. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  While I was listening to Seth™s disclaimers at the beginning, it sort of 
sounds like an Allegra ad on television [l
aughter]
: These are the risks, et cetera.  And the papers 
actually were quite good.  The paper you particularly referenced had a lot of disclaimers in it.  

And what I am interested in seeing vetted more thoroughly is the degree to which this 

compounds the complexi
ty of a
n exit when we decide to exit. 
          
          
                        
    
     It seems to me one of the virtues of, 
particularly
, ﬁThe 
Effect of an 
Additional $1 T
rillion 
LSAP 
on the E
xit 
Strategy
ﬂ was the discussion of substantial uncertainty.  There are lots of 
quotes in there that are qualified. 
It seems to me that the proponents of 
an extended LSAP would 
take a view from a signaling channel perspective that one of its benefits is that 
it is effective 
precisely because it makes it more difficult to either raise short
-term interest rates or sh
rink the 
balance sheet for some time.
  And in a way, what I am concerned aboutŠand I am interested in 
learning more
Šis the degree to which we tie the hands of our successors, or if not tieŠ
maybe 
that is too strong a wordŠwe tangle their hands, and how much 
more difficult the exit strategy 
becomes. 
It strikes me that the stronger the recovery
Šthat is, the more rapidly we achieve 
equilibrium interest rates
Šthe harder it is going to be for us to exit.  And I would like to see that 
vetted a little bit more. 
I thought the papers touched on that, particularly the paper you referred 
to, but I think it would be helpful, Mr. Chairman, if we got a better sense of what complexities 
this imposes upon exit at the right time. Just a comment. 
MR. CARPENTER.  No, that™s 
really helpful. 
MR. FISHER.  I don™t know what your take is on this. 

MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely.  We clearly have a lot of details to write down.  So if 
the Committee wanted to exit 
next week
, or something like that, we would have lots and lots and 
lots an
d lots of details to write down, none of which are we prepared to give you right now, 
because the world presumably, between now and exit, is going to change.  And so it is going to 

take some time. 
That said, I just want to leave you with one thought.  When 
we were writing these 
memos, one of the first points that we wanted to have clear in our heads before writing themŠ
all 

of the staff who were working on this, including staff at the Desk who are experts on both 
      
  
                            
      
    
           
  
financial markets as well as 
the execution of things and the staff 
at the Board
Šwas
, does 
anybody think that if we were to do another LSAP as envisioned in these memos, that when the 
Committee wants to tighten monetary policy
, the staff would not be able to follow through on 
that
?  Because I wanted to make sure that everybody was able to look in their heart of hearts and 
say, ﬁWe think that the Committee will be able to tighten policy appropriately to hit its
 dual 
mandate,ﬂ and everybody said, ﬁYes, we think we are in that situation.ﬂ How we do it is not 

perfectly clear yet
, for a variety of reasons
.  But we would have had to write a very, very 
different memo
, I think, if we really thought there was some risk to the conduct of monetary 
policy in terms of our ability to execute the exit strategy. 
MR. FISHER.  You point out in the memo that there is a learning process here, 
in terms 
of the different tools that might be used.  But I still think we should press this in our discussion 

before proceeding. 
MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely. 

MR. FISHE
R.  Yes, sir. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I 
want to follow up on one point b
ecause it also relates to what 
President Plosser was talking about.  I think, 
whether it is connected to fear that we won™t be able 

to exit or whether it is a signaling that the Committee is willing to be more accommodative 

persistently out in the future, those policy expectations 
can have a big effect 
on some of the 
results
.  Ofte
n, the way we score thingsŠand I think I threw out a half a percentage point a 
second agoŠ
doesn™t take 
into account this additional signaling effect
 about the future path of the 

funds rate t
hat 
you potentially can get.  T
here is some evidence from the even
t studies that you 
did get 
it with the first two LSAP programs
Šthat by announcing 
a program
, you are also 
sending the signal that you are going to be more willing to keep rates lower for longer. 
      
           
               
        
           
    MR. FISHER.  That™s what I was
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right. 
At least as far as the model scores it, if that™s fully 
credible, if the expected funds rate path the market has really flattens out, in principle, you get a 
nontrivial kick from that. 
MR. CARPENTER. 
The only thing to highlight, though, is the difference 
between a 
willingness to keep the interest rate lower
 for longer versus an ability 
to raise them
.  And we 
don™t currently worry about the second partŠwe don™t worry about the ability to raise interest 

rates.  But what the Committee decides to do, obviously, is about the willingness to keep interest 

rates lower
. MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Does the FRB/US model allow you to 
isolate the kind of intermediate estimates
Šthat might be credit aggregates or asset price index 
levels
Šthat fit between lower interest rates and GDP growth, so that you could actually get a 
sense of the transmission mechanism working through the model? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
You can snip cer
tain transmission mechanisms and see what it 
does to the total effect 
if you
 just zero it out.  We have done experiments like that, and what it 
shows is, roughly speaking, changing 
Treasury 
yields, if it doesn™t go out into any other asset 
prices, doesn™t do anything in the model, to a first approximation.  
What matters is that it goes 

into private long-term interest rates, like MBS and corporates; second, that it goes into 
the 
stock 

market; and, third, that it goes into exchange rates.  So you can think of 
it as 
three channels
: cost 
of capital, wealth effects, and exchange rate.
  The model says each of those is worth 
roughly a 
third of the overall effect.  So if you didn™t believe one of the channels was operating, or you 
      
                                  
  thought it was operating only half 
as effectively as it usually does, you could then scale the 
numbers down with that rough math.  And that would be approximately correct.  
But in terms of 
what it implies for bank lending, or something like that, no, the model doesn™tŠ 
MR. LOCKHART. 
It doesn™t explicitly estimate the
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It doesn™t have any explicit predictions about what happens to 
bank lending or anything like that. 
MR. LOCKHART.  So to simplify, for my purposes, the exercise assumes some kind of 
historic
al correlation between lower interest rates and economic activity. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Which may or may not prevail in this current situation. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Which may or may not prevail, with one very important 
caveat.  Because housing is at such an extraordinarily low percentage of GDP, in essence, 
that 

historical correlation has been marked down in these analyses.  Ordinarily housing is a big 

source of a kick.  In these scenarios, the direct channel on housing construction activity is worth 

hard
ly anything.  It™s a little bit, but it™s very small.  That could be right or wrong, but in the 
results that Seth was showing and 
that 
were in all the other analys
is we™ve sent you, 
there is,
 in 
that very important sense, 
an attenuation of the effectivenes
s of monetary policy, whether it™s 
conventional or unconventional right now. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to follow up on this issue 
about confidence intervals.  In 
figure
 1, there would be data uncertainty; there would be 
uncertainty about transmission channels; there would be uncertainty about models.  If you 

layered all of that together, you are going to get very wide confidence intervals.  But on 
              
          
    
   
          
              exhibit 
2, where we are
 looking at the SOMA holdings, there we can sort of mechanically map 
out, more or less, what is going to happen.  There is some uncertainty based on interest rates
, and 
so on, but 
I just want to be clear on this
: This is
 much more solid, I would say, than page 1, 
which is very uncertain and very speculative about 
what the effects might be. Is that a fair 
assessment? 
MS. EZER. 
Our portfolio projections depend importantly on the interest rate 
assumptions that were provided, so those confidence intervals will feed through into our 
projections when it comes to things like Federal Reserve income over time.
  When it comes to, 
say, the top-
left
 panel, the path of the portfolio over time, the confidence interval is probably a 
little bit smaller
, provided that the 
assumptions that we made about the timing of liftoff and the 
strategy used for exit remain constant.
  There the confidence band would be in your projections 
for prepayments on your MBS portfolio.  But since you are assuming that you are going to get 

rid o
f your holdings of agency securities over a set period of time, it is just going to change kind 
of the wiggles in how MBS declines over that period.  But we would still eliminate it over a 
five
-year period with confidence. 
MR. BULLARD.  Just one other comment, Mr. Chairman.  On exhibit 2, 
panel
 4, ﬁD
eferred 
Asset.
ﬂ  T
hat is kind of a nice term
, ﬁdeferred asset.
ﬂ As far as I know, the Committee 
has never used the deferred asset.  It strikes me as a possible political firefight to bring that into 

play.  
All 
of the scenarios here, other than 
option 1, if I™m reading this correctly, would bring the 
deferred asset into play
, with possible repercussions, I think, 
for the Federal Reserve. 
MR. CARPENTER. 
Just a small bit of clarification:  I
t has never been the case that we 
have had
, for the Federal Reserve 
System as a whole
, a deferred asset
.  It has 
been the case on 
several occasions that there has been a deferred asset for a given Reserve Bank. 
        
       
                     
     
        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think the defense in that case would be that 
the total, 
which was including the very high 
remittances
 early in the period, still would be higher than 
historical norms. 
MR. POTTER.  That™s correct. 
MR. BULLARD.  That might be a hard story to tell when the time comes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair
man
, you have a two-hander? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
  Yes.  I think the confidence intervals on interest rates are 
going to be almost proportionate to the confidence intervals on the real economy variables, 

because you are not going to know what the trajectory o
f short
-term rates is going to be or the 
shape of the yield curve. And, in fact, you are probably even more uncertain about the shape of 

the yield curve because you have never gone from purchasing all of these assets to selling all of 

these assets.  So we
 don™t really know how the market is going to react to that. 
The second thing I just want to note very briefly is a lot of this also depends on what 
monetary framework you are actually going back to.  And the presumption of the staff memo is 

that we are going back to a 
corridor system.  But you might decide, as you go through this, that 

maybe IOER works pretty well. 
And 
you might actually want to go back to a floor system that 
would allow you quite a bit more discretion in terms of how your exit actually works.  And that 

would feed into a lot of these projections.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Again, I want to thank the staff for all of the work 
you 
did to help prepare us for this meeting, including the work on LSAPs, but also work on other 
tools like IOER.  So we appreciate it very much.  
Let me turn to item 
2 and cal
l on Simon Potter 
to discuss financial developments. 
                 
                             
    
                                                                             MR. POTTER.
2 Thank you
, Mr. Chairman.  Over the course of the 
intermeeting 
period, global financial markets were dominated by three areas of focus: 
the ECB™s 
new Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) pr
ogram, fluctuating expectations for 
further policy accommodation from the FOMC, and continuing concerns over global 

growth prospects.  By the end of the 
intermeeting
 period, market perceptions of the 
effectiveness of policy measures to at least attenuate t
ail risks facing the global 
economy contributed to improved risk sentiment in financial markets, as seen in 

higher advanced economy sovereign yields and stock markets. 
I will begin with developments in U.S. interest rates, which in the Treasury 
market were moderately higher over the 
intermeeting
 period.  The upper-
left panel 
shows the decomposition of changes in nominal yields for 5- and 10-
year securities 
during key portions of the intermeeting period.  
Nominal 
Treasury yields increased 
significantly early in the period, with the 10-year yield up by more than 35 basis 

points at one point.  Most of the 
initial increase in yields was driven by improved risk 
sentiment on expectations of a forceful ECB policy respons
e, as well as by stronger
-than
-expected U.S. economic data
.  The rise in yields partially reversed following the 
release of the August FOMC minutes and continued somewhat after the Jackson Hole 

symposium.  The move lower in the 5-
year real component was co
nsistent with 
growing expectations for policy easing.  
To date, there is little evidence of worries 
of the fiscal cliff affecting pricing in the Treasury or other markets. 
At the same time, inflation compensation
, as derived from inflation
-indexed 
securities
, rose at the 5
- and 10-
year tenors
.  Higher energy prices contributed to the 
increase in inflation breakevens, particularly at shorter maturities
.  However, spot and 
forward 5
-year breakeven inflation rates remain well within recent historical ranges, 
as seen in the upper-right panel. 
As shown in the middle-left panel, dealers continue to assign the highest 
probability of a first increase in the 
target
 rate to the second half of 2015.  However, 
the distribution has continued to shift from earlier liftoff
 dates and into 2015 and 
beyond.  The survey results are broadly consistent with market-
implied measures of 
liftoff, as market prices indicate significant odds that the target rate will not be 

incre
ased until the middle of 2015. 
Immediately following the F
OMC statement on August 1, interest rates increased
, as markets had been pricing in close to even odds of an extension of the forward 

guidance
.  The middle-right panel shows an event study based on the small sample of 

forward
-guidance surprises.  Reading from left to right, the blue dots represent the 
three events in our study: 
first, the decision to maintain the late
-2014 forward 
guidance at the 
most recent 
meeting; second, the extension of the forward guidance to 

late
 2014 at the January meeting; and third, the introduction of the original mid-2013 
language in August 2011.  
The 
x-
axis measures the surprise component of these 
decisions, which we measure in months and derive from the difference between the 

announced 
forward
-guidance date and the ex
pected month of liftoff calculated from 
2 The mate
rials used by Mr. Potter are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 
      
               
  
    
       
      
                 
          
   our d
ealer surveys
.  The 
y-axis measures the change in the 10
-year Treasury yield 
after the FOMC announcement
.  Alternative methods of measuring the surprise in 
months yield broadly similar results
.  Averaging across 
these measures suggests a 
rule of thumb of roughly a 1 basis point change in the 10-
year Treasury yield for each 
month of 
forward
-guidance 
surprise
.  Of course, measuring announcement effects is 
complicated by the interaction between forward guidance and 
expectations for the 
balance sheet
, including exit, which this analysis does not consider.  In the three 
events examined
, there were no explicit changes to the balance sheet or exit 
principles. 
Turning to other domestic assets, MBS spreads to Treasuries ar
e narrower over 
the 
intermeeting
 period, as seen in your lower-
left panel
.  Investors attributed much of 
the fluctuation in MBS spreads over the period to shifting expectations for Federal 

Reserve purchases, especially in the last few days.  By contrast, t
wo other 
intermeeting developments may serve to tighten mortgage market conditions on the 

margin
.  First, the FHFA announced that it will raise guarantee fees on GSE loans by 
10 basis points starting in the fourth quarter of this year, a fee that lenders w
ill likely 
pass on to borrowers.  Second, the Treasury announced that the wind-down of the two 

GSEs™ portfolios will accelerate to a 15 percent yearly rate, from 10 percent at 

present
.  Much of the wind-down is expected to occur through paydowns, 
necessita
ting only a small portion of sales from the portfolio over the next year.  

Given this, investors do not expect the accelerated wind-downs to be disruptive to the 

MBS market, and spreads to Treasuries were little changed following the 

announcement. 
The final panel looks at how recent developments have affected 
U.S. 
risk assets
.  Overall, the stabilization in European financial markets and heightened expectations 

for domestic policy easing have supported both equity and debt markets.  
The 

S&P
 500 index rose over the intermeeting period by more than 4 percent and is 
currently at its highest level since the beginning of 2008.  
Near
-term uncertainty, as 
measured by the VIX, is near multiyear lows
.  High
-yield bond spreads have 
tightened to levels last observed in
 2011:Q3, and corporate bond issuance in July and 
August has been higher than 
over the same period last year. 
Your second exhibit turns to developments in Europe and global asset prices more 
broadly.  
The most important 
development 
in global financial markets was the 
steadily growing expectation that the ECB would announce an effective new program 

to purchase shorter-
dated peripheral sovereign debt
.  As seen in the top-
left panel, 
these expectations led to a significant narrowing of
 peripheral sovereign debt spreads 
to German yields, particularly at shorter maturities wi
thin the scope of the program. 
Many of the uncertainties regarding the new program were resolved by the ECB 
announcements last week, leading to a further narrowing of peripheral spreads, 

additional gains in European equities, and appreciation of the euro against the 
U.S. 
dollar and the Swiss franc.  
Indeed, euro
-area financial markets have exhibited a 
greater degree of stability over the 
intermeeting
 period, and investors do not appear to 
be seeking significant protection 
against 
large swings in asset prices
, as seen in the 
                                       
    
  
  
               upper-
right panel
, ﬁImplied Volatility on 
Euro
pean Equities and on the Euro-
Dollar 
Currency 
Pair
.ﬂ 
As Steve Kamin will note in his briefing, the OMT
 program has the potential to 
ease financial stresses but must be accompanied by fundamental reform measures at 

the national level
.  Changes in forward peripheral spreads to Germany appear 
consistent with this view
.  Your middle-left panel shows Spanish an
d Italian 
five
-year 
debt spreads 
relative to Germany on a 
five
-year
-forward basis
.  These forward 
five
-year spreads have come down much less than spot spreads on instruments that are 

within the maturity range
 of the ECB™s purchase program. 
In the near 
term, financial markets will face a number of uncertainties, including 
the ongoing EU and IMF review of Greek compliance with the terms of its aid 

program.  In addition, for those countries 
not already in a program, the ECB will not 
activate the OMT unless
 there is agreement on conditions for accessing fiscal support 
facilities
.  It is unclear whether Spain will take this step w
ithout renewed market 
pressure. 
Looking forward, both Spain and Italy need to ramp up debt issuance over the 
remainder of the year
, after issuing at a somewhat tepid pace in recent months
.  This 
can be seen in the middle-
right panel
.  Spanish and Italian banks have historically 
been a significant source of demand for their own sovereign™s debt.  
However, that 

source of demand has drop
ped
 off in recent months.  As shown in the bottom-
left 
panel, since the ECB™s last three
-year LTRO, Italian banks have added to their 

sovereign debt holdings at a greatly reduced pace
.  Spanish banks have actually 
brought down their holdings of sovereign debt since the first quarter, given their own 

funding difficulties.  On a more positive note, anecdotal reports suggest that asset 

managers are reducing their underweight positions on Spanish and Italian debt, and 

access to primary debt markets has improved 
for Spanish and Italian banks. 
The last panel of this exhibit focuses on global risk assets 
more 
broadly.  
The 
accommodative policy stance of many central banks has been supportive of equity 

markets in recent months, particularly in the 
United States
 and Europe.  
In contrast, 
emerging market equities have generally underperformed, reflecting investors™ views 

that th
ese regions may be experiencing a slowdown in economic activity.  China™s 
Shanghai Composite I
ndex remains at levels last seen in early 2009. 
Your final exhibit focuses on recent Desk operations and market expectations for 
additional policy actions as reported in the d
ealer 
survey.  
Over the intermeeting 
period, the Desk purchased $60 billion in longer-term Treasury securities and sold or 

allowed
 to mature without reinvestment $58.5 billion of shorter-
dated securities under 
the maturity extension program (MEP).  These operations continue to proceed 

smoothly.  In particular, the Treasury security purchase operations have recently met 

with better de
mand.  As shown in the upper-left panel, the previous trend toward 
lower coverage ratios and less favorable prices for the purchase
 operations reversed 

somewhat. 
       
              
             
  
                          
           As shown in the upper-right panel, the MEP transactions have been lengthening 
the average dura
tion of the SOMA™s Treasury holdings in line with the policy intent.  

This measure is expected to reach about 
eight 
years if the program continues through 
the end of the year, far longer than the historical range of two to three 
years.  This has 
pulled the average duration of the overall portfolio higher as well, given that the 

duration of the MBS portfolio has recently remained steady at around 
two 
years. 
The next two panels focus on the reinvestment of principal payments on the 
SOMA™s holdings of agency debt and MBS.  Over the intermeeting period, the Desk 

purchased $33 billion of MBS.  These reinvestment purchases have generally 

proceeded smoothly, with market trading volumes remaining steady and only some 

instances of specialness in the coupons being pur
chased. 
The middle-left panel shows the monthly pace of paydowns, which has 
averaged 
about $26 billion since October of last year.  Given continued low interest rates, we 

expect the paydowns to run at roughly $31 billion per month through the end of the 

year.  Such a pace would suggest that 
the 
MBS purchases resulting from the 
reinvestments of the agency paydowns would constitute about one-third of the gross 

issuance of TBA
-eligible securities. 
The middle-right panel shows the distribution for the 30-
year sector of principal 
paydowns to the MBS portfolio, as well as the coupons in which the Desk has 

reinvested.  The portfolio continues to shift into lower-coupon securities, reflecting 

the overall decline in 
rates and the decision to concentrate purchases in newly
 issued 
TBA securities that are more liquid and more directly linked to the primary rate
.  Since June, low interest rates have led to paydowns of holdings of lower-coupons 

MBS, including the 3.5 and 4 percent coupons.  
Newly issued securities also have 

longer duration than those paying down, so these purchases have extended the 

duration of the MBS portfolio. 
Your final two panels of this exhibit show results from the most recent 
dealer 
survey.  
We use
d a phone poll this Monday to update some of the answers, following 

the significant developments in Europe and the e
mployment 
report.  As seen in the 
lower
-left panel, dealers assign a 90 percent probability to any easing action being 
announced at this mee
ting
.  More specifically, dealers place very high odds of 
80 percent on a change to the rate guidance.  The median respondent also saw a 

65 percent chance of an announced increase in the size of the SOMA portfolio.  

Expectations for these policy actions fi
rmed somewhat following last Friday™s 
employment report.  The derived joint probability for an extension of the forward 

guidance and the announcement of additional asset purchases increased to 57 percent 

in this Monday™s phone survey, up from 46 percent in 
the 
dealer survey. 
The panel to the right shows the dealers™ projections for the size and distribution 
of additional asset purchases anticipated through the end of 2013, as derived from 

respondents™ expected path of the SOMA balance sheet.  Respondents ex
pect the size 
of the balance sheet to grow by around $600 billion by the end of 2013.  Median 

expectations are for an increase of $300 billion in Treasury and about $300 billion in 
             
                  
                 MBS holdings by the end of 2013.  While not asked specifically about the st
ructure of 
a potential asset purchase program, some respondents indicated in their written 

comments that they expect an open
-ended program conditioned on economic 
variables.  Mr. Chairman, this completes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions for Simon?  President 
Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Two questions for Mr. Potter.  The first has 
to do with 
the 
duration of our holdings of agency MBS.  The graph indicates the average 
duration of our current holdings is around two.  Now, would our average duration of purchases 

under what we™re going to talk about later today or tomorrow, would that be substantially larger? 

Do you have a sense of what that would be? 
MR. POTTER.  Yes.  Somewhere between four and six.  Is that right, N
ate
? MR. WUERFFEL. 
That™s correct
. MR. LACKER.  Four and six? 

MR. POTTER. 
Yes
. MR. LACKER.  Okay.  So the other question I haveŠ
I was at a conference a couple of 
weeks ago.  I believe I saw you there, Mr. Potter, andŠ 
MR. POTTER. 
Symposium
, yes
. MR. LACKER.  An economist there was arguing that the effect of our forward guidance 
occurred more via revisions in investors™ expectations about future economic conditions rather 

than a change in their views about our future reaction function, and 
becaus
e you folks have such 
rich interactions with the dealer community and you talk to them about 
this forward guidance, I 
wondered if you guys had a view as to the economist™s assertion. 
MR. POTTER. 
Those dealer economists also 
read about
 Jackson Hole.  Some of 
them 
were there
, so I think they viewed that with quite a lot of interest.  I
n the dealer survey
, some 
               
     
            
        
        
      
   people thought that the change in rate guidance might be not just a calendar type, but trying to 
distinguish it from just a pure expectation of where you expected the economy to be.  I don™t 

think it™s possible to get a very clear answer from these respondents, because I don™t think the 

FOMC
™s been completely clear on this either. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Simon, I think I heard you correctly.  So we™ve been purchasing about a 
third of the eligible TBAs, and you also mentioned that there™s a planned 
increase
 in the 
rate 
of 
GSE wind
-downs to 15 percent from the 10 percent level earlier.  I
s that likely to change? If we 
were to proc
eed with just 
$30 or $40 billion, as outlined in a
lternative 
B, would that change our 
percentage of the eligible TBA purchases, given the contraction that™s occurring among the 

agencies
? If my memory is correct, they had about $1.4 trillion.  It goes back 
to last March. 
I can™t remember the last time I looked at the numbers.  So that™s about $15 billion; 15 
percent 

translates to about $15 billion, I think, in the contraction.  I™m just curious if it 
affe
cts the 
percentage of eligible TBA that we™d be hold
ing if we were to proceed. 
MR. POTTER.  No, I don™t think so. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

MS. LOGAN. 
We™re currently purchasing about a third of gross issuance.  That number 
is going to go up to 60 to 75 percent, depending on which option the Committee chooses. 
MR. FISHER.  Right, s
o that is not affected by
Š MS. LOGAN
.  The reduction that the GSEs are doing is happening 
in more than just 
TBAs
; they™re reducing in other types of securities 
as well
.  So I would think that number is 
probably fairly small.  In terms of the total amount outstanding, we™re currently going to have 

about 18 percent of the MBS, and that would move to about 25 percent. 
       
    
   
      
             
         
        
    
   
 MR. FISHER.  Okay
, thank you.
  And just an observation, if you look at your 
panel
 5 and
, particularly
, the high-
yield 
spread 
on panel
 6, things obviously are going our way.  T
his is 
what we would like to see, as well as the equity price response.  What doesn™t seem to be going 
our wayŠand I only point it out as an offset, even though it™s a short time horizonŠ
is 
it seems 

that the 
breakeven 
inflation rates
Šwhether it™s the 
5-year
, 5-year forward
; the 
5-year
; the 
10-year, which is not on this chartŠbottomed in the spring of this year, and the slope is upward.  

We can talk
, perhaps
, later.  I don™t know if we™ve done an LSAP-
type program in a context 
of 
rising inflation expectations or 
not. I think there was at least a 
chart in the 
Teal
book that would 
indicate we haven™t done one yet under those circumstances. 
But I just point out, Mr. Chairman, that if you draw 
a line from the bottom of the 5-
year 
rate, it really bottomed out in the summer of 2011 and has been on the rise. I™m not saying it™s 

dangerous, and it may be something that we would like to encourage, 
or some at this table would 

like to encourage, but we do have rising inflation expectations.  And to say inflation expectations 

are contained
Šwe might think about how we want to phrase that as we get down to the policy 
statement of tomorrow. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I™m not sure I take the same inference.  The 5-
by-5 
is pretty 
flat and is lower than it was last year. 
MR. FISHER.  
And 
the 
5-
year? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  At
 the margin, and the 5-year is obviously being affected by 
the oil price movements. 
MR. FISHER.  And the 
10-year also is not on this chart, and then gold prices, of course, 
have increased significantly
, for those 
who 
care about that ancient relic. 
       
      
           
           
                
   
            
  
                                                     MR. POTTER. It is true that the deflation risk we can calculate is lower than it was in 
2010. MR. FISHER.  Right.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questi
ons for Simon? [No response] 
Okay.  Seeing 
none, we need to vote to ratify domestic open market operations since August.  
Without 

objection?  Okay.  Our next item is the economic and financial situation, and David Wilcox and 

his colleagues will make that
 presentation. 
MR. WILCOX.
3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think there should be a single 
summary exhibit. 
You all may be relieved to know that my prepared text includes 
1,192 words, and I do not plan to ad lib an additional 2,000 words into my delivery.  
[Laughter] 
As you can see from the upper-
left panel of the forecast summary exhibit, the 
near
-term outlook for real GDP growth in last week™s edition of the Tealbook is 
broadly similar to the one that we sent you in July.  To be sure, the July gain in real 

PCE was better than we had expected.  However, consumer sentiment
Šshown in the 
lower
-left panel
Šhas remained downbeat, job gains have been modest, and the price 
of gasoline has moved back up, all of which caused us to largely discount the 

favorable spending news.  Similarly, July shipments of capital goods were stronger 

than we had expected, but forward-looking indicators, including the continued decline 

in the capital goods orders data, as well as the subdued responses to various surveys 

on capital spending plans and business conditions, are consistent with only subdued 

near
-term increases in business outlays.  If you squint hard at the upper-
left panel, 
you will detect that we shifted a little GDP growth from the second half of this year 

into the first half of next, reflecting our assessment that the drought will depress farm 

output in the second half of this year by more than we had predicted in July. 
The one component of aggregate demand that has seemed to have been on a 
somewhat stronger trajectory relative to our expectation in the July Tealbook was net 

exports.  Even so, last week™s forecast called for GDP growth to average just 

1.8 percent through the middle of next year, about in line with our prediction for the 

growth of potential over this period. 
Since the Tealbook closed, the main piece of economic news was last Friday™s 
employment report.  In a seeming exception to Dave Stockton™s famous description 

of the usual shelf-
life of t
he staff economic forecast, our jar of mayonnaise survived 
its first 48 hours in the Mojave Desert with only relatively minor signs of spoilage.  

[Laughter]
  The red line in the bottom-right panel summarizes our effort to combine 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
          
       
                                   
      
   
 the signals from the estab
lishment and household surveys (the latter of which is not 
shown on the chart because it is so noisy compared 
with the establishment results), 

and to control for weather effects and recession-
related seasonal adjustment 
distortions.  As you can see from the downward tilt toward the end of that line, the 

estimated underlying pace of private payroll employment growth has trended lower 

over the course of this year and now 
is 
at the low end of the range that it has occupied 
during the past 2½ years.  The unempl
oyment rate unexpectedly declined 
0.2 percentage point, but like many other analysts, we have been inclined to see more 

weakness than strength in the totality of the results from the household survey, given 

that the employment measure from that survey and 
the participation rate both 
declined.  Based on our projected path for real GDP over the next several quarters, we 

continue to expect the unemployment rate to average around 8¼ percent through the 

first half of next year.  I should also note that the workweek was lower than we had 

expected, and average hourly earnings were flat
, rather than increasing slightly as we 
had expected.  In combination, these results suggest a modestly weaker trajectory for 

compensation and
, therefore,
 household spending than we had factored into the 
Tealbook. 
Two other key pieces of information released since the Tealbook were also 
weaker than expected.  In particular, vehicle assembly plans now point to a slower 

pace of motor vehicle production in the third and fourth quarters th
an we had 

projected in the Tealbook, whileŠ
as Steve will discuss shortly
Šthe latest foreign 
trade data were slightly to the soft side of our expectations in terms of the
ir implications for GDP growth. 
In all, these bits of information would cause us to shave about ¼ percentage point 
off our forecast for the pace of real GDP growth during the second half of this year, 

leaving our forecasted average growth rate for this quarter and next at an anemic 

1¼ percent. 
Turning to the medium term, we upgraded our outlook slightly relative to our July 
projection.  As Steve will discuss, the improvement, such as it is, partly reflects a 

somewhat less worrisome situation in Europe than we had previously believed.  As 

we described in the Tealbook, even after factoring in the disappointment that we think 

would ensue from an announcement of no change in the stance of monetary policy at 

the conclusion of this meeting, we judge that stock prices would remain on a slightly 

higher trajectory and the dollar would be slightly weaker than we assumed in the 

previous projection.  These small positive influences are only partly offset by the 

increase in oil prices, part of which may itself reflect the improvement in sentiment 

related to the crisis in Europe. 
The small upward revision 
to real GDP over the medium term led us to shave a 
little off of our projected path for the unemployment rate, which is shown in the top-

right panel of the exhibit.  Even by the end of next year, however, we expect no 

significant reduction in the unemploy
ment rate. As real GDP accelerates more into 
2014, the unemployment rate declines about ½ percentage point, ending that year at 

about 7½ 
percent. 
         
    
    
     
         
   
   
     
         
     
       
    
  
  Aside from the crisis in Europe, the other main concern that continues to loom 
over the domestic outlook is the fiscal cliff.  On this front, there have been no major 

developments recently, and we continue to expect none, 
at least through the 

November elections.  At this stage, I can only assure you that our decision to stand 

pat on our fiscal policy assumptions reflects no lack of concern or uncertainty on our 

part:  The fiscal cliff continues to figure prominently in our thinking as a serious 

threa
t to the still
-anemic recovery. 
Turning to the inflation outlook, the incoming data on core PCE price inflationŠ 
the 
middle
-right panel
Šhave been close to our expectations.  We continue to project 
that core inflation will hold steady at about 1½ percent through the end of 2014, 

reflecting anchored inflation expectations, a persistent margin of labor and product 

market sl
ack, and modest gains in imported goods prices. 
In response to the upward move in spot prices for crude oil since the July 
Tealbook, we have marked up our near-
term projection for headline PCE inflation
Š the middle
-left panel.  We have, however, made only small revisions to our near-
term 
food price forecast.  Although we now expect the quantity effects of the drought to be 

worse than we had forecast in July, the futures prices that we used in preparing our 

July food price projection had apparently already in
corporated almost all of the price 

effects.  Despite the upward pressure from food prices that we think will begin to 

show through around the end of this year, we expect headline inflation to step down 

slightly in the first part of next year, as the antici
pated reduction in crude oil prices 

implied by futures markets pushes down retail energy prices.  Steve will now 

continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.  In 1972, when Chinese Prime Minister Zhou Enl
ai was asked what 
he thought was the historic impact of the 
French 
Revolution, he famously answered: 
ﬁIt™s too soon to tell.ﬂ 
[Laughter] 
By those standards, assessing the implications of 
the European Central Bank™s plans to intervene in peripheral debt markets would 

seem hopelessly premature.  And yet, as Simon has described, anticipations of 

aggressive ECB action have substantially calmed European financial markets, slightly 

brightening an admittedly still
-cloudy outlook. 
As described in its announcement last week, the ECB plans to purchase sovereign 
debt on the secondary market, provided that the beneficiary governments enter into an 

arrangement with the region™s financial backstop facilities and agree to policy 

conditionality.  Although the ECB will be announcing neither a target ceiling for 

yields on peripheral debt nor the amounts it intends to purchase, it has signaled a 

more aggressive and sustained program than its earlier forays into bond markets. 
Beyond simply comforting investors that the ECB is riding to the rescue, these 
plans could ease financial stre
sses in a number of ways.  First, by lowering yields, the 

bond purchases would reduce public debt service burdens and improve fiscal 

sustainability.  Second, and as a related matter, by taking sovereign bonds out of the 

hands of private investors, ECB purchases may create room in those investors™ 

portfolios for new issues, thereby improving the governments™ access to financing.  
          
  
           
                 
   
   
         
                     
  
    Finally, the package of ECB purchases
, plus access to the regional financial backstop 
facilities
, is widely anticipated to involve less stringent conditionality, and thus less 
stigma, than the full
-blown IMF and EU rescue packages received by Greece, Ireland, 
and Portugal.  In consequence, it is more likely, though far from certain, that Spain 

and/or Italy may request financial assistance before market conditions have become 

so adverse that further financial turmoil is inevitable. 
With markets figuring in brighter prospects for official support, financial stresses 
over the next several months are likely to be less pronounced than we assumed in the 

July Tealbook, and we are anticipating that, barring further adverse shocks, European 

markets could soon begin the long, slow process of normalization.  However, we are 

still very far from being out of the woods.  In the near term, European l
eaders still 
need to work out the conditionality to be required of governments benefi
ting from the 
financial rescue facilities and ECB intervention, and that could be contentious.  

Additionally, IMF and EU officials are currently assessing the status of Gr
eece™s 
struggling adjustment programŠalthough Greece™s official creditors are expected to 

approve a much
-needed disbursement by October and postpone more difficult 
decisions until later, this is not assured, and a messy Greek exit from the euro area at 

this time could be quite dangerous. 
Taking a longer view, the ECB™s new program is not, to 
coin a phrase, a panacea. 
It can only give Europe breathing space to implement the fundamental reforms that 

will ultimately restore confidence.  If the Europeans do not make progress on the 

measures needed to achieve fiscal and financial stability
Šbudget consolidation, 
growth
-promoting structural reforms, and region-
wide banking initiatives
Šthe 
ECB™s ability to contain financial tensions will be sorely tested.  Accordin
gly, market 
confidence likely will not be fully restored until the peripheral economies prove they 

can cut their budgets, improve growth prospects, and strengthen their banksŠ
and all 

that could take a number of years. 
In consequence, economic activity in Europe is also likely to remain subdued for 
some time to come.  To be sure, the easing of financial stresses, combined with some 

data that have been less bleak than expected, have led us to project a somewhat 

shallower recession than we wrote down in the July Tealbook.  Even so, in our 

current projection, euro-area GDP continues to contract through the middle of next 

year and recovers only very weakly thereafter. 
The outlook for our other trading partners, while hardly as bleak as that for 
Europe, is nonetheless subdued.  Excluding the euro area, aggregate foreign growth 

dropped from roughly 4 percent in the first quarter to 
less than
 3 percent in the 
second, below its trend pace.  Moreover, since your last meeting, indicators such as 

PMIs and exports have ge
ner
ally come in on the soft side. 
These developments are worrisome, but considering the factors responsible for 
the slowdown, our best guess is that 
economic 
growth will bottom out in the coming 
quarters rather than deteriorate further.  The pace of 
deterioration in Europe, which 
accounts for much of the United Kingdom
™s stagnation this year, as well as the 
             
                               
              
                    slowdown in Asia™s exports, is projected to become only a little more pronounced in 

the second half of this year.  The recent weakness in U.S. growth has also weighed on 

our trading partners, but the U.S. economy should start picking up a few quarters 

down the road.  And much of Asia™s slowdown reflects the fading of the bounceback 

from Thailand™s floods and Japan™s tsunami last year.  All told, we 
anticipate that 
foreign growth outside the euro area will stay subdued at 3 percent over the remainder 

of this year.  It then picks up to 3¾ percent by 2014, as the euro area starts to recover, 

the U.S. economy picks up steam, and monetary policies around 
the world remain 

quite accommodative. 
Another factor weighing on foreign growth, especially in Asia, has been China™s 
slowdown from near double-digit rates in the past two years.  Chinese growth 

registered 7½ percent in the second quarter of this year.  With recent weak exports 

and PMIs leading us to revise down our forecast, we see growth remaining at that 

relatively subdued pace during the remainder of this year, before picking up to about 

8 percent thereafter. Under these circumstances, we continue to s
crutinize the data 
for indications of a hard landing, but we do not see any compelling signs that one is in 

the offing: 
 Retail sales growth has remained reasonably solid, housing prices have 

flattened out, and the government retains the monetary and fiscal scope to counter a 

decline in demand. 
The effect on oil prices of resurgent political tensions over Iran poses another 
threat to the global economy.  Crude oil prices have now retraced more than half of 

their decline from earlier this year, and our curre
nt projected trajectory of oil prices 
averages roughly 10 percent higher than in the July Tealbook.  A rise in oil prices of 

this magnitude should not substantially affect the foreign outlook.  By our rough 

estimates, it could reduce 
economic 
growth in the advanced economies by 
0.1 percentage point over the next year or so, while the effect on aggregate emerging 

markets growth is roughly a wash
, as gains by oil exporters offset losses by importers.  

By the same token, our inflation outlook is a bit higher i
n the near term but little 
changed further out.  However, no resolution of the problem of Iran™s nuclear 

program is in sight, and we are attuned to the risk of much steeper rises in oil prices. 
All told, considering the momentous developments taking place 
in the global 
economyŠMario Draghi™s plan to save the euro, China™s struggle to achieve a soft 

landing, and 
fluctu
ations in commodity marketsŠthe outlook for U.S. trade is, well, 
not so momentous.  In the first half of this year, notwithstanding the global slowdown 

and the rising dollar, net exports managed to eke out a 
small 
positive contribution to 
U.S. GDP growth.  We received trade data for July yesterday; both exports and 

imports fell, but the trade balance was little changed.  Accordingly, we retain o
ur 
view that for the next couple of quarters, the combination of slowing foreign growth, 

a still
-elevated dollar, and the effects of the drought on agricultural production leads 

to some moderation in export growth, and the external sector imposes a modest 
drag 
on the economy.  After that, net exports gradually shift back toward neutral, as the 

global economy picks up and European stresses subside, so that a reversal of flight-

to-safety flows allows the dollar to start depreciating.  Thanks to Mr. Draghi, th
is 
projection is based on a somewhat lower path of the dollar than in the July Tealbook, 
         
  
      
                     
   
                   
                                                         and thus a bit faster export growth and less drag from net exports.  Andreas will 

continue our presentation. 
MR. LEHNERT.
4 I™ll be discussing material from our recent 
QS report 
on financial stability 
and from an earlier memo on the effect of low interest rates.  In our 
report, the most prominent shocks we identified were an intensification of the 

European sovereign crisis and a U.S. recession, perhaps brought on by a s
uboptimal 
resolution of the ﬁfiscal cliff.ﬂ  The major vulnerabilities we highlighted were, first, 

the market™s perception that some large banks remain weak, despite substantial 

increases in capital and liquidity, which raises the likelihood of funding runs and 

increases the cost of raising capital; second, the unstable funding model of brokerŒ 

dealers
; and, third, the persistent risk of runs on money market funds. 
We have also placed increasing emphasis on vulnerabilities stemming from the 
low interest rate 
environment, and that™s what I™ll focus on today.  After all, long-
term Treasury yields haven™t been below 2.5 percent for a sustained period since 

1954, a time when the financial system was quite different. 
A low short-
term interest rate policy, given st
rained household and business 
fundamentals, is designed to improve macro performance.  The benefits arise, in part, 

from increases in asset prices and
, thus, the value of collateral held by businesses and 
households.  These increases should, in turn, enhan
ce financial stability. 
But a low 
rate environment could lead investors trying to boost yields to borrow too much, take 

on too much risk, or bid up asset prices enough to stretch valuations.  Relatedly, 

important parts of the financial system might become
 vulne
rable to a rapid rise in 
rates. 
To assess these risks, we surveyed a wide range of asset markets and financial 
institutions looking for signs of excessive valuations, greater leverage, 
or increased 

risk
-taking.  To summarize, we found little evidence that the low rate environment 
has fostered additional vulnerabilities to date: 
 Valuations for broad asset classes are 
not stretched
, and we identified only a few isolated pockets of increased 
risk
-taking. 
As shown by the top panel on your first exhibit, 
estimated term premiums 
for 
10-year Treasury yields are quite low, due in part to safe-haven demand for 

Treasuries resulting from strains in Europe.  Term 
premiums
Šand thus Treasury 
yields
Šcould increase quickly if, for example, concerns about the U.S. fis
cal situation were to intensify. 
Your next three panels cover valuations in three major U.S. asset classes: 
equities, residential real estate
, and corporate bonds.  Overall, valuations across these 
asset classes show little sign of pressure.  As shown in the middle left, stocks are not 

trading at unusually high multiples; indeed, forward price-
earnings ratios are 
generally well within their ranges over the past 20 years.  Our measure of residential 

real estate valuation, shown to the right, is near an all-
time low.  Risk premiums
 in 
4 The materials used by Mr. Lehnert are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 
       
           
                   
              
  
        
       the high-
yield corporate bond market
Šas measured by the implied forward spread far 
out in the future (the black line in the bottom-
left panel)
Šare near their average of 
the past 20 years, notwithstanding the extraordinary highs 
experience
d during the 
financial crisis. 
However, valuations of assets in narrower and less-liquid markets have shown 
signs of pressure. Issuance of so
-called leveraged loans has been robust this year.  
Moreover, there is a trend toward lighter use of loa
n covenants and increased 
leverage.  As shown to the right, average ratios of debt to earningsŠknown as a debt 

multiple
Šamong this class increased further this year, although it remains below its 
pre
-crisis levels. 
Your next exhibit considers evidence on l
everage and 
risk
-taking
.  In the 
nonfinancial sector, as shown by the pink and blue regions in the top panel, household 

and business leverage has continued the decline begun in the recession.  Government 

borrowing, by contrast, has picked up, leaving the ratio of debt held by the public to 

GDP at its highest level since W
orld W
ar II. 
As shown in the middle two panels, there are signs that, potentially, commercial 
banks are taking increased interest rate risk.  Banks have increased their holdings of 

long-
mat
urity securities. As a result, their portfolios may be more sensitive to a 
sudden rise in interest rates than they were a year ago, depending on their interest rate 

hedges.  The low interest rate environment, combined with an unlimited FDIC 

guarantee on transactions accounts, has attracted a surge of deposits to banks.  The 

ability to issue deposits at below
-market rates should benefit banks were rates to rise; 
however, we don™t have historical experience to judge the sensitivity of these new 

deposits to a rise in rates.  That said, as discussed in the Tealbook, results from a 

recent informal survey of banks suggested they did not think it was likely that 

deposits would decline rapidly when the added insurance expires.  We™re currently 

working with economists and supervisors from throughout the Federal Reserve 

System on an analysis of interest rate risk at banks and plan to include the results in 

our December report. 
Life insurance companies are vulnerable to extended periods of low interest rates, 
in part b
ecause they have a significant body of liabilities with guaranteed returns that 

exceed current yields on safe assets.  As a consequence, insurers may be feeling 

particular pressure to reach for yield by extending their exposure to duration and 

credit risk. 
Indeed, as shown in the bottom left, the average maturity of insurers™ 
bond portfolios has risen in recent years, as firms accept greater duration risk.  

However, the shift isn™t particularly dramatic, and we are working with colleagues 

here and at the F
ederal Reserve Bank of Chicago to understand the risks faced by, and 
posed by, these institutions. 
The panel to the right shows the rapid rise in assets of real estate investment 
trusts
ŠREITs
Šthat specialize in holding agency-
guaranteed mortgage
-backed 
sec
urities.  While these institutions are something of a niche player, their business 

model of funding agency MBS holdings with repo, while vulnerable to sharp rate 
            
    
                 
      
            
     
        
  
     
   
  
   
                                                   rises, has proved quite profitable in recent years, producing double-
digit returns for 
shareho
lders.  This growth is one of the clearest indications we have of the 
willingness of some investors to take on additional interest rate risk in order to earn 

higher current returns.  This willingness may be enhanced by the apparent safety of 

investing in G
SE-guaranteed securities. In terms of their systemic threat, at their 
current scale, the sudden distress of mortgage REITs would likely be painful but 

manageable for the broader financial system. 
I™ll conclude with a less quantifiable form of risk produced by the low 
interest 
rate 
environment, related to a sense that a great deal of money is sitting on the sidelines.  

Consider two examples:  First, respondents to the SCOOS report that their clients 

have significant unused borrowing capacity; and second, pr
ivate equity firms focused 
on leveraged buyouts have elevated levels of committed but uninvested capital.  
All 

of this and more amounts to ﬁdry powderﬂ that could be deployed quickly.  Thus, 

while our ongoing monitoring efforts have so far found little evi
dence that the low 
interest rate environment has led to excessive increases in leverage, asset valuation
, or 
risk
-taking, investors do have the means to rapidly shift their portfolios.  Ed Nelson 
will continue our presentation. 
MR. NELSON.
5 I will be referring to the packet 
labeled ﬁMaterial for Briefing 
on the Summary of Economic Projections.ﬂ 
As shown in the top panel of exhibit 1, under your individual assessments of 
appropriate monetary policy, you see real GDP expanding only moderately t
his year
, but you expect the pace of the recovery to pick up next year and that economic 

growth in 2014 and 2015 will be somewhat above its longer-run value.  

Correspondingly, you expect the unemployment rate, shown in the second panel, to 

stay near recent readings for the rest of the year
, before gradually declining over the 
subsequent three years.  All of you expect that the unemployment rate at the end of 

2015 will be appreciably below its present rate; nevertheless, almost all of you expect 

it to be above what you judge to be its longer-run normal level.  Turning to the 

bottom two panels, you generally expect total PCE inflation of around 1¾ percent 

over the four quarters of 2012.  For 2013 through 2015, you generally see core and 

overall inflation stayi
ng close to or slightly below your 2 percent inflation objective. 
Exhibit 2 tabulates the ranges and the central tendencies of your projections, 
along with comparisons to the June SEP and the current staff forecast.  Compared 

with your June projections, you now anticipate a slightly stronger recovery and a 

somewhat larger decline in the unemployment rate over the projection period.  Your 

inflation outlook is little changed.  The Tealbook forecastŠwhich embeds the 

assumption of no additional accommodationŠputs economic growth in 2013 and 

2014 at the lower end of your central tendency, and the unemployment rate above it; 

the 2015 forecasts, however, are within the central tendency.  The Tealbook forecast 

for inflation runs consistently below your central tendencies for 2013 to 2015. 
5 The materials used b
y Mr. Nelson are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
                   
             
     
     
       
   
      
     
               
        
          
  Exhibit 3 provides an overview of your assessments of the appropriate path for 
the federal funds rate.  As shown in the top panel, most of you think that it will not be 

appropriate to begin raising the funds rate until 2014 or later.  About two-
thirds of 
you now see firming only beginning in 2015 or 2016, compared with about one-third 

of you in June.  Four of youŠtwo fewer than in JuneŠ
now believe that economic 

conditions will warrant increasing the federal funds rate before 2014.  Two of you 

favoring a funds rate increase before 2014 cited the need to tighten policy relatively 

soon in order to prevent inflation from exceeding the Committee™s 2 
percent 

objective, and two pointed to the need to forestall financial imbalances.  Many of 

those who would not raise the funds rate until 2014 or later cited sizable output or 

unemployment gaps alongside an inflation profile unlikely to exceed 2 percent over 

the medium run. 
The bottom two panels of the exhibit provide your assessments of the app
ropriate 
target for the federal funds rate at the end of each year of the forecast period and over 

the longer run.  For the 6 participants who 
see the funds rate leaving the effective 

lower bound in 2014 
or earlier
, the median value for 
the funds rate at 
the end of 2014 
is 
1.75 percent.  The 12 participants who expect that the funds rate will not leave the 

lower bound until 2015 judge that the appropriate funds rate at the end of that year 

will be 1.6 percent or less, while the 1 
participant who sees the st
art of firming in 
2016 sees the funds rate at 75 basis points at the end of that year (not shown). 
Fourteen of you now judge that ﬁappropriate monetary policyﬂ calls for a more 
accommodative path for the federal funds rate than in your June SEP, involving 
either 
a lower target for the funds rate at the end of the initial year of firming or a shift out 

in the first year of firming.  Moreover, 11 of you indicated that appropriate policy 

calls for additional asset purchases
, at this meeting or before long. 
Exhibit 4 depicts the economic conditions that you anticipate for the year in 
which you expect the first funds rate increase. Your projected unemployment rates 

range from about 5¾ to 8 percent, with a median of 6½ percent, while your inflation 

projections 
are in a narrow range of roughly 1¾ to 2¼ percent, with a median rate of 
2 percent.  Generally, participants who expect the first funds rate increase in
 2012 or 2013 (shown by the 
blue triangle and 
white diamonds) see a higher level of 
unemployment at the time of 
the first funds rate increase
 than do those reporting later 
firming
 dates (shown by the gray circles, dark blue squares, and 
the 
gray triangle
). The final exhibit reviews your assessments of the uncertainty and risks 
surrounding your economic projections.  As shown in the top two panels in the 

column on the left, almost all of you continue to indicate that you judge the current 

level of uncertainty about GDP growth and unemployment to be higher than the 

average level over the past 20 years.  The co
rresponding panels to the right indicate 
that you continue to view the risks to GDP growth as weighted toward the downside 

and, accordingly, the risks to unemployment as weighted to the upside.  Many of you 

attributed your continued emphasis on downside growth risks to concerns about 

Europe and U.S. fiscal policy; other factors cited included uncertainty about the level 

and growth rate of potential output and the possibility of a hard landing in China.  
      
  
  
    
     
    
                                Turning to the bottom two panels, 8 of you assess the uncertainty attending your 

projections for total PCE inflation as higher, and another 10 of you see the 

uncertainty as broadly similar to the average level of uncertainty over the past 

two
 decades.  Most of you continue to see the risks to inflation, shown 
to the right, as 
broadly balanced.  Thank you.  That concludes the staff presentations. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much for your presentation.  The floor is 
open for questions.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Wilcox, the lower right-
hand panel 
displays a model estimate, and I 
was wondering what it™s an estimate of. 
MR. WILCOX. It™s a statistical exercise that tries to combine several different sources of 
information.  First and most broadly, it combines the payroll survey estimate of job gain with an 
adjusted measure from the household survey, 
where the adjustments
Š MR. LACKER.  Have been comparable. 

MR. WILCOX.  Štry to take the household measure and do about a dozen or 
15 adjustments that put it on
, as conceptually 
as possible, 
an apples
-to-apples basis with the 
establishment survey. 
The second category of information that it builds in is that we had one of our seasonal 
adjustment experts, Charlie Gilbert, take a close look at this series, specifically with a question in 

mind of trying to disc
ern effects on seasonal factors that stem from the timing of the sharp 
downdraft in employment in 2008 
and
 2009, and to advise us on the extent to which those timing 
effects may have bled into seasonal factors
, causing published estimates of seasonally adjusted 
job growth around the turn of the year to be systematically higher than they should actually be. 
The third type of information that™s built in is a regression
-based analysis of weather 
effects.  It seems like a dim memory at this point, but we had, a
s you will recall, an 
extraordinarily warm winter this year, and there was some speculation that that may have shifted 

the timing of employment.  Those weather
-related effects are pretty small, but they™re included 
           
    
                    
       
       
     here
, as well
, for the sake of completeness.  And then around all of that, what we do is just apply 
a simple 
Kalman 
filter to the resulting series in an effort to extract for you where we think all this 
statistical evidence would point in terms of what™s the best available estimate of job gain
, taking 
account of all that information that™s available to us. So it™s
, at some level
, nothing more than a 
statistical exercise to try to extract signal from noise.  On the other hand, it packs in a 
tremendous amount of information. 
MR. LACKER.  Those all sound like very useful and constructive statistical initiatives.  I 
just wondered what the target you were aiming at trying to estimate is. I mean, is it the trend or 

the current value? 
MR. WILCOX. It™s essentially a smooth
ed trend that takes account of both the 
information in the establishment survey and the household survey.  I mean, I could reiterate: 
It takes account of that
; it tries to adjust for weather and 
seasonal
Š MR. LACKER.  You™re aiming at a true measure of the cu
rrent gain
, or a true measure of 
the trend? 
MR. WILCOX.  True measure of the current gain, smoothing through 
a variety of 
sources of noise. 
MR. LACKER.  A smooth measure of the current gain.  I™m less confused now. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You™re confused at a 
higher level. President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I actually drove back from our western 
symposium this year with two geriatric dogs and other things, but I want to comment on the fact 

that driving across the s
tate of Nebraska, what
 struck me was the drought and the corn crops and 
just how dead the entire s
tate of Nebraska looked
, at least from Interstate 80. 
       
                                 You made some reference to the drought and the corn crop, and I remember reading 
somewhere
ŠI couldn™t find it in my searchingŠabout your estimated effects of the drought on 
GDP this quarter and next.  And I™d like to hear you talk a little more about what you think those 

effects were
; the ramifications of those effects, of how they bleed, in some sense, through in your 

forecast t
o your employment forecast, for example, through an Okun™s l
aw measure because 
GDP is lower
; how much impact you thought it had on the gap in the near term; and how that 
dissipates through your forecast.  Can you just walk me through those linkagesŠt
his is clearly a 
classic supply shock of 
a dr
oughtŠand how much then it feeds into other things that matter that 
we look at a lot for monetary policy? 
MR. WILCOX.  So I™ll take a first crack at it and invite my other colleagues to jump in 
with additional i
nformation.  We thought in July we had built in some quantity-
related effects
Š about $10 billion is my recollectionŠon farm output.  This time, based on USDA assessments of 

field conditionsŠ
people may be doing something a little more systematic, out walking
 in the 
fields with their clipboard and so forth to look at corn yields
; corn is one of the crops that is most 
affected
Šwe think that it™s about a $30 billion hit to real farm output this time, so substantially 
bigger than what we had built into the July projection. 
We think that that™s likely to show up mostly in a decumulation of inventories in the third 
and fourth quarters.  The way that inventory arithmetic works, the hit to GDP growth is going to 

be concentrated in the third quarter.  We™ve got the same rate of inventory decumulation built 

into the fourth quarter, but because it™s the same rate of decumulation in both quarters, the 
effect 
on GDP growth 
we™ve penciled in 
is zero in the fourth quarter.  
We also think there will be a 
small additional negative effect on agricultural exports as well, so that™s where in terms of the 

GDP accounting
Š        
       
   
                       
   
  
                    
MR. PLOSSER.  And that led to how much of a decrease in your estimate of 
GDP growth for the third quarter? 
MR. WILCOX.  About 0.8 
percent
age point o
n GDP growth
. MR. PLOSSER. 
Yes, 0.8 
percent
age point.  That™s what I thought 
I remembered. 
MR. WILCOX.  We thinkŠwe hopeŠthat™s going to be a transitory supply shock and 
that next year
, our planning assumption has been, crop yields are going to come back to normal.  
Now, there™s sort of a philosophical question about when that actually occurs.  If we were 
operating 
in annual data, it would be perfectly clear that it would happen in 2013.  
However
, the 
way that the BEA does it, and we™ve been in very close contact with them, is 
to smooth that 
through the four quarters of the calendar year, so that snap back to normal crop yields, 
basically 

at this point, of course, by assumption, occurs in the firs
t quarter. 
So we™re mimicking 
the 
BEA™s algorithm in packing in the return to a normal level of GDP in the first quarter of 2013.  

That™s not based on any pretense that anybody actually knows that that™s the way the corn plants 

are going to grow in 2013.  
That™s just the 
BEA 
methodology.  I wouldn™t have anything better to 
suggest to them if I were in their shoes. 
Now, farm proprietors™ income actually sees a much smaller effect because prices are up 
and there™s crop insurance, and so the implications for 
nominal farm income are much less 
severe than they are for real output. 
We think that there™s likely to be very little effect on 
employment because we™ve made the assumption that employers are going to smooth through 

this transitory effect.  I wouldn™t be surprised, of course, if there was some effect on things like 

farm equipment manufacturers and that sort of thing, but I think that™s going to be lost in the 

noise in terms of our ability to actually 
estimate it. 
       
                               
   
   MR. PLOSSER.  So this wouldn™t show up in 
any sense on your estimates of the 
magnitude of your output gap over the next two quarters? 
Would you raise that? 
MR. WILCOX.  M
echanically, I suspect our output gap will be a little wider over the 
second half of this year, and then it will just come back in the first quarter of 2013.  Is that right, 
Bill? 
MR. 
WASCHER
.  Yes, that™s right.  Because we tend to set potential growth on an 
annual basis, we didn™t make an explicit adjustment to the gap measures you see in the Tealbook 

for the effects of the 
drou
ght
.  I would say that in terms of when we look at Okun™s l
aw relationships and thinking about the path of the unemployment rate, 
we did take out the effect of 

the drought from potential in that equation.  So we didn™t want the drought to affect the 

unempl
oyment rate forecast. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Ye
s, that™s kind of what I was trying to get at.  Okay.  Thank you very 
much. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  One minor place it might show up, because we didn™t do the 
adjustment, would be in the Tealbook 
B rules thing. It™s pretty small, but the 
rules
 would 
respond to that. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Did I just understand correctly that you removed the effect of the 
drought on the gap, the unemployment rate gap? 
MR. WILCOX.  In our Okun™s l
aw analysis, in setting the unemployment rate. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It will bounce right back. 

MR. WILCOX.  I™m sorry? 
                           
               
    VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The effects are just going to go away in two quarters. 
MR. WILCOX. It is a transitory effect.  The fu
nds rate is constrained at zero.  So it 
doesn™t have any implication for the funds rate.  And in terms of calibrating the response of the 

unemployment rate to the GDP gap, we sterilized the GDP gap from transitory dro
ught
-related 
effects on GDP. 
MR. LACKER
.  Okay.  So let me just ask the question for which 
this is most germane
Š do inflation dynamics depend on this adjustment? 
MR. WILCOX. 
I think we™re talking about splitting a micron here, butŠ 
MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, but I™m just very curious about the principle here. 
MR. WILCOX.  The methodology is intended precisely to seal off the implications for 
core inflation.  I should say, of course, 
the first
-order implication for inflation is through food 
prices. 
MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, right, righ
t. MR. WILCOX.  That has been allowed to feed through. 

MR. LACKER.  Right.  But in terms of the gap™s effect on inflation, you want to sterilize 
it from the effect that the dr
ought is going to have on real output and employment in a 
year 
or 
two. 
MR. WILCOX
.  Correct, y
es. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question for Andreas.  
On exhibit 2, you have 
this chart that looks at nonfinancial sector credit to GDP.  
I keep staring at it, and I am still trying 
to figure out what implications I™m supposed to draw from it.  The secular uptrend from 1956, at 
          
      
              
       
                   
best
, flattens out for a while
.  So the first question is what implication do you think we were 
supposed to draw from this
?  And, second, if you looked at a char
t of 
nonfin
ancial sector assets 
to GDP, would that also show 
mostly a secular 
uptrend?  And then, how do you put those two 
together? 
MR. LEHNERT.  I think the
re are
 key macro questions that are impli
cated 
by your 
question, which I™m not going to touch, but 
just from a financial stability perspective, at the very 
highest level
, in some sense, financial stability concerns in a low-
rate environment arise when 
you see people and businesses borrowing more.  This picture was just supposed to 
be an easy 
way 
to portray the fact that we™re not seeing households and businesses borrowing more. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Right.  We could 
also interpret it as, gee, credit to GDP 
is still really, really high
, and
, therefore, that means bad things.  That is what I was sort of 
getting 
at. 
So you don™t take a negative signal away at all from the total level of credit to GDP is still 
high? 
MR. LEHNERT.  Ye
s, okay.  I treated that as a separate question.  So then there™s a 
question, are we approaching some kind of 
fiscal moment
, some sort of S
argent
Wallace 
moment, where the global carrying capacity for U.S. sovereign obligations is being reached? 

That™s something that we highlighted in our report as a potential risk.  
If there™s 
a material 
worsening in the fiscal outlook, 
or if 
there™s some really ugly resolution to the debt ceiling 

negotiations in January and so forth, all those things could have negative implications for future 

stability. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But the total level here, if you add household, business, 
and government together, that™s not a good sign. 
MR. LEHNERT.  If you look across countr
ies
, you would see a lot of different 
levels. 
           
          
   
  
      
    
   
           
    
     
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
They™re 
all over the place. 
MR. LEHNERT
.  Exactly.  So I don™t know why Denmark is one and Japan i
s a different 
one, but we can just judge the 
United States
 by its own history. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  First, I wanted to thank Andreas for a very good summary
, very helpful 
graphics
, and so on.  We™re in the middle of doing our 
SABR
 analysis for banks, and one of the 
positive attributes we have noticed is that we seem to be seeing a brighter picture for the average 

bank.  For example, the ones that we rate one or two probably are performing 
the best that we™ve 
seen in terms of the percentage of potential 
downgrades since December of 2006.  So I think 
that™s one positive aspect that wasn™t included.  I™m not being critical, but when you look at your 

second panel of long-
term securities held by comm
ercial banks and so on, there seems to be a 
healthier tenor, and we™re not done with the analysis yet, but I just wanted to point that out. 
With regard to seasonality, I wanted to ask Dave Wilcox about the August employment 
numbers; I think I™m correct in 
saying that that is a number that gets revised more frequently 

than others.  I think 17 of the last 22 years, i
t™s been revised, and if I remember correctly, last 
year it went from zero to 44,000 to 104,000, and I assume we™re taking account of the fact th
at 
that is often a highly unreliable number.  Am I correct? 
MR. WILCOX.  We™re taking account of the fact that it is the best possible information, 
and we don™t confuse it with truth, absolutely.  [Laughter] 
MR. FISHER.  So we assume it gets revised more o
ften than not? 
MR. WILCOX. 
Yes. 
           
          
   
              
             
  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
The BLS has a 
confidence intervalŠ
the 90 percent 
confidence 
interval is 
plus or minus 100,000.  So that gives you an idea. 
MR. WILCOX.  It™s a sample-
based estimate. It is based on a very large 
sample of 
employers. It™s a universal sample of large employers and a statistically drawn probability 
sample of medium an
d smaller employers, but there are a host of issues associated with 
constructing that number, including the fact that not everybody th
at ultimately will report
, 
reports in the first wave of responses and that seasonal adjustment, as my remarks described 

earlier, involves 
a great deal of science but some art as well.
  So I don™t have any specific reason 
for doubting or casting aspersions on the August number, but you™re absolutely correct that 

month in and month out, that™s a number that is subject to two-sided revision. 
MR. FISHER.  And then lastly, just listening to Steve Kamin, this is perplexing about oil 
and gas 
prices
, and particular
ly prices at the pump.  There may be some seasonality in terms of 
the 
switchover 
that
 occurs, but given the weaker economy, which I think almost all of our 
forecasts have envisioned, and given the production that™s taking place stateside, even 

accounting f
or the storm that took place in the Gulf, it just seems odd that we might expect oil 
prices to increase rather than hold level or decrease.
  And f
or what it™s worth, the ﬁoiliesﬂ that I 
speak to
Šfrom the independents to Tillerson at Exxon and so onŠ
their expectation is that this 
has been a bit of a bulge, and that it™s more likely to settle down and actually decrease somewhat.  

For what it™s 
worth
Šand I always emphasize that because Mr. Tarullo insists that I do so when I 
talk about my anecdotal evidence
ŠI just wanted to pass that on. 
MR. KAMIN
.  Thank you. 
Just to be clear, our baseline forecast for crude oil prices in 
the markets is, indeed, to decline over time from the current level. 
MR. FISHER.  It wasn™t clear the way you presented it.  So I wanted 
to add that. 
      
          
                     
    
  
   
    
   MR. KAMIN
.  Yes.  So just to clarify, what I was alluding to was future upside risks that 
could take place if geopolitical problems in the Middle East became more pronounced than they 
are now. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to come back to the financial 
stability handout, exhibit 2, 
chart
 1, which is ﬁN
onfin
ancial 
Sector 
Credit
-to-GDP Ratio.
ﬂ In 
answer to the earlier question, you said 
that the cross
-country evidence on this was all over the 
map, and that does not gibe with what I understood the cross-country evidence to be, which was 

that this line is basically trending up across the developed economies.  S
o it looks very similar 
actua
lly. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Sorry. I meant the cross-country evidence on the level.  I thought that 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley was asking, is 2.5 a magic number? I mean, this number is much bigger 
in some countries and much smaller in other countries. 
MR. BULLARD.  Oka
y, but the picture would look the same. 
MR. LEHNERT. 
Yes. 
MR. BULLARD. 
It has always been trending up, I guess.  The developed world has 
always been trending up, 
is that right? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
The tricky part about this is if you have a secular trend 
of more intermediation, then this is going to be an upward-trending number, and so the degree of 

intermediation in a financial system really is important in terms of what 
number you 
get. 
               
         
              
    
              MR. BULLARD.  When people showed this picture to me over the year
s, I always said, 
well, this was 
financial market deepening
, and 
good things are happening in the 
intermediation 
sector
.  It didn™t pan out so well later. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Well, and presumably by analogy, 
then
, the fact that it™s 
now falling 
for the household and business sectors 
isŠ MR. BULLARD.  Y
es.  Okay, thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I just 
wanted to make a comment on the 
financial stability report. I continue to find a lot of value in this, and I think particularly as we 

look at these trends 
in a low interest rate environment, I would take no exception to the 
conclusion that right now imbalances are not obvious.  But just thinking back to how we thought 

about land values in the 1980s, in the late 1990s and early 2000s, as we watched banks begin to 

concentrate in commercial real estate and even some of the subprime exposures, the point at 

whi
ch to know when to take signal from some of those things is very difficult, notwithstanding 
supervisors and others 
looking at them.
  So I think as you continue to monitor this, as we get into 
December and beyond
, looking at where these trends are going 
wil
l be 
very important. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any other questions for our colleagues? 
[No 
response]  Okay.  Seeing none, on the agenda, we have an opportunity for participants who want 

to raise questions or issues related to financial stability
.  And Vice Chairman
, if you™d like to 
start off
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen and I were in B
asel 
over 
the weekend, and I have to say that there was a 
pretty strong sense of unanimity that what the 

ECB did was essentially the best that t
hey could accomplish, given the various constraints under 
                              
   
                 
  
 which 
they were 
operating.  The fact that the purchases could be unlimited means that the 
program has the potential for actually being an effective backstop, and the fact that the ECB will 
be pari p
assu 
with other bondholders is important because it really will reduce the pressures on 
private holders.  
So in effect, 
there may be private holders, if they view this as credible, who will 
actually want to invest in these sovereign instruments for a carry trade because the yield 
curves 

in these countries, 
of course
, are very, very steep. 
There™s also a bit of carrot now to incent proper actions by the government.  So if you do 
the right thing, we will intervene and we will hold down your debt service cost.  And I don™t 

think th
ere was that carrot before
, so I think that™s pretty significant.  I think that the ECB has 

essent
ially put on the table something that could take the risk of an interest rate-debt service-
fiscal deficit spiral a bit off the table as long as the countries do the right thing.
  And in addition, 
if these purchases do, in fact, materialize, I think this does push you in the direction toward 

further fiscal union.  After all, the ECB is backstopped by 
the entire 
euro zone, so such purchases 
will increase the joint and several nature of the union.
  And finally, I thought the other thing that 
was noteworthy abo
ut the ECB action was that it was a 22 to 
1 vote, with only 
Weidmann
 of the 
Bundesbank dissenting.  Given the fact that the German political leadership, 
at least for now
, seems to be supporting the ECB actions, this means that the Bundesbank™s opposition i
s somewhat marginalized at this point. 
So that™s the good news. 
Despite this, I don™t think we should kid ourselves.  I think the situation remains very 
tenuous despite the ECB™s supports.  I™d be, probably, slightly darker than Steve™s comments on 

this.
  Several issues worth highlighting: 
First, the ECB program would only activate if the 
countries actually negotiate an MOU with the 
euro group, and already we™re hearing signs 
that 
Spain seems to be reluctant or slow in terms of pursuing it.  In fact, the Spanish may decide that 
                       
         
       
            the backstop might be e
ffect
ive even if they don™t seek an MOU.  That seems like a highly risky 
strategy, but it is something that they might decide to do.
  Second, the program obviously will 
only continue if they stay on the progra
m. And, third, it™s going to take a while for this all to be 
implemented because the MOU has to be negotiated with the e
uro group
, and all of the finance 
ministers have to agree, and several parliaments actually have to approve the MOU.  So this idea 
that this is going to be happening very, very quicklyŠ
I think the market is probably a little bit 
ahead of itself in terms of how quick
ly this will come into play. 
Other issues
Šthe 
ECB program will not necessarily crowd in investors, because it™s not 
clear how long this is going to last.  So you might buy things, but you still have quite a bit of 

risk.  
You still have a very bad feedback 
loop from the austerity programs to the economy, to 
fiscal performance
, and
 the state of the banking system.  This doesn™t take any of that off the 
table, and there™s still no road map as to where we™re actually going in terms of the ultimate 

destination
:  What does greater fiscal union in Europe look like? 
So this is a very important 
thing that the ECB has done.  I think they did the best that they could possibly do, and the good 

thing is they put the problem back in the lap of the governments, 
where it b
elongs.  They have 
done what they can do now, and now it™s up to the governments to decide, both in the core and in 

the periphery, if 
they™re going to go along. 
The basic model
, though, of this whole situation hasn™t changed.  Countries have to show 
they™r
e on a sustainable path to regain market access.  The core countries are unwilling to be 
explicit about the level of support because of 
fears that this will undermine the effort.  The 
constitutional court decision in Germany today, which was actually mostly positive, affirmed 

that the German commitment is limited to 
•190 billionŠthat™s it, and so that™s sort of 
significant. 
            
     
          
              
  
   
     
 I think the unwillingness of the German Constitutional C
ourt to be explicit does create 
uncertainty that makes progress more difficult.
  So we do still have a long way to go, and we 
don™t have big, solid backstops to absorb shocks or support confiden
ce.  The ESM
ŒEFSF resources are
 still very much too small to credibly backstop Spain and Italy, and the ECB support 
may be too uncertain as t
o its sustainability.  So it™s progress, but there a
re still a lot of questions 
on the table. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you for the financial stability report.  Like President George, 
I do appreciate the monitoring that you™re doing in this area.  I just had two quick questions.  

They both relate to money market funds.  We™ve had an SEC proposal that wasn™t proposed, and 

I was wondering about your perspective looking at Europe, 
where there™s more than
 $1 trillion of 
money market funds 
and 
they have a mix of floating and fixed NAVs.  I don™t know how much 
time you spent looking at the European money market funds, but I™d be interested in your 

perspective on the industry™s concern with the floating NAV, which se
ems to have been 
successful in stopping forward movement.  And then the second question is, given that they have 

both floating and fixed NAVs in Europe, and the deposit rate went down to zero, is there 

anything to infer about interest on excess reserves fr
om the European money market fund 
experience with the deposit rate going to zero
? MR. LEHNERT. 
Are
 those questions you™d like me to answer? 
[Laughter] 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If not here, at another time. 

MR. LEHNERT.  Very, very briefly, and I certainly don™t approach your expertise in this 
area, we™ve long maintained that the redemption of par, what you call the fixed NAV, is useful in 

certain circumstances.  There are certain elements of the U.S. tax cod
e and other things that 
             
    
     
        
  
   
          
     
     
                                                                 make it useful
.  But basically
, at the end of the day, it™s just a safe place to put your money
, and 
if 
it floats up and down a bit, it™s not the end of the world.  And, of course, the European 
experience highlights that, although p
resumably their tax treatment might be slightly different. 

Then what™s happened to European money markets since the deposit rate went to zero? It
™s maybe still a little early to tell what the long
-run effects are, but the initial wave of reports is that 
there hasn™t been an implosion of the money markets. 
MR. POTTER.  One fund closed.  The Bank of AmericaŒMerrill Lynch fund closed. 

MS. LIANG
.  I guess I would just add that even at current rates, the proportion of U.S. 
funds that are waiving fees is really
 quite high, so the implications of further reductions in 
money fund rates could have effects.  S
ome ballpark estimates
Šthey are not precise
Šis 
that 
about 70 percent of U.S. funds are waiving their fees at this pointŠthat™s a pretty big number. 
CHAIRMAN BE
RNANKE.  Okay.  Why don™t we take a break for lunch?  When we 
come back, I™ll talk briefly about the experimental consensus forecast, and then we™ll go to the 

economic go
-round.  Why don™t we reconvene at 1 o™clock?
 [Lunch recess] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
6 Why
 don™t we 
re-commence?  Please feel free to finish 
your fruit or your cookie. I™ll provide the entertainment here.  [Laughter] 
I™d like to talk for just 
a few minutes about 
the 
latest iteration of the experimental consensus forecast.  You have a 
handout 
with that title. It proceeded in the same way as in previous iterations
:  The staff sent out 
a preliminary Tealbook forecast about a week in advance and 
received your comments. We also 

had the benefit 
this 
time of having the SEP.  So using all that, 
we came up with the forecast 
that™s shown in table 1 on page 1, and which is diagrammed in exhibit 1 on page 4. 
6 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
                  
           
      
    
  
      Like the Tealbook, this forecast or projection is conditioned on no change in policy.  That 
is, it™s 
conditioned on the August policies of continuing the MEP and late 2014 guidance.  
Generally speak
ing, the data are quite similar to 
the 
JulyŒAugust consensus, which is shown 
immediately below.  One exception is the 2013 real GDP forecast on the very first line, 
2.2 percent, which is a little bit weaker.  That was not inconsistent with the comments that came 

on the first draft
; most people either saw the near term as being a bit weaker or about the same
.  But I want to come back to that number in a moment.  The unemployment and inflation numbers 

are pretty similar, and if you care to look at the figure, you™ll see that the trajectories are very 

similar obviously, particularly relative to the standard errors. 
Like last time
, we also looked at the consensus forecast under alternative policy 
assumptions, and that™s given in table 3 on page 3.  Under each variable, the first line, the status 

quo is, again, the same as the consensus forecast in t
able 1.  That™s the forecast assuming the 
August policies continue.  The subsequent lines include, first, a chan
ge in the guidance to 
mid-2015, so simply 
a mechanical moving out of the interest rate path to mid-2015, and then 
subsequent 
additions of 
a $750 billion or $1 trillion LSAP program.  So that gives the 
alternative
s.  The differences are consistent with the 
FRB
/US analysis
; I™ll come back to that 
point as well.
  And 
exhibit
 2 shows the paths for the federal funds rate, the unemployment 
rate, 
and inflation under optimal control, under the no-
policy
-change consensus forecast in red, and 
then the alternative policies provided in t
able 3. 
Now, this time an issue came up
, which was less of a concern last time, but 
it raises an 
important question that I think the subcommittee is going to have to look at, which is that, of 

course, the SEP is conditional on each person™s view of optimal monetary policy.  And in this 

case, if you turn to table 2, which shows median forecasts in the September SEP, you™ll see the 
        
           
     
    
  
     
    
      SEP is broken into two categories
: all participants and participants who assume further easing. 
A major
ity of people submitted a forecast in which they assumed that the guidance would be 
advanced to 2015 and that we would undertake additional asset purchases. 
So the SEP submissions actually assume that change in policy.  So then the question is, 
how do you get from those SEP projections back to the no-policy-
change baseline?
  And what 
the staff proposed, and what they did, 
was basically they took these policy differentials that are 
in t
able 3
, and they subtracted from the SEP results to get the baseline.  An
d to the extent that 
those differentials are not accurate or are different from what people expect, then that will, of 

course, create some noise in the baseline forecast. 
So I raise this for a couple of reasons.  The first is that we need to think aboutŠ
and we 
talked about this last time
Šwhether the consensus forecast we would want to release would be 
the pre-
meeting status quo policy forecast
ŠI think President Lockhart suggested that last time
Š or the postmeeting inclusive
-of-the-action forecast, or both.  We could consider both
; I think we 
need to discuss that.  If we do both, then we will have to figure out how to make sure people are 

comfortable with both the before and the after, if you see what I™m saying. 
For this meeting, I think it will not 
be 
very m
uch of a problem.  What I had proposed to 
do is, as was given to you earlier on, in 
item
 5 after the policy decision tomorrow, I will ask you 

whether you are comfortable with the consensus forecast inclusive of the policy action.  And if 

we do take policy 
action, then this whole issue will be irrelevant because we™ll be looking at the 
policies assuming 
the further easing
Šat least for those participants who submitted that. 
But I 
just want to flag this point and note that we are planning a discussion in October of this whole 

project, and certainly one of the issues we™ll want to discuss is whether or not we want to look at 

ex ante, ex post
, or both forecasts, and how we would best extract that information.  So, again, 
                   
               
         
    tomorrow after the policy decision, I™ll ask you if you are comfortable with the consensus 
forecast, including whatever policy decisions we m
ake; are 
comfortable, with reservations; or 
have a 
very 
different view.  And 
I™ll 
ask you
, if you have a different view, 
to briefly state 
what 
that 
difference is.
  Any questions or comments? Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
You have this issue that the SEP has some people 
who 
have no change in policy; others have changes in policy.  That™s going to still be an outstanding 

issue going forward.  Do you have any thoughts on how we wouldŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that™s what I™m raising
Šwe have to figure out how to 
deal with that
.  One possibility would be to specifyŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  A, B
, and C? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, ye
sŠI suppose.  If we™re going to do the ex ante, 
before
-meeting projection, then everybody would be asked to make a projection conditional on 
the policy prior to the meeting, and the forecast could be used to say, 
ﬁWe thought this was 
unsatisfactory.  That™s why we took the action we did today.
ﬂ  Alternatively, we could ask for a 

forecast conditional on one or more policy actions.  But that™s an issue that 
this particular 
exercise has made clear, and I™m just flagging it for discussion by the subcommittee. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It™s interesting to see the difference that people submit in 
terms of the policy, because you actually find out what people think 
about how 
efficacious the 
policy is
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, of course.  
That™s right.  That™s certainly one of the 
benefits of doing that.  But everything that we are considering here also has the cost of 

multiplying the number of projections and forecasts we™re asking people to do, and that™s 

something we need to take into account.  
President Lacker. 
       
              
         
           
          
MR. LACKER.  You mentioned parts of the consensus forecast process.  We™re asked to 
provide a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, and I™d urge the staff and all of us to give 
some thought to what that ought to mean.  As I read the instructions, I thought of f
our different 
interpretations of that.  You take as a given that what we™re trying to do in writing down a 

forecast is 
to write
 down the mean of a joint distribution of the economy and policy.  Well, if you 
ask us to submit a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, are you asking us to replace our 

reaction function with one that™s fixed at that path unchangingly, 
and averaging over that? 
What 
do all 
of 
the shocks have to be? 
What™s the most likely outcome that delivers that as the policy 
reaction
Šwhat
 economy is weak enough to justify that policy?  That™s a different question.  Or, 
do we take 
our reaction function and add-
factor it so that it delivers that policy 
as a mean? 
There™s a bunch of different ways you can think of doing that, but we ought to be precise about 

it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course
Šwe™ll have to be precise.  These are 
complexities. 
One possibility would be to have everybody, again, assume appropriate monetary 
policy and 
deliver that joint distribution 
that you™re describing; and then, 
try to see if th
ere™s a 
center of gravity 
of that, which looks like the consensus; describe that consensus; and then 
describe those wh
o differ and qualitatively how they differ.  So that would be one approach.  
Another approach could be, for example, to ask people to use a specific reaction function or to 

specify their own reaction function.  
President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. 
Yes
Šthank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I like the idea
, in principle, 
of having a consensus forecast based on status quo policy and then a consensus forecast based on 

the policy action.  I think, though, that 
in practice
, the latter is going to be very challenging
, because you could easily imagine that the Committee could come up with a choice of a policy 
            
  
     
                 
    
action that they had not considered ex ante.  And then it becomes very difficult to know how the 
timing would work and to 
get the logistics to work. 
CHAIRMAN BERNA
NKE.  No, absolutely.  And again, I think Governor Yellen™s 
subcommittee will solve these problems for us [
laughter] and bring that to us in October.  
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Let me just reiterate on this. I do think that the market expectation o
f the Committee™s policy as of a certain date, which encompasses all aspects of monetary policy, is 

a fixed point that we could rally around.  Everyone c
an give their prognostication based on that.  
That would give us just one exercise to do.  Usually the 
market ex
pectation is not a long way off.  
It might be somewhat off, but it™s not a long way off, and it would simplify the exercise in my 

mind and would keep it clear
er what we™re 
doing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s, of course, what the British and some others do. 

MR. BULLARD.  Ye
s. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Does that address President Lacker™s concerns?  I wouldn™t have thought 
so. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not exactly.  Only if it™s approximately 
right
. MR. EVANS. 
Yes
Šright. 
CHAIRMAN BERN
ANKE.  Anybody else?  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  Narayana made the point I was going to make. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments or questions? 
Again, we will be 
discussing this at the next meeting.
  President Evans. 
             
    
                    
   
   
        
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a question 
that™s a little bit different
? I
t was triggered by 
some comments that President Fisher made earlier in asking questions, where he alluded to the 
fact that some people around the table would be, however you put it, more accepting of a high
er 
inflation rat
e than others, or whatever.  And in exhibit 2 on page 5, this question comes to my 

mind, which is, 
there is an optimal control path that is shown that has inflation rising to
ŠI think 
it™s 2.3 percent, 
if it™s co
nsistent with previous Tealbook-
style analyse
s. I personally don™t see 
anything in this path that™s inconsistent with our long
er-run strategic approach that we adopted in 
January, and I just wonder if that™s the sense of the Committee or if there™s an important 

divergence of opinion there, which seems to be one of the points that President Fisher might 

have been raising. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we are clear that our objective
s are
Šthink of a 
quadratic objective function.  They™re symmetrical.  The
re is an 
increasing marginal cost 
of being away from each objective. 
We have a balanced approach, but people w
ill have different 
models of the economy, and they™ll have different weights in their objective functions.  So this 
is 
obviously not a purely value-fee projection.  
President Bullar
d. MR. BULLARD. Is 
exhibit 2 something that would be distributed as part of the 
consensus 
forecast
? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, nothing has been decided, but I would
n™t 
imagine 
we would want to do all of those things. 
MR. BULLARD.  So this is just an internal document, 
like the ones we always use. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. EVANS.  I wasn™t asking a question about communications.  I was asking more a 
question about how we interpret our long
er-run strategic document, 
because at various times
, we 
          
          
                
    
  make diffe
rent comments about these types of outcomes, and it strikes me that there™s less 
agreement on that particular observation than sometimes is given by the words that we use. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I™ve said in press conferences that it™s a symmetric 
objective a
nd we have a balanced approach, and so on.  
Anyone else? 
[No response] 
All right. 
Now we come to the main event. Let™s start ou
r economic go-round with President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Intermeeting data
, I think, 
have done little to 
alter the economic picture.  We
™re in a period of sluggish economic growth, clearly.  
Our Fifth 
District survey measures, which fell sharply in July, 
have 
bounced back to neutral readings now, 
and the tenor of our anecdotal reports has been middling of late, consistent with reports we™
ve 
been hearing since the spring.  While activity is weak, we
™re not seeing any signs in our D
istrict 
of a dramatic slowdown around the cornerŠ
or a dramatic pickup
, for that matter. 
I thought it was appropriate, Mr. Chairman, that at our last meeting you took a longer-
term perspective by focusing on economic growth over the entire recovery.  As you noted, real 

GDP growth has averaged around 2 percent since the recovery began.  I think 2.2 percent is the 

pre
cise number.  We keep seeing swings in growth every couple of quarters around that average.  
So it mak
es sense to focus on the longer-run path around which we™re fluctuating, rather than 
just the last quarter or two.
  At our last meeting, Mr. Chairman, you talked about why growth 
was so low, and you discussed the spider charts put together by Board economists Greg Howard, 

Robert Martin, and Beth Anne Wilson.  I believe they refer to them as butterfly charts, but I™m 

not taking a stand on insects here.  
The 
main purpose of their paper was to show that advanced 

economies recover as rapidly from banking and financial crises as they do from other recessions, 

and I thought they did a pretty convincing job of that.  
Their charts also show that the current 

recovery
 in U.S. GDP tracks quite closely the typical advanced economy recovery from banking 
        
                                        and financial crises
, as well as the typical advanced economy recovery from housing slumps.  
The message I take away from their work is that we shouldn™t have expected to do much better 
than what we™ve experienced, and I think that™
s consistent with the message from some other 
research along the same lines.
  Now, the authors don™t focus on the notion of a gap, however.  
And for many people right now, the motivation for furt
her stimulus is that the relevant gap is 
quite large. 
I was quite pleased to see the memo from Bruce Fallick and Jeremy R
udd on this subject.  
It™s 
a helpful, well-organized description of how the staff thinks about and estimates economic 
slack
Šlays it out
 quite clearly.  And I think this memo should help clarify our mutual 
understanding going forward. 
But I
™d like to make a suggestion or two for further clarifying our 
discussions.  My suggestion is that we distinguish carefully between two distinct concep
tual 

notions of slack.  One concept is defined by the number to which the unemployment rate would 

converge in the future in the absence of unanticipated shocks and under appropriate monetary 

policy.  This is essentially what 
we™ve referred to as the 
ﬁlonger-run normal rate of 

unemployment.ﬂ I think that™s what we called it in our consensus statement in January.  T
hat™s a 
fine term for it.
  When people refer to sustainable employment, this is the concept I think of
:  what the economy is going to converge to 
several years from now, after the current shocks we
™ve 
experienced have dissipated and
, under appropriate policy, we get back to some trend with no 
shocksŠ
the mean forecast out there.
  Now, this number probably doesn™t vary much over time 
because
, by defi
nition
, the effect of current shocks has faded out by the time the economy 
converges to this number.  In fact, this number might be close to constant over time, or it may 

vary only with some slow-moving and predictable things, 
such as
 the demographic compo
sition 
of the labor force and the like.  So I think when you look at a construct like the NAIRU, the non-
              
      
                              
 accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, it
™s constructed with this notion in mind.  I™
ll come 
back to 
the 
NAIRU in a minute. 
The second concept of 
economic slack
, which I think we should distinguish from this 
first one
, is based on the reference level of the unemployment rate 
with which it is most 
appropriate to compare the current unemployment rate for the purposes of assessing current 
monetary pol
icy.
  Equivalently, one can think of this just as well in terms of the reference level 
for output 
with
 which it™s most appropriate to compare current output for monetary policy 
purposes.  
This is sometimes referred to as the 
ﬁnatural rate,
ﬂ although some writers refer to this 
as the 
ﬁefficient rate
ﬂ and reserve 
ﬁnatural rate
ﬂ for something distinct.  But 
ﬁnatural rateﬂ 
tends 
to be the term that 
we™ve used around the table here and 
that 
others 
have used
, and it™
s what the 
staff memo uses.  So 
I™
m going to stick with that term for this reference rate. 
In some very simple models, these two concepts are identical.  But in general, they™re not 
the same.  Indeed, in our standard, modern, mainstream models, almost all of the shocks hitting 

the model should affect the natur
al rate, even if the longer
-run normal rate doesn™t vary much.  
Now, not all of the shocks that hit the economy should affect the natural rate.  That™
s very clear 
in these models as well, and I™
ll talk more a little bit later about 
the difference and
 what kinds 
of 
shocks fall in that category.  By the way, I™d mention that modern models are all extensions of 

the 
Solow 
growth model that the Chairman referred to at our last meeting. That model is 
deterministic, nonmonetary.  These mod
els are extended to include a role for monetary factors 

and to include the role of uncertainty and unpredictable shocks to the economy.  I think the staff 

memo would have been clear
er if it had distinguished between these two notions of slack, 
because the 
estimates they present in this memo
Šsome are aimed at this longer
-run notion, and 
some pretty clearly are aimed at this short
-run reference notion.  
For example, the NAIRU 
            
       
             
      
          
  
      estimates they present ar
e designed to estimate the long
er-run normal rate of unemployment, 
because 
they 
deliberately exclude high
-frequency factors, but our models tell us that™
s clearly the 
wrong benchmark for policy in a world in which the economy is hit by a range of shocks.  
So my 
suggestion would be that staff 
members
, when they present 
to 
us a gap or a natural rate concept, 
be clear about what they™re trying to present.  I™ll note hereŠ
and I
™ll come back to this in a 
second
Šthe discussion we had about adjusting the natural rate for the drought
; that
™s a high
-frequency 
adjustment.  But the logic for making that adjustment is really identical to the logic for 
this reference rate that responds to current shocks. I think it would also aid clarity if we, in our 

discussions, were mindful of this distinction between these two.  The gap between the current 

unemployment rate and the long-run normal unemployment rate is exceptionally high by 

historical standards, and that gap clearly represents a tremendous amount of human suffering.  

And I can understandŠeveryone should understandŠwhy that would add urgency to the search 

for remedies to that.
  But modern macroeconomics is pretty clear about the gap that™
s relevant 
for the conduct of monetary policy, and it™s conceptually different from the gap defined by the 

distance 
between whe
re we are today and 
where we
™re going to be several years from now. 
So how do you estimate policy-
relevant gaps? Well, you need a model because you
™re 
talking about a counterfactual; 
you
™re talking about something that doesn™t happenŠ
it™s a latent, 
unobserved variable.  You need a model to be able to extract something like that from the data, 

and different models, obviously, 
give you different estimates. 
The staff memo presents estimates 
derived from EDO, the Board™s New Keynesian dynamic stochastic gener
al equilibrium
 model.  
And it delivers 
an estimate of the current gap 
of 
a little under 3 percent, defined this second way, 
the natural rate way. 
That compares 
with 
the NAIRU
-based estimate that the Tealbook provides 
        
      
                 
  
         
     
       
     
         of about 4½ 
percent, so you can see 
that you can get a significant difference there
.  This 
illustrates the extent to which the model you bring to bear makes a difference. 
So how big is the relevant gap?  Well, I™ve said beforeŠand I think others around the 
table have said before
Šthat we don™t think it™
s large, and we
™ve tried to describe economic 
factors that, in theoretical models
, would affect the natural rate and so would
n™t
 add to the gap.  
So they™d reduce your estimate of the gap.  
Now, rather than repeat myself
ŠI know that hasn™t 
stopped 
me in the past
ŠI thought I™d take the opposite tack and talk about what™s in the gap.  
The economy in a model that™s taken to the data is envisioned as driven by shocks and other 
developments.  Those shocks 
all affect the data you see, but not all of th
em affect the natural 
rate.  So the things that affect the economy, but don™t 
figure 
into this natural rate, are the things 
that affect the gap. 
What could those things be?  Well, this depends, obviously, on the model 
you use to interpret the data, the mode
l you use to extract an estimate of the natural rate, and so 
determine the gap. 
Let™s take a look at
 EDO, the Board™s DSGE model.  Its 
estimate of the gap 
is based on the natural rate, as I said, and it™s near 3 percent.  What would it take for the gap to 

be that large in that model?  Now, I should caution here
:  What I
™m going to say is based on my 
understanding of the model conceptually, theoretically.  I haven™t looked at the empirical 

decomposition, but based on my understanding of what™s going on in t
hat model
Šthis is true for 
a lot of other models as wellŠ
you
™d have to believe 
that 
one of two sorts of things 
is going on 
for the gap to be large. 
First, you could believe that firms have not fully adjusted their prices in 
response to the downward shift in demand that occurred four years ago.  These models are based 

on the notion of prices being sticky temporarilyŠ
that people set prices and
, for a time
, they™
re 
not incented to
ward, 
or they
™re prevented from
, adjusting their prices to reflect developments 
that they
™re seeing at their doorstep.
  So this price stickiness keeps prices from adjusting.  A 
fall 
                                             
     in demand shows up in quantities rather than prices at first, and then later, as prices adjust, the 
adjustment shows up in prices rather than quantities.  So that™
s the general mechanism.
  To 
attribute it all to that, you
™d have to believe that there™s 
an incredible amount of price stickiness 
in this economy.  I don™t find that plausible, and I don™t think it lines up with other evidence we 

have on the degr
ee of price stickiness in the economy. 
The second class of things you could believe, in order to believe that the gap is large, is 
that the economy has been hit by a string of large shocks that have not affected the model™s 

natural rate but have affected t
he economy.  And this is what the model attributes the large gap 
to.  What would those shocks be? Well, in EDO, there 
are
 only two kinds of shocks that would 
affect the gap.  One is a string of upward shocks to the degree of monopolistic power that firms 

have in setting prices. Firms are monopolistic competitors.  They have a little bit of pricing 

power, not total, and the amount of pricing power they have is determined by the degree of 

substitutability between goods.  For some reason, goods are less of a substitute for each other 

now, so firms have more pricing power, and t
hat™s why prices haven™t adjusted
, quantities have, 
and the gap is high.  Alternatively, you could believe that a string of analogous shocks in the 

labor market ha
s occurred, so that workers have more bargaining power in setting wages and 
are 

able to extract a 
kind of monopoly power from the firms they work for.  Now, I don™t have direct 

observations on any of these.  You infer these from the model and the data.  You 
take the model 

as given, you infer these kinds of things.  But those don™t really match up, in my mind, to the 

kinds of anecdotal stories you hear from people.  You just don™t hear about firms having a lot 

more pricing power than they did four years ago, and it certainly doesn™t seem consistent to think 

of workers as having a lot more leverage now, either.  So I find both of these implausible.  
Now, 

as I said, this is based on my understanding of EDO
; my understanding of how the theoretical 
              
    
    
    
              
     
  
       
  
       model is built
Šthat is well documented.  In that EDO model, in the memo results, they didn™t do 
the decomposition.  They didn™t show us how much of the gap is due to sticky prices left over 

from 
2008 shocks, how much is due to monopoly power shocks, how much is due to wa
ge pricing shocks.  I said they don™t seem plausible, but the right way forward for us, in talking 

about these things, is to put some estimates on the table and do the decomposition.  W
e have a 
working group under 
way that works with a set of these models. 
There are 
other DSGE 
modelsŠPhiladelphia, Chicago.  What™s the other one? 
PARTICIPANTS.  New York. 

MR. LACKER. 
New York.  I forgot New York.  And there 
are
 others around the 
System.  I know 
that 
Atlanta operates a pretty elaborate model as well.
  So e
ach of these taken to 
the data would give you a different estimate of the gap, and they™d give you a different 

decomposition of what the gap was about.  We™d be able to look at those, if we had them in front 

of us, and say, ﬁWell, attributing the gap to this is persuasive to me.  It matches up with what I 

think is out there,ﬂ or, ﬁThis reason for the gap to be large isn™t persuasive to me.ﬂ  And we could 

have a discussion that goes beyond, ﬁI think the gap is big.
ﬂ ﬁNo, I think the gap is small.
ﬂ  ﬁNo, 
I think the gap is big.
ﬂ ﬁNo, I think the gap is small.ﬂ I think we could make progress by putting 
the cards on the table, by putting some more-
explicit analysis on the table. 
So that™s my suggestion for improving our discussion of the gap going forward.  As I 
said, the estimates of the 3 percent gap in EDO seem implausible to me compared 
with 
factors 
that I
™ve talked about that are likely to affect the natural rate rather than the gap
Šthings like 
the 
labor market
, skill problems, 
the 
housing overhang, and policy uncertainty, which 
aren™t 
captured by the models.
  We could have a debate then about what is in the model or not.  T
his is 
what goes into my thinkingŠthat we shouldn™t expect much from monetary policy now.  
                   
                     
 Moreover, we might be pretty close to where the policy-
relevant natural rate is right now.
  Thank 
you
ŠI took some extra time here.  I appreciate it.  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE C
HAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I don™t really understand why the DSGE model should 
be particularly relevant to the current set of circumstances, given that this is a financial shock, a 

huge financial shock, and my understanding is that DGSE models are very rudimentary, 
if 
they 

hav
e anything
, in terms of the financial sector.
  To go to the DSGE models 
as a source of 
determining the natural rate versus the NAIRU and 
the size of the gap seems a little bit 
ﬁoff the 
reservation
ﬂ relative to the source of the shock.  So I™m just curious what your reaction is. 
MR. LACKER.  Sure.  Let me say two things to that.  
The f
irst is that progress has been 
made in putting the rudiments of a financial sector in these models.  The New York model is a 

leader on that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  B
ut we™
re still in elementary school. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  The second thing I™d point out, though, is that if we™re going to 
think about the data we see, draw conclusions, and act on it, we™
re using either an explicit model 
or an implicit model.  There
™s no avoiding that.  Otherwise, what we™re doing is gibberish.  
An explicit model has the advantage of exposing all sides of the reasoning process to scrutiny by 

others.  You can say, 
and it
™s perfectly legitimate to think, 
ﬁAll right
Šyes, this factor that I t
hink 
is important is not in this model,
ﬂ and I just did that with EDO.  I just said, 
ﬁLook, it doesn™t 
have a very articulate labor sector
ﬂŠbut we can debate that, and we can look at the magnitudes 
and talk about that.  
So I think it
™s a vehicle for analysis and discussion that crystallizes our 
thinking, that pins things down, but I don™t think it™s constructive to say, ﬁX isn™t in the model.  I 
       
              
    
    
                have a free pass to say whatever I want.ﬂ I just don™t think that™s constructive.  I know that™s not 
what you were advocating. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, President Lacker.  You™
re a 
perfect straight man for me because 
I™m going to be rather brief 
[laughter] 
to preserve 
time for 
the main event. 
Reports from my 
District contacts were very little changed from August. 
Economic expansion remains positive but very modest.  Just a coup
le of comments from 

contacts.  First, housing-sector contacts and several of my banking directors repor
ted that 
residential real estate activity in general is clearly improving.  Prices have firmed in many areas, 

sales volume has increased, and permitting is rising.  Purchase mortgage applications have 

increased recently, and refinance activity remains positive. I have also seen data suggesting that 

the recent increase in purchases is bei
ng driven primarily by mortgage-financed homebuyers 
rather than cash investors.  Second, a director from a large management consulting firm offered 

the view that a number o
f his firms, very large corporate clients, have resigned themselves to a 
2 percent growth world, and that major actions these businesses might take to accelerate their 

growth are largely on hold.  We heard a similar theme from several contacts.
  And, third, 
inflation and rising business costs are not much of a concern among our contacts.  My director 

from the country™s largest home-
improvement retailer reported that suppliers are not asking for 
price 
increases in this environment. 
Let me shift to my 
Bank™s assessment of the national economy and outlook.  It has 
become pretty difficult, in my view, to reject the view that the economy has been on a roughly 

2 percent growth trend for most of the recovery.  Maybe I™m a little slow, but the recognition has 

gelled
 in my thinking, 
just in the last few weeks
, that this is the prevailing reality.  Based on 
                        
          
     
         recent estimates, this may even overstate the immediate reality.
  My outlook for GDP growth 
continues to show only modest improvement on this trend over the forecast horizon.  In 
particular, beyond this year and next, I remain less optimistic about the pace of 
GDP growth than 
the Tealbook.  With respect to employment, my baseline outlook has been a continuation of the 

trend of roughly 150,000 per month that has prevailed over the past two years.  This pace would 

be sufficient at current participation rates to make continuing but modest progress on the 

unemployment rate. However, last week™s job report makes it pretty clear that employment 

growth has fallen short of the 150,000 trend over the past four months.  Even though four months 

amount to a small sliver of time, I am concerned about the lack of any sustained progress on the 

unemployment rate since the beginning of the year.  It is getting harder to rule out the p
ossibility 

that returning to the 
scenario of 
150,000 jobs a month is at risk.  
My perception is that the well
-known uncertainty factors, including those associated with various downside risks, are 

contributing to some of the recent softness in the data.  I have no argument with the SEP bias that 

GDP growth risks are weighted to the downside, but I don™t rule out that these uncertainty drags 
could dissipate and that there is some upside potential.  For instance, some of the incoming 

information around housin
g and 
Europe has been mildly encouraging, and it
™s plausible that if 
the major sources of uncertaintyŠnotably, the fiscal cliff and European situationŠ
are resolved 

favorably, or more or less favorably, in a few months, the outlook actually could be brighter.  So 

it strikes me that this environment is not as clear
-cut as the situations that we faced on the cusp 
of LSAP1 and LSAP2. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Mr. Wilcox, did you want to add to the 
conversation? 
          
   
        
      
      
                      MR. WILCOX.  
Yes. I don™t have a detailed response to President Lacker™s comments, 
but I thought I might just offer a few observations.  Sometimes I
™m in sympathy with many of 
the points that President Lacker makes.  I think it™s impor
tant, though, to state that we take it as 
our remit to advise the Committee to the limit of our ability to measure the economy, to estimate 
and understand the economy, to observe economic processes.  We think it™
s critically important 
not to do more than that, and we™re profoundly aware of the extent of our ignorance and the 

ignorance of the macroeconomic profession at large, regarding key questions about how the 

macroeconomy works. 
I™
m reminded of a comment that Larry Summers once made in quite a 
differen
t situation
, in which he said, ﬁYou know, economics is an interesting field.  I doubt that 
when astrophysicists get together
, they debate the fundamental validity of the laws of gravity.  
And yet what we as economists do is, we have profound uncertainty about questions that are as 

fundamental as the laws of gravity.
ﬂ  We on the staff do make every effort to distinguish short-

run influences that we can identify.  For example, we have adjusted our reference level of the 

unemployment rate in light of influence
s that we can identify and estimate
, stemming from 
emergency unemployment benefits and from the quality of functioning of the labor market.  We 

have adjusted our measure of the gap between the actual unemployment rate and the reference
, 
or natural, 
rate of
 unemployment for those kinds of things.  But beyond that, we confront the real 
world in which data are imperfect, theory is deficient, policymaker and staff bandwidth is 

limited, and there are a lot of profound and fundamental debates to be resolved. 
With regard to EDO, it is a state
-of-the-
art DSGE model coming directly out of the 
intellectual tradition that President Lacker refers to. It
™s part, but only part, of the intellectual 

base that we consult in the course of putting together our analysis that we provide to the 

Committee.
  Now, whether the empirical properties of that model are plausible or implausible is 
                
                              
              
a little difficult for me to say.  They are what they are, and they
™re derived by an effort to work 
directly in that intellectual tradition.  W
e have pursued a diversified, 
multimodel strategy
, which 
we think provides our analysis with a greater robustness than would be the case if we had a 
single 
model or a single-
intellectual
-tradition strategy. 
So I
™m in sympathy with many of the 
points that President Lacker raises, but I think we need to recognize that the macroeconomic 

profession has a long way to go before we can deliver the kind of clarity and certainty that it 

seems to me is implicit in much of your remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President 
Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate Dave Wilcox™s comments 
there, and I™
ll have a few comments on the slack memo at the end here. 
Let me talk for a minute 
about the Eighth District economy, which continues to expand at a modest pace.  The drought in 

the 
District has been especially severe and is having an important effe
ct on agriculturally 
based 
businesses.  I generally agree with the Tealbook analysis of the 
effe
ct of the drought on the 
macroeconomy over the next couple of quarte
rs. 
District labor markets are improving slowly. 
The 
District unemployment rate, based on 16 D
istrict MSAs, has continued to decline this year 
and is, according to the most recent data, about 7.5 percent, noticeably below the national 

unemployment rate.
  Employment growth in the District has been slow, just a touch better than 
the national data, according to the most recent observations.  District real estate markets have 

improved during 2012.  Data on home sales for District MSAs, for instance, are up by 
a healthy 
margin compared 
with
 2011.  Specifically, year-
to-date home sales are up almost 13 percent in 
Louisville, 7 percent in Little Rock, 10 percent in Memphis, and 16 percent in St. Louis.  

Similarly, building permits for single
-family homes year to 
date in 2012 versus 2011 were up 
42 percent in Louisville, 14 percent in Little Rock, 46 percent in Memphis, and 23 percent in 
               
             
          
   
    
  
    St.
 Louis.  So I think that the housing part of the equation is moving off the bottom in 2012, and I 
find that encouraging. 
Natio
nally, I view the macroeconomy as being in a sluggish 
economic 
growth mode, but 
for a variety of reasons, I do not think the current constellation of data readings is one that should 
trigger outsized monetary policy action.  I view the U.S. economy as being on a path not too 

different from the one suggested in the work of Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rog
off as cited by 
President Lacker.
 They noted that post-
financial
-crisis or 
post-bubble economies tend to grow 
relatively slowly for a long time.  Our economy cl
early suffered through 
a collapse of a housing 
bubble, along with an associated financial crisis, so it is not really that surprising that the 

economy is following a path similar to the one experienced by other countries 
that 
have been in a 
similar situati
on.  In particular, the notion of a rapid return to the pre-
crisis
, bubble-influenced 
real GDP growth trend seems quite unrealistic accor
ding to the international cross-country 
evidence.  This, to me, is the leading hypothesis for our current situation.  I am concerned about 

the global slowdown and that, fed in large part by ongoing recession in Europe, this is affecting 

and will continue to affect U.S. multinational corporations.  These effects are quite apparent in 

my discussions with business contacts in 
medium and large firms in the 
District and across the 
nation.  Many are reporting troubling or worrisome movements in revenue and volume data 

during recent months.  While this bears watching, I do not think it is yet at the point where I 

foresee an especially severe impact on the U.S.  Some of this is certainly to be expected when the 

pan-European economy, which is actually somewhat larger than the U.S. economy, is in 
recession. 
I see U.S. inflation as subdued but generally close to target, unlike the summ
er and fall of 
2010, when nearly all measures of inflation were low and on a downward trajectory.  Again, this 
             
                 
   
   
             
  
     bears watching, but in my view, a threat of continued disinflation and possibly eventual deflation 
has not materialized, at least so far. 
Inflat
ion expectations are, by our own description, stable.  
Five
-year TIPS
-based expected inflation was about 208 basis points yesterday.  This, again, is 
not the situation of 2010, at least so far.  In addition, the five-year TIPS real yield of about 

minus 145 basis points is considerably lower than in 2010, suggesting that monetary policy may 

be much easier today than it was at that juncture.  In addition, I do not see financial stress as 

being particularly high at the current moment.  The St. Louis Financial Stress Index is showing 
a relatively tame reading. Of course, many factors could increase financial stress, but as of now
, those events have not occurred and, in fact, may not occur. 
I think it makes sense to wait and see what Europe can deliver during th
e fall.  As I
™ve 
told all of you before, I™
ve become 
more pessimistic on the medium
-term European prospects 
during the summer, as I have come to doubt that Europe has the type of either informal or formal 

institutional arrangements to deal with a crisis of
 this magnitude.  
Still, I think the jury remains 
out on that issue, so it would make sense for us to wait and see what the Europeans do, 
and see 

what happens.  
Certainly, recent declines in Spanish and Italian yields across the yield curve for 

government debt in both countries have been impressive 
and
 substantial, even if the medium-
and longer-term outlook for Europe is questionable.  
I am concerned that the ECB is not really 
easing aggressively in order to mitigate the 
euro
-area recession. Indeed, the ECB is preoccupied 
with selective debt purchases on a basis that requires some conditionality, which means that they 

have to wait for the country to react to their offer.  This throws off the timing of the relationship 

between the 
normal business cycle 
and 
monetary policy.
  So that™s keeping the ECB from acting, 
which makes me worried that the U.S. action could exacerbate the recession there by 

strengthening the 
euro.  And indeed, the e
uro has been stronger in recent weeks.
  You might say 
      
             
              
          
  
   
 we worry only about the U.S. economy, which I think is very true and very relevant, but this 
could end up feeding back to the U.S. in a detrimental way if we make the European situation 

worse. 
Longer
-term interest rates in the U.S. are already very low.  Ten
-year 
Treasury tr
ading in 
a recent session was around 170 basis points.  That™
s extremely low by rec
ent historical metrics. 
Longer
-term inflation expectations are in excess of 250 basis points, depending on which 
measure you use.  That implies negative real yields over a 
10-year horizon.  That™s an extremely 
long horizon to have a negative real yield.  I think the U
nited States 
can benefit from the lower 
yields that we have in place right now.  We can benefit from the flight to safety that has driven 

capital out of Europe, 
much as the U
nited States
 did during the 1997Œ98 
Asian currency crisis. 
Also, equity markets are at recent highs
Šfour
-year highs, 
if I™m not mistaken.  This seems to 
indicate among investors a certain confidence in the future of U.S. economic performance 

despite an ongoing worldwide slowdown, and I think the jury is still out a little bit on whether 

the U
nited States
 can be the strength in the storm here or whether we™re going to get pulled into 
the global slowdown ourselves.  Obviously, there are detrime
ntal effects from the rest of the 
world, but there are also offsetting 
flight
-to-safety effects in the U
nited States
.  So I think we 
could afford to see how that plays out for a few months here going forward. 
Labor markets in the U.S. are improving, although in a halting and uneven way.  It is 
sometimes noted that the national unemployment rate has not improved during 2012.  I might 

remind the Committee that this was also true in 2011.  We had 9.1 percent unemployment in 

January of 2011.  As of August 2011, 
we were also at 9.1 percent.
  However, today™s 
unemployment one year after that is 8.1 percent, 1 full percentage point lower.  That™s about as 

good as we can do in this game, about as good as we can do in one year™s time.  The U.S. 
              
    
       
       
          unemployment rate has 
rarely, if ever, dropped this much in one year during the past 25 years.  
This improvement, 
of course
, occurred unevenly, but it did occur nevertheless and from a 
starting point last year at this time in September that looked considerably darker than today
™s outlook.  
Some might say we did
n™t
 take action last year, but we took action through the m
aturity 
extension p
rogram.  That program is still in place and still on the table. 
In summary, as always, there are many ongoing developments that bear watching, but I 
think that the current readings on key aspects of the economy do not argue for outsized monetary 
policy action at this particular juncture.  I™m not saying I would never support it, but I don™t think 

that this moment is probably the right time. 
A few comments on the slack memo.  I do appreciate the memo, and I think it did a great 
job of outlining the approach to the slack issue that has been taken by the staff for, 
I belie
ve, 
many years at the Fed.  I thought it was accurate and outlined the issues very well.  The memo, 

to me, suggests that the ﬁ
get
-serious DSGE approachﬂ shows exactly how complicated this 
concept really is when you try to get down to it.  W
henever 
you
™re 
trying to fix something, it
™s good to know what you™re trying to fix.  And the great thing about the New Keynesian model is, 

you know what you™re trying to fix.  You™
re trying to fix the fact that there are sticky prices out 
there, and you can improve welf
are in that model in a certain way by certain types of monetary 
policy actions.  But different assumptions that you might make inside the model are quite subtle, 

and they can imply different welfare outcomesŠ
that is, different amounts of utility that actua
lly 
get delivered to households.  I think 
that 
there
™s no substitute going forward, that the Committee 
just has to take a stand on these complicated issues and we have to roll up our sleeves and say, 

ﬁWhat is it that we think we need
 to do?
ﬂ and ﬁW
hat is it that we want to fix?ﬂ
  The problem is, 
because of the subtleties inside these models, what we learned from the models is that you can 
          
        
                       
       inadvertently be doing more harm than good, depending on what™s actually going on in the real 
world and depending on whi
ch assumptions are really the ones that make the most sense. 
I think 
there
™s a very clear core idea, and you don™t have to read the whole literature to get at the core 
idea.  The co
re idea is that the flexible price level of output is a volatile object. 
Even in an 
economy that had no frictions whatsoever, there would be all kinds of shocks, and that level of 

output, which would be a Pare
to-optimal thing, would be moving around all of the time.  T
he 
actual level of output that we observe is probably not that level of output, and therefore there 

may be scope for a policy action.  But in any event, that volatile flexible price level of output is 

not going to be a smooth trend the way we traditionally have thought about it in macroeconomic 

circles since the 19
50s and 1960s.  Most of what we try to do when we think about potential 
output and measures of slack is to get a smooth trend.  I don™t think that that™s supported by the 

modern macroeconomic literature. 
The memo also makes it clear that there
™s tremendous 
uncertainty about estimates of 
slack, even if you™
re willing to swallow other assumptions about 
the 
statistical models or the 
economic models.  
As I
™ve emphasized in the past, even if all you want to do is forecast, and you 
don™t care about all of the the
oretical issues, the relationships between the slack measures and the 
actual inflation outcomes are questionable themselves and are weak and
, I think, 
have gotten 
weaker over time. 
I™ve talked about slack many times here, but I do think that, 
going forwar
d, it would behoove the Committee to put a clear model on the table.  W
e can argue about whether 
those assumptions 
are
 the right ones, whether 
we like them, 
and whether we think we can bring 
other evidence to bear on the particular assumptions.  And 
we can 
get it clear
er in our own heads 
how we think we™re helping matters with our policy. 
                                    
           I also thought it was very interesting in the memo
ŠI™ve often wondered about the term 
ﬁNAIRU.ﬂ  The memo makes it clear that the ﬁAﬂ no longer belongs in 
ﬁNAIRU,
ﬂ and in fact
, the ﬁNﬂ doesn™t belong in ﬁ
NAIRU
ﬂ either
Šso just ﬁ
IRU.
ﬂ It™s just 
ﬁIRU
ﬂ at the end.  T
he ﬁAﬂ 
stands for ﬁ
accelerati
ngﬂ 
and staff 
members 
make it clear that they™ve had to take that part out 
because it wasn™t working very well over maybe quite a long time period.  So I thought that that 
was interesting.  Maybe we should quit using the term, since the acceleration part isn™t in there 

anymore.
  Thanks a lot.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The past nine months remind me a bit 
of Samuel Beckett™s play 
Waiting for Godot. 
Rather than waiting for 
Godot
, we are waiting for 
the labor market recovery.  And like 
Godot, the recovery in the labor market continues to elude 

us.  
In the Beckett play, the character
s seriously consider suicide as their best solution to the 
seemingly endless wait.  I do hope 
that 
tomorrow we arrive at a better solution.  [Laughter] 
Unfortunately, last month™s labor market report was quite consistent with my submission 
for the e
xperimental consensus forecast.  I had a more pessimistic outlook for the next 18 months 
than the consensus forecast, and it assumed that we would not see robust employment growth or 

a significant change in the unemployment rate by the end of the yearŠ
or, for th
at matter, the end 
of next year
Šwithout further accommodation.  The modest employment growth did not surprise 
me, although I may not have sufficiently considered the possibility of the further declines in 
the 

labor force participation rate that were a striking feature of last Friday™s employment report, 

reducing the unemployment rate but for the wrong reason.  
One of the distinctive features of this 

recession and recovery has been the percentage of the unemployed who remain unemployed for 

greater than
 26 weeks.  Unlike the deep recession in 1982, in which there was a quick recovery 
        
                          
          and, as a result, a re
latively small increase in long
-duration unemployment, this recession has 
had a weak recovery, resulting in more long-duration unemployment.  Work being done by the 
staff in Boston that decomposes the 
Beveridge 
curve by duration of unemployment finds that the 
shift in the curve is primarily generated by workers who suffer long-duration unemployment.  

Faster growth in the economy would likely mitigate some of this problem. 
While some have attributed the slow recovery to a deleveraging process, I would put less 
weight on that argument.  Consumption and business investment have not been the laggards in 

this recovery.  Rather, government spending and housing account for much of the unusual 

weakness.  In fact, if you exclude housing and government spending from GDP for this recovery, 

it looks much like the previous two recoveries.  The unusually weak government spending is, in 

part, a result of the state and lo
cal governments pulling back in response to greatly diminished 
revenues, a direct consequence of the depth of the recession and the weakness of the recovery.  

Many were prepared for a revenue shortfall, with funds accumulated in their rainy day funds, but 

this recession quickly put most rainy day funds underwater.  Housing is usually a driver of most 

recoveries but has been absent for much of this recovery.  However, since the onset of the 

housing bust, the population has grown, per capita income has grown, 
interest rates are low, and 

prices are more affordable, resulting in tentative signs of a housing recovery.  This is a propitious 

time for considering additional stimulus to housing. 
If homebuyers feel that house prices are on 
the rise
Šas many indicators
 suggest 
and
 the Tealbook forecastsŠ
and that mortgage rates will 
remain this low only temporarily, we may start to get new homebuyers to commit before rates 

and prices rise. 
It is important to note the significant downside risks we are still facing.  While there have 
been some positive announcements about financial support out of Europe, the underlying 
                        
              
      
   solutions still require political support.  Domestically, while most are aw
are of the dangers of a 
fiscal cliff, the positive solutions still require political action.
  Should either of these risks 
materialize, we will need to consider a further array of tools: 
 possibly expanding QE even 
further, using asset purchases to target long rates
, or providing more commitment in our 
guidance.  An important addition to these tools might also be an expanded set of discount 

window actions.  The staff memo on this provides a good road map to possible ways forward.  

They include a variant of 
the Bank of England program, a mortgage program that would provide 
low-cost funding for banks to finance mortgage loansŠparticularly to those parts of the 

mortgage market that have been slow to recover, and programs that might require T
reasury 
support to reduce the credit risk entailed on certain types of lendin
g.  While some of these tools 
are likely to be most useful during a crisis where lending markets are disrupted, some could be 

implemented even in the current rate environment. I would encourage the staff to continue to 

search for creative ways that we can support those areas of the economy that are still troubled.  

As further progress is made, it may be worth discussing, either as an additional tool if the 

recovery continues to be quite slow or as a contingency plan should some of the tail risks 

materialize.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  During the intermeeting period, the 
economic data have confirmed that the ec
onomy remains stuck in low gear. Like the Tealbook, I 

expect only modest 
GDP growth in the second half of this year.  
Clearly, the economic recovery 
hasn™t been able to gain traction in the face of a variety of head
winds.  These include household-
sector d
eleveraging, tight credit for many potential borrowers, fiscal retrenchment, and global 
uncertainties.  Given these headwinds, absent further monetary policy accommodation, I would 
          
  
          
         
    
     expect sluggish growth and no meaningful progress toward our employment mandate until 2014.  
Indeed, when judged on a policy-consistent basis, my outlook is somewhat more pessimistic than 

the Tealbook forecast and consensus forecast, with slower 
GDP growth and a higher path for the 
unemployment rate. 
In gauging the medium-
term ou
tlook for the economy and the stance of monetary policy, 
I find the 
Kalman
-filter model that I developed with Thomas Laubach to be a useful tool.  A
fter 
this morning™s discussion, I™
m a little nervous about going into the 
Kalman 
filter, but I
™m assured 
that Thomas is ready with a white board to answer any technical questions regarding our model.  

But this model seeks to distinguish between transitory and highly persistent supply and demand 

influences on economic activity.  In response to President Bullard™s 
earlier comments, I would 
stress that in our model, we do not impose any restriction that potential output growth is smooth.  

We let the data speak to that.
  The highly persistent influences on demand can be summarized by 
what we call the natural rate of 
interest.  In the model, a highly persistent reduction in demand 
lowers the natural rate of interest.  And I think importantly for thinking about the stance of 

monetary policy and a number of issues around that, our balance sheet policies should boost the 

natural rate of interest, all else 
being 
equal, in this empirical model. 
So, influenced by Board 
staff research that highlights the information content of gross domestic income along with gross 

domestic product, I™ve estimated a modified version of the LaubachŒ
Williams model using both 

GDI and GDP.
  The current estimate of the natural rate of interest from this model is about 
minus 75 basis points.  The current real funds rate, therefore, is only about 1 percentage point 

below this estimate of the natural rate.  This implies that the current extent of monetary 

accommodation, including our balance sheet policies, has only modestly exceeded the severe 

headwinds that we™re facing in our economy. 
         
          
        
                             Given my forecast
s for subdued 
economic 
growth and very little pr
ogress on the 
employment mandate over the next few years, my SEP projection assumes considerable 
additional monetary policy stimulus.  In particular, I assume a new program of open-
ended 
purchases of 
Treasuries and MBS.  They expand the Fed™s balance sheet
 by about $1 trillion over 
the next year or so. 
And with this stimulus, I expect a faster recovery, with real GDP growth of 
2½ percent next year and 
3¼ percent in 2014, with the unemployment rate edging down to 
7.9 percent at the end of next year and 7.3 percent 
at the end of 2014.  
I see the risk
s to this 
outlook as skewed to the downside.  Another bout of brinkmanship around the fiscal cliff seems 

likely, if not inevitable.  The problems plaguing Europe also remain daunting, with considerable 

risk to our economy if the financial crisis intensifies. 
Here I would just echo the comments made 
earlier by Vice Chairman
 Dudley.  I share those views and was somewhat more pessimistic than 
perhaps the Tealbook™s description of recent events in Europe.  The bold program that the ECB 

has announced will certainly buy some short-run relief, but the underlying problems remain
:  a 
lack of political federalism, an unsustainable fiscal outlook, and disparities in economic 

competitive
ness across Europe.  So, in summary, the ECB™s actions may serve as a useful bridge 
loan.  
I hope it is not a bridge loan to nowhere. 
The fiscal cliff and the crisis in Europe are not just risks to the outlook; 
by increasing 
uncertainty
, they 
also 
seem alr
eady to be adding to the factors slowing our recovery.  It seems 
everyone I talk to stresses that uncertainty is holding back hiring and investment.  Indeed, 

uncertainty appears to have virtually paralyzed some businesses, prompting them to postpone 

capita
l spending and delay payroll expansions.  So a key question for monetary policy is whether 

this rise in uncertainty should be viewed primarily as a shock to demand, which lowers both 

output and inflation if not counteracted by additional monetary policy stimulus, or as a shock to 
            
    
       
                
           
   
supply, such as the drought, which lowers output but boosts inflation.  R
ecent theoretical and 
empirical research has addressed this question.  As I described back in December, empirical 
research by my staff at the San Francisco Fe
d finds that over the past 30 years, 
higher uncertainty 

operates like a negative aggregate demand shock that reduces both economic activity and 

inflation.  Following uncertainty shocks of the types that we currently face, expenditures on 

consumer durables, investment, short-
term interest rates, and inflation all fall
, while 
unemployment rises
, in this analysis.  
Now, I
™m sure President Lacker will be very happy to hear 
what I
™m about to say, and that is that we also looked at this issue in a fully micro
-fou
nded 
DSGE model.  This finding that uncertainty acts primarily as a demand shock is confirmed by 

the research using such DSGE models, both by my staff and by academic researchers. 
An increase in uncertainty causes households to save more for precautionary reasons.  This a
ffects 
both supply and demand in the models.  However, in these models, the demand effects are by far 

the dominant ones.  This is because the negative effects of an uncertainty shock on consumption 

are amplified when prices are slow to adj
ust, causing businesses to cut production further.  
This 
implies that uncertainty shocks lead to a negative output gap, a fall in inflation, and this is 

consistent with the empirical evidence I mentioned a moment ago.  All told, both theory and data 

sugges
t that the uncertainty shocks that I believe are holding back
 our economy today really 
should be seen more as adverse shocks to demand, which monetary policy should aim to offset. 
Turning to inflation, the medium-term outlook has not changed.  I continue t
o expect 
overall PCE inflation to remain below 2 percent for the next few years, and I view the risks 
to the 
inflation forecast as balanced. 
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 
           
   
                           MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like Presi
dent Lockhart, I
™m going to 
keep my remarks on economic conditions particularly brief today because I believe that we have 
more agreement on the outlook than we have on the policy implications of the outlook, which 

means 
that 
I™m not going to be as brief in my comments on policy 
tomorrow. 
My 
District 
business contacts remain concerned about the risks to the outlook, yet they are generally 

reporting only small changes in activity levels in their own businesses.  A few of my business 

contacts point to either a coming slowdown or a coming acceleration in their sales.  Their 

comments are consistent with the holding pattern around today™s 2 percent growth rate.  
In my 
current outlook, I expect the recovery to remain in this holding pattern for the rest of this y
ear 
and then generally pick up to a GDP growth rate of a little more than 2½ percent in 2013 and a 

little more than 3 percent in 2014.  In order to achieve these projected growth rates, I assume that 

we provide further policy accommodation by extending the period of very low rates into 2015. 
Among the data released since our last meeting, the August employment report stands 
out.  It was particularly disappointing in that the BLS confirmed that the economy had made very 

little progress in labor markets over 
the summer. While the month
-to-month swings in the 
household survey make the progress on the unemployment rate difficult to interpret, the decline 

in the employment
-to-population ratio to essentially its post
-recession trough makes it clear that 
there has
 been little sustained progress in labor markets.  Nonetheless, as GDP growth picks up 
over the next two years, I am expecting that we will make gradual progress on unemployment.  

As mentioned in the memo on economic slack, the Cleveland staff has taken a close look at the 

flows into and out of unemployment to examine the natural rate of unemployment.  This research 

finds that the trends of flows into and out of unemployment, often referred to as labor market 

churning, have been f
all
ing for several years.  This decline in labor market churning implies that 
             
                   
  the current path to full employment will likely be slower than in past cycles. 
Some 
commentators treat the slow progress on reducing unemployment as evidence that the natural 
rate 
is far higher.  However, in the Cleveland Fed model, a faster pace of GDP growth does 

lower the unemployment rate more quickly.  While this result is supportive of monetary policy 

accommodation, it doesn™t answer the question of the effectiveness of our no
ntraditional 

monetary policy tools. 
Turning to inflation, I have made only small changes to my outlook for inflation.  I agree 
with the Board staff that we
™re likely to see more disinflation in core PCE rates, but my forecast 
doesn™t get quite as far away 
from the 2 percent rate as the Tealbook anticipates. 
The risks to my economic outlook remain primarily to the downside for GDP growth.  
Although market participants seem to be taking a more optimistic view that Europeans will solve 
their problems, a 
crisis
 in Europe remains a large risk to 
the recovery in the U
nited S
tates
.  In addition, the fiscal cliff poses a significant risk of 
a dramatic slowing of the U.S. economy.  
These risks to growth imply that unemployment could end up higher than anticipated.  On 

inflation, I continue to see the risks tilted toward the downside, given th
e significant downside 

risk
s to economic activity and 
the
 low levels of 
some measures of 
inflation expectations.  In my 
view, these risks to growth, unemployment, and inflation make the outlook more uncertain than 

normal.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Following our July meeting, the key question 
was whether the incoming data would finally begin to show substantial and sustainable 

improvement in labor markets.  It™s pretty clear that the answer to that question is no.  Without a 

doubt, 2012 will go into the books as another year of unsatisfactory economic performance.  This 
                    
         
         
           
  
 is the third year in a row 
of growth around 2 percent.  This pace of growth leaves 
resource slack 
quite large. 
At the same time
, the inflation outlook is not threatening, and numerous theoretical 
and empirical analyses show that there are ways to provide additional accommodation th
at will 
improve this economic situation. 
In terms of recent developments, the problems that we™
ve characterized as downside risks 
earlier in the year have materialized into actual headwinds.  They are gathering in strength. 
My 
business contacts noted that 
their current operations are being adversely affected by increasing
ly negative forces in the U.S. and around the world.  Similar to some comments that President 

Lockhart made, apparently CEOs are sharing their gloomy outlooks with their fellow CEO 

interlo
cutors, and this has the potential to reinforce downward expectations and spiral into even 
softer spending and hiring.  
For example, one of my regular contacts repeated comments he had 
heard from the CEO of a major U.S. conglomerate, 
who was a former Fed Bank chair 

somewhere.  According to my contact, this CEO instructed all of his business units to plan for 

the possibility that the U.S. will experience a lost decade
, like Japan.  I think that™s disturbing.  
With regard to Europe, many of my contacts thought the odds of truly awful outcomes had 

declined, and that™s a positive comment.  The recent ECB announcements regarding outright 

monetary transactions give the fiscal authorities somewhat more time to maneuver, but the 

additional bond buying will be condit
ioned on fiscal consolidation that likely will be difficult to 
achieve and bad for growth in those countries.  And without stronger growth, the periphery 

countries are going to face repeated crisis events over the next several years. As one financial 

contact we spoke to put it, 
ﬁAll the Europeans have done is transform an acute problem into a 
chronic one.
ﬂ  The other elephant in the room is the U.S. fiscal cliff.  On the upside, my contacts 
say 
that 
surely the parties in Washington will find a way to limit 
the damage after the election
.           
                       
        But on the downside, many currently see uncertainty over the cliff weighing on activity, and no 
one can rule out the possibility of a messy outcome that would result in very significant fiscal 

drag hitting us around the turn of the year. 
One bit of positive news is that I™m hearing commentary that indicates monetary 
accommodation is helping.  Several financial contacts say that today™s low rates are leading them 

to increase investment, and that should facilitate futu
re activ
ity. 
For instance, we heard 
comments on how funding for distressed properties has increased and capital is being redeployed 

to the residential sector. Indeed, there™s been a 
lot of talk about residential construction 

improving, as several have noted.  Furthermore, refinancing continues to help firms strengthen 

their balance sheets, putting them in a position to increase investment or pass on funds to 

someone else more likely to spend them, as you pointed out at our last meeting, Mr. Chairman.  
I should 
note that while lo
w rates are pushing some to undertake more investment, our financial 
contacts do not say that 
they are seeing excessive risk
-taking or anything approximating 
financial 
froth
.  And in the past, they™ve not been shy about pointing that out when they have seen that. 
As I said earlier, condition
ed on our current policies, the outlook for 
economic 
growth is 
unacceptable.  It™s unacceptable in part because recent data reinforce the obvious point that high 

inflation is not a concern, certainly not relative to our long-run objective and certainly not within 

our balanced approach strategy.  And it™
s unacceptable because mainstream monetary analysis 
clearly indicates that there are means of providing more accommodation that can improve these 

outcomes
.  The Board staff analyses clearly demonstrate this.  The LSAP memos had simulations 
that pointed that out, FRB/
US™
s optimal control simulations and 
the nominal-income-
level
-targeting simulations point that out, too.  Mike Woodford™s careful analysis in h
is Jacks
on Hole 
paper showed the same. 
       
    
        
           
    
    
   
               
  
        While I™m at this point, let me make a couple of comments about DSGE models, which 
were discussed earlier today. It is certainly the case that we are presented with results from four 
models that are currently being l
ooked at: 
the 
EDO model out of the Board, our Chicago model, 
Philadelphia™s model, and New York™s model.  A 
question that President Lacker was asking was
, in the context of these models, how big 
is 
slack, 
and 
how is it measured
?  At some level within 
the 
context of these models, this is a bit of a red herring.  For instance, if you look at the 

projections, all of the inflation forecasts coming out of these models are under our 2 
percent goal, 

and that™s true through 2015.  So, 
even
 in a model that™s lookin
g at whatever measure it is that™s 
holding back inflation, 
there is no
 inflationary pressureŠand some of the models have much less 
inflationary pressure than others.  The second point is that the theory in these models is really 

about marginal costs.  That
™s the fundamental variable.  The firms in these models are faced with 
the following question: W
hen I get to change my price and I™ve seen things change, what™s my 
margin
al cost structure that tells me how much I should increase my price, given that I won
™t be 
able to do it next time for sure? What have 
I face
d, w
hat am I expecting others to face, and 
things like that? 
Slack i
s often viewed in these models as a useful proxy at best.  I
f there™s a lot 
of slack, then your marginal costs won™t be rising
; they™ll be low, and things like that.  But the 
fundamental is really about marginal costs.
  And so, when you think about that, these models are 
really looking at the inflation data and everything around those data and saying, ﬁWe just don™t 

see inflationary pressures.ﬂ I can™t tell you exactly what the resource slack is that is embodied in 

that, but we don™t see inflationary pressures, and that™s coming out of all four of the models that 

we™re presented with quarterly. 
Another point that President Lacker ra
ised is, if sticky prices are really what™s 
fundamental here, why haven™t they adjusted already
?  And you hear that a lot.  In these models, 
                     
   
  
     
    
         
      
     a lot of asynchronous price adjustment for whatever reason is 
given
, and John Taylor has 
contributed importantly to exactly that point going way back over the last 20 or more years.  
But 
even allowing for the fact that maybe there would have been adjustments already, I think it™s 
reasonable to assume that we™ve been hit with a sequence of negative aggregate demand shocks 

along the lines 
that I 
believe 
President Williams™
s comments were pointing at.  At least we™ve 
certainly been surprised the last three summers in a row that output has been lower than we were 

projecting, s
o something different is at work.
  And then it™s 
also the case that 
inflationary 
expectations matter in these pricing equations and models.  This is a little more delicate and 

subtle.  Apparently inflation expectations are stable in all of these models, but there 
are
 subtle 
modeling choices at work in each of them about what the stochastic process is for marginal cost 

pressures and how they™re updated and what inflation expectations are.  This gets at a point of 

dissatisfaction
Šwhen I talk with various people in the Federal Reserve, they might say, ﬁI do
n™t 
like looking at the FRB/
US projections because I see all 
of 
this monetary accommodation 
coming, and I don™t see inflation coming, a
nd why is that?
ﬂ  I talk to people, and they worry a lot 
about inflation.  
We aren™t able to model that
Šapparently not sa
tisfactorily, 
because they all 
come back to the same place, which is
, expectations are well anchored or the stochastic process 
is 
mean
 reverting at some level, and so we just don™t see things getting out of hand.  I want to 
point out 
that this is not 
a FRB
/US question per se, but it™s a statement about how much we 
really 
know within the context of well-articulated macro models.  It™s way beyond just FRB/
US. 
All of our DSGE models have that same feature. 
So the bottom line, Mr. Chairman, 
is that this is the
 third summer in a row that economic 
growth has failed to achieve escape velocity, and the economy™s liftoff has fizzled on the 
          
                 
               launching pad.  It seems clear that the outlook crosses the threshold that justifies more action.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Thank you.
  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When we were in Jackson Hole, 
we got to hear you, Mr. Chairman, talk about the tools we have available.  You described our 

asset purchase tools and our communication tools, and so I™d like to give you some feedback 

from the 
Ninth District about how we™re doing on the communication front.  I get the same kinds 
of questions, I would sayŠusually from different people, but they sometimes come from the 

same person
.  The first comment is
, as the FOMC 
considers its date to keep rates low through 
late 2014, people are concerned, 
why is 
it that 
the Fed 
is 
committed to keep
ing 
rates low for two 
years
?  How could the Fed commit like this without thinking about the fact that the world could 
change in some fashion
?  And the second 
comment is
, by saying that interest rates are going to 
be low for that long or 
are expected
 to be low for that long, the Fed is signaling that conditions 
will be weak, and that
, in and of itself, is suppressing demand.  Now, of course, I say to them, 
ﬁNo, you misunderstood what the FOMC is intending to say to you.  It is meaning to 

communicate that the economic conditions threshold for raising rates is now higher than you 

might have thought.  The recovery has to be further along than you might have thought.ﬂ  A
t this 
stage, my questioner says, 
ﬁWell, that makes sense, but why didn™t you guys just say that?ﬂ  A
t that point, I usually turn the conversation to something about fracking 
[laughter] because that 
seems to work.  To me, this kind of dialogue suggests 
that 
we need to communicate more clearly 
about our reaction function.  And communication about our reaction function is sometimes 

motivated in terms of accountability and transparency, and these are, I think, good motivations.  
      
       
    
                           
       But as my brief summary of my 
Ninth District colloquies indicates, communication about 
our react
ion function is also an 
essential
 ingredient to the effectiveness of policy. 
Now, the changes that have been made in B(5) relative to what was in the previous 
FOMC statement in July
ŠB(5) 
now represents even more of a commitment because actually the 
conditioning clauses have been removed, although 
many readers were not paying close attention 
to those conditional clauses anyway.  I think the lead-in sentence to B(5) is much better, but I 

have to say, most people don™t read the words that carefully in the FOMC statement.  Their 

takeaway is the year.  That™s the main thing they™re hearing. 
So before we communicate 
our reaction function, we have to start thinking about how we 
formulate one, and as I™
ve m
entioned before, I think that a good reaction function should have at 
least two inputs
: some measure of inflationary pressures and some measure 
of labor 
market 
underutilization.  These inputs would capture how well we™re doing in terms of our two 

mandates
, and our policy stance, I would think, should evolve as these inputs change.  
I see this 
as the basis for the approach that President Plosser, President Williams
, and I are following in 
our alternative policy statements.  The K
PW statements emphasize only those changes of the 
data that are viewed as leading to changes in measures of inflationary pressures and labor market 

underutilization.  
And then the KPW statement
s translate those changes in inflationary pressure
s and labor market underutilization into 
the rationale for the 
Commit
tee
™s policy decisions.  
At this 
point, I™ll digress briefly to say that I think we™ve completed our cycle of going through the 

parallel FOMC statements, and President Plosser, I believe, will bring forward the KPW 

approach to t
he 
subcommittee on communications for further consideration.  So I™m sure the 
subcommittee members are glad to hear that.
  That said, just like the FOMC statement itself, the 
               
                    KPW memos are very oriented around changes in monetary accommodation and how they 
relate 
to changes in conditions. 
Ultimately
, though, 
a Committee reaction function has to translate the level of 
inflationary pressures and the level of resource utilization into a decision about the level of 
monetary accommodation.  A 
key challenge we
™ve
 struggled 
with is that it™s much easier for us 
to reach accord about the changes in these variables than it is for us to reach accord
, at least 
qualitatively, about the levels of inflationary pressures and the levels of resource utilization.  A
s we saw fr
om submissions of the consensus forecast, there are very different views around the 
table on that.  Some might see this heterogeneity as precluding the possibility of developing a 

Committee reaction function, but I think this is where the consensus forecas
t process is a very 
useful way forward.  It provides a way for us to come together behind a 
Committee view about 
the medium-term inflation outlook and about the economy™s performance relative to the 

employment mandate, conditional on our current policy stance now and as anticipated.  
Then we 

can usefully formulate the Committee™s reaction function as a mapping from that consensus vi
ew into policy choices.  ﬁMedium-
term inflation is too high relative to target
ﬂ:  That would say you 
should contemplate reducing accommodation.  ﬁThe unemployment rate is too high over the 

medium run relative to 
mandate
-consistent levels
ﬂ:  Then the Committee should contemplate 
adding accommodation. 
Mr. Chairman, the Committee™s consensus view about the economy seems clear, and it™
s been described in many recent FOMC statement
s. The Committee expects inflation to be at or 
below target over the medium run and unemployment to continue to be elevated fo
r some time 
relative to mandate
-consistent levels.  That consensus viewŠ
inflation 
running too low; 
                 
        
                         unemployment, too highŠimplies a need for additional accommodation, accommodation that 
would lower unemployment while keeping inflation near target. 
I open
ed by discussing a public desire, 
at least in the Ninth District
, for greater clarit
y about our reaction function.  In the next go-round, 
I™ll describe how
, by fulfilling that desire
, we 
can also provide additional accommodation.  And I™ll return to the question being posed to me 

implicitly by my Ninth District interlocutors
:  Under what conditions 
will
 the FOMC begin to 
raise the fed funds rate? I will argue that our communications often suggest the FOMC is 

unwilling to tolerate low unemployment, even if that low unemployment rate is not translating 

into medium-
term inflationary pressure
s.  And I think p
aragraph 5
 of 
alternative B offers us an 
opportunity to clarify our attitude toward low unemploymentŠthat we™re not against low 

unemployment 
if it doesn™t lead to medium
-term inflationary pressures. Maybe that clarification 
could provide stimulus that™s appropriate in light of the Committee™s consensus outlook.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
The 10
th District economy continues to 
expand at a moderate pace. Our retail, restaurant
, and auto contacts reported higher sales and 
expect gains in coming months, particularly those in the auto sector.  
Energy activity expanded 

further as gains in oil drilling outpaced declines in natural gas drilling.  Housing marke
t conditions continued to improve, and construction activity increased for both residential and 

nonresidential sectors.  
Manufacturing activity in the 
District expanded at a slightly faster pace in 
August.  The number of contacts in our manufacturing surve
y who 
were expecting higher levels 
of production and shipments in six months moved notably higher, and expectations of 

employment gains remained in positive territory. 
One component of our survey that has softened 
      
    
       
                           over the past several months is the expec
ted level of new export orders.  The number of contacts 

reporting higher levels has been declining but still outweighs those expecting an outright decline.  

So far this year
, total 
District exp
orts remain above their level a year ago, though exports to 
Eur
ope have been decreas
ing. 
In terms of the D
istrict labor market
, initial claims for 
unemployment insurance have declined notably over the past few months, and layoff 

announcements have been modest.  Still, employers remain quite cautious about expanding their 

payrolls.  
In terms of ag
ricultural
 conditions, U.S. net farm incomes are 
projected to reach their 
second
-highest level in history despite the worst dr
ought in three decades. Farm incomes are 
being supported by higher crop prices and crop insurance payments, 
which are offsetting 

declines in production and livestock profits.  In addition, the persistent, strong demand from the 

ethanol and export sectors continues to strain low crop inventories and could 
place upward 

pressure on prices heading into 2013 as reflected in futures markets. 
Turning to the national outlook, the recovery has been progressing mostly in line with my 
expectations.  Overall, I take a similar view as the 
Tealbook in that incoming dat
a since the last 
meeting ha
ve not materially affected my outlook for 
economic 
growth.
  For the second half of 
this year, I anticipate 
that 
firms will remain reluctant to undertake large expansion projects or 
aggressively add to payrolls because of the near-term risk.  In particular, I noted in the most 

recent NFIB survey that small businesses cite taxes and the regulatory landscape as their most 

pressing problems, with poor sales third on the list.  These issues are reaffirmed when I talk with 

my business contacts, 
and suggest that monetary policy may find it particularly challenging to 

offset headwinds of this nature.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 
                    
                         MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Incoming information since our last 
meeting suggests that economic conditions in the 
Third
 District have continued to improve 
modestly.  Although labor markets and manufacturing remain subdued, the housing sector and 
retail
 sales have strengthened notably.  Housing markets in the D
istrict are 
showing their 
strongest signs of recovery since the recession began.  House prices are up significantly in the 

second quarter in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.  Housing permits driv
en mostly by multifamily
-sector housing have been on an upward trend, and residential builders and real estate agents both 

reported increased activity in August.  
The commercial real estate market is also showing 

continued signs of strength.  Tightening in the office market in C
enter 
City
, Philadelphia, 
is 
placing upward pressure o
n rents.  
Retail sales in the region have grown somewhat faster over 
the intermeeting
 period, and auto sales have continued to increase at a good pace. 
Turning to the nation, based on incoming information, my forecast for the second half of 
this year is not terribly enlightening. It™s modest
, and I think it will continue to be over the 

coming six months.  
How
ever, my medium-term and longer-term forecasts have not changed 
very much and, indeed, point to a continuing modest recovery.  Given the large size and nature 

of the shocks that hit the economy, a slow recovery, 
as we™ve heard
, is actually the most likely 
outcome.  It™s not necessarily evidence that our monetary policy stance is inappropriate.  Indeed, 

many of the rules reported in Tealbook 
B suggest 
that policy is about right.  Political and fiscal 
uncertainties at home and abroad still cloud the outlook and are holding back business 

investment.
  Overwhelmingly, 
the anecdotal evidence suggests that business leaders
™ reluctance 
to invest and hire i
s driven by uncertainty, not excessively tight financial conditions.  Households 
continue to deleverage, and that™s holding back spending as saving remains high.  My concern is 

that 
none of the
se headwinds will likely be ameliorated or substantially affected in the near term 
                
    
                             with further monetary easing or the 
further 
easing 
of 
financial conditions.  That doesn™t seem to 
be a constraint. 
I know I™m not alone in having wished for a stronger employment report last Friday.  
The 
payroll increase in August and the downward revisions to June and July were disappointing.  
Despite the strong actions that the Fed has taken, the unemployment rate remains above 

8 percent.
 This has generated a discussion about whether the continuing high levels of 
unemployment are structural or cyclical in nature. I actually don™t find this conversation very 

useful, particularly for policy.  Rather, 
I believe 
it™s better to think about whether the high level 
of unemployment can be addressed by further easing of financial conditions, whic
h is what 
monetary policy would entail.  
It seems to me that before we conclude that unemployment calls 
for more monetary policy accommodation, we must understand more about the nature of the 

shock that™s caused high unemployment and its unwelcome persiste
nce.  This is consistent with 
President Lacker™s observations.  It™s not about whether unemployment is 
cyclical, structural, 
permanent
, or temporary, necessarily.  It™s about understanding the nature of the shock that™s 
causing the problem that we observe. 
There™s still a lot we don™t understand about the labor market and its ongoing struggles.  
Academic and public debate expresses a wide range of views, and we should be humble about 

our state of knowledge.  We™ve discussed, for example, the difficulty of t
ransferring skills from 
one sector to another.  Those who lost their jobs in construction will have a hard time going to 

other industries.  But this type of unemployment cannot be solved by monetary policy.  

However,
 it™s not the only source of mismatch.  
Skill mismatch can occur within sectors, not just 
across sectors. 
Jai
movich and S
iu point to what™s called job polarizatio
n.  Job opportunities in 
middle
-skill occupations, which tend to be focused on routine tasks, 
are disappearing because of 
                
                  
          changes in 
technology and other things, while low-
skill
 and high-skill job opportunities are in 
fact increasing.
  The employment share of routine occupationsŠthis middle group, which 
includes jobs 
such as machine operators, meat
-processing plant workers, and 
office a
nd administrative supportŠ
has been decreasing since the mid
-1980s.  At the same time, the 
employment share of nonroutine cognitive occupationsŠincluding surgeons, lawyers, and, 
of 
course, economistsŠand that of nonroutine manual operationsŠ
whether it be janitors, 

gardeners, bartenders, 
or 
home health care
Šhave been rising. 
In other words, there appears to 
be a polarization in the job market to
ward the low and the high, 
or the tails of the distribution
, and away from the middle.  During the three jobless recoveries since 1991, the level of 

employment in these routine occupations has never recovered to pre-
recession levels.  The 
absolute level appears to fall and fall permanently.  The fact 
that 
this job loss seems to occur 
sharply during rece
ssions makes it appear to be cyclical, but it does not recover.  This is a 
phenomenon that cannot be addressed by monetary policy.  
For t
hose who point to low w
age 
growth as evidence against mismatch
, it™s interesting to note that real wages in the tail of 
the 
distribution actually seem to be rising modestly, unlike in the middle of the distribution.  Again, 

we do not have definite answers to what™s happening in the labor market, but we need to 

consider that evidence exists that the problems may not be amen
able to monetary policy 
or easing of financial conditions. 
The FOMC has applied a high level of monetary stimulus during this recession and 
recovery.  The fed funds rate has been effectively zero for four years, and we 
have said we 
expect 
it to remain 
there 
at least through late 2014.  We have implemented two rounds of asset 
purchases, followed by the maturity extension program.  Yet unemployment remains high.  

Given this evidence, one could draw two possible conclusions.  One is that monetary policy is 
         
    
    
                   
  
         
   
   
   the right tool, but we just haven™t implemented a large enough program.  Given the sluggish 
employment response to date and the large amount of stimulus that has been supplied
, it seems 

as though 
it™s increasingly plausible that further monetary accommodation
 is not going to be 
effective in quickening the pace of recovery to 
a higher 
level
 of employment
, much as we wish it 
could. 
One still might argue that because high unemployment is very costly and we are 
uncertain about the effect of more monetary policy accommodation, we should try it.  What do 

we have to lose?  Well, in my view, 
we have a lot to lose. The large
r the balance sheet becomes
, the higher 
are 
the risks to the economy that we will not be able to exit in a way that preserves 
price stability, maximum employment
, or 
our own credibility.  Ever-more-
aggressive action 
increases the r
isk of poor outcomes in the not-too-distant future or maybe the distant future.  
To avoid this, we are going to have to be relying on tools that are not guaranteed to work.  Inflation 

expectations, while stable, are stable 
until they™re not.  Should inflation begin to rise quickly, we 

may have to contract our balance sheet at a very fast pace or perhaps raise IOER very rapidly. 

Will that be disruptive to markets? We won™t 
know until we face that situation.  If our policy is 

not very effective at influencing unemployment rates, then inflation could begin to rise well 

before unemployment has shown much of a decline.  Will we have the fortitude to take the 

necessary actions to reduce accommodation
, and if so, how well will we be able to communicate 
our rationale?  Would we disrupt markets? Would we reverse the progress on unemployment? I 

have grave concerns that we are sowing the seeds of a very complicated exit for little or
 no benefit to the unemployment rate today.  
We say these exit risks are manageable, and I™d like to 

believe that they are, but we really don™t know that.  Given the unprecedented nature of the 

actions we™ve taken, how manageable these risks are is really 
unknowable at this time.  
We are 
       
      
                 
         
    
     
     
   
       and will be in uncharted waters.  That™s one reason I strongly urge us to be prudent.  To my 
mind
, at this point, costs of further action greatly exceed expected benefits.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank 
you.  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, just as 
President Lacker was 
a straight man for President 
Lockhart, in a 
way
, President Plosser has been a straight man for me
.  L
ike President Pianalto
, I will interlocutate 
[laughter] 
more tomorrow than I plan to do today. 
President Williams made a very important point. 
He talked about how uncertainty has 
paralyzed most businesses and how uncertainty acts as an aggregate demand shock.  I agree with 

that analysis. I hear that from my contacts.  The ques
tion is, is monetary policy effective in 
offsetting this form of uncertainty?  President George mentioned the National Federation of 

Independent Business.  She cited some data.  What she did not cite was that 93 
percent of that 

sample makes clear that they
 do not wish to borrow, 
either because of uncertainty or because 
they have access to capital that
™s abundant and cheap.  In my own surveys 
as preparation for this 
meeting, I asked a simple question
: If the actions we were to take at this upcoming meeting 
were 
to reduce your cost of capital by 25 basis points or more, what would it do in terms of your 

investment plans? I deliberately sampled larger companies because that™s 
where cap
-ex come
s from.  Employment comes from small
 and medium-sized businesses.  
We assume that, just by 

sheer wei
ght of numbers, significant cap-
ex come
s from large corporations.  And I would say 
that 
9 out of 10 said it would not change 
thei
r investment plans, even if we took action that led to 
a reduction 
of 
1 percent or more in the
ir cost of capital.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 
                       
     
                           
    
        VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  First, I want to make a comment on President Fisher™s 
last remark.  My understanding is that capital spending has never been particularly i
nterest rate 
sensitive.  It™s really driven by demand and capacity utilization, things of that nature.  So I 
wouldn™t expect that to be a really strong channel by which monetary 
policy stimulates the 
economy. 
MR. FISHER.  Can I just make a point to that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
.  Sure. 
MR. FISHER.  At least in the drafts 
of our statement, we were 
saying that 
business fixed 
investment was weak.  The question is, are we affecting business fixed investment?  And, more 

important than 
that, are we affecting employment? 
My point is that in the responses I™
m getting 
to anecdotal 
inquiryŠ
not systematically organized, although the systematic surveys that we see, 
through the NFIB and others, show 
that it is questionable whether or not we are ac
tually 
affec
ting employment.  The question is, 
are we affecting employment 
over the short term or the 
long term?  We have a wealth effect.  The Chairman has made that a very strong argument, 

including 
at the last meeting. 
If you™re advising 
a corporation about what to do with the savings 
that they can achieve through cheaper capital
, they can invest it in greater plant or equipment 
expansion, they can buy back their stock, or they can increase their dividends.  And I would 

argue that the former would have 
a more immediate impact on employment creation than the 
latter. 
Excuse me. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
My point was that I don™t think very many people in the 
room would debate the point that capital spending is not going to be very influenced by small 

changes
 in interest rates.  So I don™t think that™
s something that we have a big disagreement 
about around the table. 
                    
             
    
          
           
    
    As far as the outlook is concerned, since the last meeting, I think there™
s been very little 
change with respect to the U.S. data.  Some data are 
a bit better
Šthe retail sales data, the motor 
vehicle sales data.  Some are 
worse
Šlike the ISM, which fell below 50, and the components of 
the ISM were particularly weak. 
Inventory strength actually held up the ISM, which is a little 
concerning.  T
he cap
ital goods orders have clearly been weak.  I™ve noticed that, if you look at 
the nondefense capital goods orders ex air, the rate of orders now has 
fallen below the rate of 
shipments, and this is actually not a positive indicator for what™s going to happen 
to capital 
spending going forward. In terms of payrolls, I was prepared to come into the meeting, if we had 

a strong payroll employment report, to argue how noisy the data 
are
 and how we can™t take a
ny signal from 
that
. But the reality is, if you really
 look at the trendŠand understand that there™
s a 
lot of noise in the 
series
Šthe last two months, 118,000 per month
; so far this year
, 139,000 per 
month
; in 2011, 153,000 per month.  Now, there™s noise month to month, but if you look at the 

longer-
term tren
ds, 
what you see is basically either a flat trend or maybe a gradually slowing 
trend.  So that™s what I would take away from the payroll data. 
There are 
also two other negative developments that I think are really worth highlighting.  
First, I think the external environment continues to worsen.  We™ve talked a lot about Europe, but 

we haven™t really talked very much about China.  ChinaŠif you look at the 
official GDP growth 
numbersŠ
is still okay; 7.6 percent, I think, 
was 
the number for the last quarter.  But if you look 
at the actual indicators coming out of China
Šlike 
trade
, for exampleŠ
it would not at all 
surprise me if it turned out that the Chinese sl
owdown was much more substantial than what the 

official indicators 
show.  
We™re also going to be seeing a further shock to real income over the 
near term from higher oil, gasoline, and grain prices.  T
he grain price effect is going to be 
particularly probl
ematic for the EMEs
, where f
ood is a much larger share of the consumption 
          
  
      
          
        
        
     
    
 basket.
  Also, as many other people have noted, the risks in early 2013 are tilted to the downside 
given what
™s going to happen on the fiscal front.  I don™t think any of us knows 
with any 
certainty what
™s going to happen, but the uncertainty between now and then is negative for the 
outlook.  And I think most of us 
believe 
that we
™re probably going to end up with some greater 
degree of fiscal restraint in early 2013 than what we have 
right now. 
So to me, the economic outlook calls for us to do more.  Now, I agree that the tools we 
have are not that powerful.  But rather than concluding from this that we shouldn™t use them, I 
conclude that we should use them more forcefully.  I think 
a failure to act forcefully at this 
meeting would be very damaging to confidence; 
it would imply that we
™re out of ammunition or 
almost out of ammunition
; and it 
also 
might signal that we were cowed by the political 
environment, which I think would be very u
nfortunate.
  When I consider the risks to action 
versus inaction in an uncertain world, I also view the outcome very much as quite 
asymmetric, 
with the bias clearly on the side of action.  
Consider two alternatives
:  We do more, and the 
economy is stronger 
than expected
; versus, 
we do very little
, and the economy disappoints.  
Which creates the greatest disappointment? Surely the latter. 
I would be very happy if we did 
another round of LSAPs, extended the guidance, et cetera, and the economy turned out to 

surprise us and did better than expected.  In that case, we could cut off the LSAP program early, 

and the balance sheet wouldn™t have grown very much.  In contrast, if we do nothing and the 

economy disappoints, I think we will rue that as a lost opportuni
ty. I also think the timing is 
right.  The ECB did something very forceful at their last meeting, and following on right behind 

them might actually provide a firmer underpinning or momentum to confidence and market 

sentiment. 
       
         
             
           Now, what
™s the lesson of the past few years? Well, I think the lesson of the past few 
years is 
that 
we™ve been consistently disappointed on the 
economic 
growth side of the equation.  
There are two explanations for this.  One is that the headwinds were greater than what we 
thought, but there™
s another explanation as well
Šthat maybe monetary policy is not as 
accommodative as we thought.  And this goes back to President Williams™s 
comments. 
I™
m pretty convinced that monetary policy stimulus effects probably become attenuated over time, 
because part of the way that monetary policy works is by affecting the timing of spending 

decisions.  We don™t really have an experience where we
™ve had a period like this in which 

monetary policy has supposedly been very loose for many years in a row.  A
nd I expect what 
we™re seeing is that the monetary policy impulse to the growth side is actually lessening over 
time.
  Regardless of whether you say it™s consistent disappointment because of headwinds or 
consistent disappointment because monetary policy is not as 
stimul
ative
, as we thought, I think 
either way
, they both imply that we should do more.  
We™ve essentially foreshadowed forceful 
action in the August FOMC statement, the minutes to that meeting, and the Chairman™s Jackson 

Hole speech, so I think it™s time to follow up on what we™ve foreshadowed with action at this 

meeting.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anybody for coffee?  Coffee is available.  Why don™t we 
take 20 minutes and return at 3:10? 
[Coffee break] 
CHA
IRMAN BERNANKE
.  This i
s a prompt group.  I like this. 
MR. 
LACKER
.  Thanks to Debbie.  Thanks to the Deputy S
ecretary. 
MS. DANKER.  Happy to help. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  All right.  Governor Yellen. 
      
    
      
           
                     
     
  
    
MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The two employment reports we have 
received since our last meeting confirm that the economy is growing too slowly to generate any 
meaningful progress in improving labor market conditions.  They™re consistent with an economy 
that is expanding at or near its potential.  And although I was heart
ened by July™s strong reading 
on consumer spending, I agree with the staff™s reluctance to make too much out of one month of 

better data.
  Taking a broader perspective, incoming data provide no evidence of any 
fundamental change in the outlook for the better.  I agree with the conclusion, too, of the staff 

memo for this meeting that the preponderance of evidence points to a large margin of labor 

market slack. 
If payroll gains are sustained at their recent paceŠaround 125,000 per month in 
July and AugustŠ
there
™s a good chance that we will look back on a lost decade.  The SEP 
forecast I submitted this round shows unemployment hovering above 7 percent at the end of 

2014, even with substantial additional policy accommodation.  Moreover, continued progress at 

the pace we have seen recently is a big ﬁif.ﬂ 
Readings from some forward
-looking indicators, 
such as the expectations component of consumer sentiment and new orders for nondefense 

capital goods ex aircraft, do not bode well for household and business spending in the months 

ahead. 
Amid the search for explanations of the painfully slow recovery, there™
s been a lively 
debate about the role of economic uncertainty.  Now, there are many different sources of 

economic uncertainty, but many of you have highlighted uncertainty about economic policy, 

especially about European policy responses and about the outlook for U.S. fiscal policies.  

You
™ve noted that this policy uncertainty has been restraining household and business spending.  
And several of you have hypothesized that this might account for the weak spending and hiring 

we saw last spring. 
If uncertainty about economic policy as opposed to uncertainty about the 
                      
     
                    broader economic outlook, accounts for why employers were deferring hiring and investment 
decisions, then a lifting of that uncertainty might arguably provide a significant boost to 

spending.  Under a favorable scenario, for example, we could see some resolution of fiscal policy 

uncertainty in the months after the election.  My own view is that policy un
certainty has been 
exerting some negative influence on aggregate demand.  Some systematic evidence of its 

influence comes from empirical work by Nick Bloom at Stanford.  Bloom and his coauthors have 

developed a high-frequency measure of economic policy uncertainty, and they™
ve related this 
measure to key economic variables, such as payroll employment growth.  They show that 

increases in economic policy uncertainty foreshadow declines in output, employment, and 

investment, and that high levels of policy uncertainty in recent years, such as uncertainty about 

future tax policies and the debt ceiling, have hampered the recovery. 
But economic policy uncertainty is only one of many factors relevant to the economic 
outlook.  And the evidence, as I read it, strongly suggests that an uptick in policy uncertainty 

cannot account for last spring™s slowdown.  Bloom™s index of economic p
olicy 
uncertainty 
spiked up in the summer of 2011, but by March it had fallen back two-thirds of the way toward 

pre
-recession levels. 
It remained at low levels in April and May, at the very time when the 
economic recovery was sputtering.  On the premise that economic policy uncertainty affects 

economic activity through consumer and business sentiment, it™s also worth noting that several 

ind
exes of consumer sentiment and business optimism peaked in April or May.  
So an increase in 
economic policy uncertainty does not seem capable of explaining the spring slowdown.  This 

suggests to me that spending is unlikely to surge, even if policy uncerta
inty were to diminish in 
the months ahead.  Unfortunately, our current economic malaise has substantially deeper roots 

than just uncertainty about the future direction of economic policy, and these headwinds are 
           
       
    
        unlikely to soon subside. Uncertainty, broadly defined, does, however, influence my thinking 
about monetary policy.  Uncertainty provides a reason why we should act forcefully now to 

strengthen the recovery, rather than trying to keep our powder dry.  Given the downside risks to 

the current outlook, and the constraints on our ability to provide stimulus while the funds rate is 

at the lower bound, the best we can do at this point is to ensure that the economy is as resilient as 

possible in case we are faced with fiscal gridlock, a European debacle, o
r other negative shocks. 
Another argument for strong action relates to h
yste
resis.  We face the worrisome risk that 
the longer the economy operates with such high levels of slack, the more likely it is that the 

downturn will have a lasting negative impact on employment and potential output.  I™
ve seen no 
strong evidence for h
yste
resis effects yet, but our current situation is unprecedented, at least in 
recent U.S. history.  
In the early 1980s, the unemployment rate fell almost 
4 percentage points 
over the 2¾ years following its late 1982 peak, to 7 percent.  By contrast, since its most recent 

peak in October 2009, the unemployment rate has fallen less than 2 percentage points.  

Moreover, h
yste
resis effects may become evident not only in the unemployment rate, but also in 
labor force participation.  As the Tealbook box shows, the participation rate remains far below 

the staff™s estimate of its demographic trend rate, and persistently poor job-finding prospects may 

well leave a permanent imprint on the particip
ation rate.
  Taking this argument one step further, I 
would argue that just as there can be permanent costs of allowing unemployment to remain high 

for an extensive time, there can also be permanent gains in output and employment in a high-

pressure labor market.
  We saw some evidence of this in the late 1990s, when h
yste
resis seemed 
to be working in reverse by pulling population segments into the labor force that for a long time 

had been excluded.  Chronic labor shortages induced firms to invest more heavily in training, 
         
        
       
                        
and it fostered upward mobility as firms moved employees up through internal job ladders more 
rapidly. 
Hyste
resis provides a rationale for 
a more expansionary monetary policy.  The argument 
runs as follows.  Our usual loss function is symmetric around 
the 
NAIRU.  It thus assigns equal 

costs to given size deviations of unemployment above and below 
the 
NAIRU.  But with 
hyste
resis
, the penalty for a deviation of unemployment above 
the 
NAIRU should be greater than 
that for an identical deviation of unemployment below 
the 
NAIRU.
  The implications of such an 
asymmetric weighting of unemployment gaps for optimal monetary policy in the present 

circumstances are substantial.  Bob Tetlow, a staff member in the 
Board™s 
Division of Research 
and Statistics, has been exploring optimal control simulations where the loss function depends on 

the squared deviations of a transformation of the unemployment rate from the NAIRU, rather 

than on the squared deviations of the unemployment rate itself from the 
NAIRU. 
This is a 
tractable technique for, in effect, assuming an asymmetric loss function.  In Tetlow™s 

simulations, the only policy tool available is the path of the federal funds rate.  His results 

showed that even a moderately lower weight on unemployment undershoots below the NAIRU, 

relative to overshoots, could postpone the timing of liftoff substantially. 
Based on all of these considerations, in tomorrow™s policy go-round or maybe this 
afternoon™s, I will argue that strong policy action is called fo
r at this meeting. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was going to make comments about my 
forecast compared 
with
 the consensus, but I™m not entirely sure which one of the consensus 
forecasts to compare it 
with. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You pick. 
[Laughter] 
          
              
                      
        
       MS. DUKE. I
™ll just say that I think it
™s not inconsistent, but there are four assumptions 
that are a little bit different in my forecast than in the Tealbook and
, maybe
, in the forecasts of 
some of you.  Th
e first one 
is that there is an underlying strength in the fundamentals of the 
economyŠ
such as balance sheet strength, debt service capacity, and credit supply
Šand that this 
strength is being masked by low levels of business and consumer confidence as well 
as concern 
about risks posed by Europe and the fiscal cliff, but that whenever loan demand picks up, 
the 
credit supply will be fully available to meet it. 
The second
 one is 
that it
™ll be especially difficult 
to interpret data over the second half of this year and the first half of next year, as investment and 

purchase decisionmaking is increasingly either paralyzed or distorted by uncertainty about 

federal tax and spending policies, and that, on balance, the uncertainty itself will depress activity 

and lead to weaker outcomes for 2012 and 2013.  Third, the one place I do still see a potential for 

an upside surprise is in housing, and I 
believe
 purchasing mortgages might be helpful here, but 
not necessarily in the ways that you might think.  And, finally, I 
have assumed that we choose 
alternative B today
.  Furthermore, in light of my assumptions about the fiscal cliff, we™
re more 
likely to face deteriorating conditions than simply unsatisfactory progress as we approach the 

end of the year; 
and that the deter
ioration will lead us to continue asset purchases well into 2013. 
In recent meetings
, I™ve talked at length about my belief in the first assumption, and I™
m not going to repeat that today.  But I™d like to discuss assumptions 2 and 3 in this round and 

rese
rve comments about assumption 4 for the policy round.  
Beginning with my pessimism about 

the rest of this year and the first part of next, almost every conversation that I™
ve had with a 
business person or a banker recently has ha
d the same theme: 
Things s
eem pretty much the 
same
Šslow, steady improvement in business fundamentals, but with a new tendency to put all 

long-term investment or expansion decisions off until after the election.  Oddly enough, these 
                     
             
                  
businesses have the luxury of postponing decisionm
aking precisely because things have 
improved.  They™ve strengthened their balance sheets and found ways to grow the bottom line 
even in the face of sluggish top-
line growth. In fact, their profitability
-improvement efforts are 
likely at least partly 
responsible for the slow improvement in labor markets.  Indeed, the business 
investments that do get the green light are mostly directed at saving labor, and no one mentions 

any plans for hiring.  I believe the marked slowdown in business spending that we™
re already 
seeing is 
a direct result of a wait
-and
-see attitude. 
As we get closer to the end of the year and the expiration of tax cuts, implementation of 
expense sequestration, and expiration of fixes for doctors and alternative minimum taxes, 

businesses 
and individuals will have to start making adjustments for what could happen, whether 

or not it actually does.  For example, contractors who expect that they™
ll have to cut staffing if 
their contracts are affected by sequestration are legally required to is
sue layoff notices in 
advance, even if the spending is not ultimately cut and the layoffs don™t actually happen.  Those 

who receive the notices will surely adjust their spending accordingly, and this potential pall on 

holiday spending has to be making retailers nervous about their inventories.  Those same 

retailers are having to pull the trigger now on their inventory decisions in the face of a potential 

shutdown of E
ast 
Coast ports by a longshorem
en™s
 strike.  So who could blame them if they 
decide to shav
e a bit off their purchases just to be sure? 
Health
-care companies are especially 
cautious as they plan for both sequestration and implementation of health-
care reform.  Simple 
operational changes, like tax withholding tables, have to be put in place for all businesses.  For 

individuals, asset sales decisions, especially for sales of businesses, will have to be made soon to 

ensure the current capital gains tax rate. I had the personal experience of doing a new will 

recently, and my lawyer explained to me 
that things would be very different if I died this year or 
              
                
        
   
         
 in January [laughter].  For these reasons, I believe that the fourth quarter is going to be 
affe
cted 
by the fiscal cliff regardless of its ultimate resolution as businesses
, in particular
, hit the 
brakes. 
And I ca
n™t convince myself that a lame
-duck Congress will somehow resolve all of the fiscal 
issues by the end of the year, no matter how the election turns out.  In fact, the best case I can 
construct is a temporary extension that pushes the poli
tical wrangling well into the first quarter 
of next year.  And after the debt ceiling brinkmanship we saw last time, I think a perfectly 

plausible scenario is a plunge off the fiscal cliff
, on the assumption that some sort of deal will be 
easier to construct after the damage becomes more obvious.
  So I think we have to make 
contingency plans for how we can shore up confidence in the face of a really bad outcome, 
rather 
than thinking just about 
how we react if the recovery stays unsatisfactorily slow.  For these 
reasons, I
™ve taken on board a bit of a lean toward the 
ﬁFiscal 
Cliff
ﬂ scenario in the near
-term 
portion of my forecast. 
In contrast, my continued optimism about housing and the underlying strength in the 
economy shows through in my medium-
term foreca
st.  I think 
that 
the inventory factors that 
began to emerge early in the year are now taking full hold in house price movements, and that 

the momentum arrow is pointing up.  This makes a difference.  
The s
taff estimates that roughly 
3 million households, 
almost 
one-
fourth
 of underwater households, moved from a negative to a 
positive equity position in the second quarter.  The Tealbook baseline forecast assumes a 

5 percent increase in house prices this year that
™s already pretty much baked in, 
followed by a 
leveling
-off.  But some models are predicting continued strong gains in house prices.  Staff 
forecasts of house prices and residential investment are on the conservative side, tempered by 

concern about foreclosure pipelines, 
the elevated level of vacant h
ouses, weak household 
formation, and the tepid pace of 
the 
housing recovery so far. 
                                  Here I think there™
s reason for more optimism. 
Foreclosure pipelines are full because the 
exits are still clogged, but the pace of new delinquencies has slowed markedly.  
The exits are no 
longer clogged by national moratoriums or retooling for new modification programs.  The 

current backlog is more closely tied to state
-specific or operational issues that seem to me 
unlikely to suddenly clear and release a flood of foreclosures onto the market.  
As for the vacant 

inventory, a large portion of the vacant homes not listed for sale 
is outside of bank REO 
inventory.  
Becaus
e we don™t know why they™
re held off the market, I
™m not sure we can make 
assumptions about their sudden return to the market.  I view the potential for pent-up demand to 

show through in faster household formation and put upward pressure on house prices as even 

more likely than the potential for a surge in foreclosures to hold prices down.  At some point, 

demographics win.  Those kids now living at home with their 
parents will not stay there until 
they™re 40.  
[Laughter] 
And when they do form households, they™re going to require housing 
units, whether rental or owner occupied. 
MR. 
FISHER
.  We™re going to hold you to that. 
MS. 
RASKIN
.  Ship them to Betsy™s house.  [Laughter] 
MS. DUKE.  To me, this represents the one area of dry tinder in the economy that could 
be lit with a spark of confidence.  To be sure, mortgage lending conditions are still extremely 

tight, but some recent developments should help.  The specte
r of putback risk has reportedly 
been holding back loans to borrowers at the lower end of GSE standards.  
The 
FHFA has now 

committed to reducing putback risk beginning in January 2013 through better front-end quality 

control and time limits on liability.  Wit
h house prices on the rise, fewer loans should fall 

through 
because of
 appraisal issues.  Regulatory uncertainty should clear, 
as new regulatory 
               
     
                  
      
          requirements for loan origination, securitization, and servicing are likely to be finalized in the 
coming month
s. Probably the biggest drag on lending is the shrinkage of loan origination capacity.  The 
industry is showing signs of strain in what looks to be only a tri
llion
-dollar origination year, 
compared 
with 
a peak origina
tion of $3 trillion not that many years 
ago. 
But if high profits are 
the best fertilizer, we should see more banks entering the business.  I want to investigate actual 

data, but anecdotally, the bankers I spoke with this time 
who
 were in the mortgage business were 
actually having record profits, while those who weren™t in mortgage origination were wondering 

about their survival.  I™
m talking about the difference between a range of 
0.5 to 0.6 ROA, 
for 
those with no mortgage business, versus one of 1.30 to 1.50, for those with a mortgage business.  

So, for all of these reasons, I think there™s a lot of meat left on the house price and housing 
finance bone, and I™
m optimistic about that part of the forecast.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO
.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Because
 John captured my views on the 
economic outlook, I™m going to jettison most of what I would have said.  In fact, I think John 

captured my views better than I had captured my views.  So I thought I™d turn back to labor 

markets
, moved by some of Charlie Plosser™s comments.  The first comment I™d make 
is that it™s 
important to distinguish between cyclical lab
or market conditions and longer-
term labor market 
issues.  I don™t think there™s any doubt that we™ve got some chronic labor market issues in the 

United States.  There
™s been evidence of declining dynamism in U.S. labor markets for well over 
a decade.  There certainly is a substantial sense tha
t people currently taking lower-
income 
service
-sector jobsŠ
if they had better ed
ucation and trainingŠwould be available for jobs that 
might then 
be created with higher value added. 
What Charlie referred to as polarization is 
                         
     
                   
  
     
   undoubtedly true, but again, a chronic issue rather than a cyclical one.  I actually think that 
unlike so many other questions, there™s been a substantial convergence of viewsŠnot entirely, 

but a substantial convergence of viewsŠaround the proposition that a relatively small portion of 

the big jump in unemployment that we™ve seen is attributable to structural fact
ors. There
™s been, 
as you all know, substantial, good, and careful work from the Federal Reserve Banks of 

Cleveland, New York, 
and San Francisco over the past several years that
 has supported that 
conclusion.  A
nd I think among academic researchers, the c
onvergence is also manifesting itself
, as shown most recently in Ed Lazear™s paper at Jackson Hole, following on, by about five 

months, Jesse Rothstein™s paper, 
which surveyed much of the same material and came to many 

of the same conclusions. 
Jeff
, at the last meeting
, suggested that a paper done by Richmond Fed research staff was 
a dissonant voice on this basic proposition that structural unemployment was not a big part of the 

story.  This paper, of course, starts from a very different perspective on long-
term unemployment 
than the literature I just referred to a moment ago.  The Richmond Fed paper argues that an 

unobserved heterogeneity among unemployed workers means that newly unemployed workers 

have inherently different exit rates
, and that over 
time, the composition of the pool of the 
unemployed shifts toward workers who started with the lower exit rates.  I looked at the paper 

after Jeff talked about it at the last meeting, and I spoke with others here at the Board about it, 

and I actually don™t think it establishes a case for structural unemployment. There are a lot of 

empirical and technical questions about the paperŠ
it™s certainly interesting 
and may well have 
significant merit
Šbut I actually don™t think it™s making a structural argument, at 
least not if we 
think of ﬁ
structural
ﬂ as referring to nontransitory unemployment that can™t be affected fairly 
directly by fluctuations in aggregate demand.  It would be unsurprising to learn that firms are 
                
      
        
  
          more likely to lay off relatively less
-valued employees whose lesser perceived abilities may 
mean that they™re less likely to be quickly plucked up by a firm that is hiring.  That phenomenon 
is entirely consistent with 
a demand
-driven increase in unemployment.  
More generally, the 
Richmond Fed model attempts to decompose the variation in the pool of the unemployed over 

time.  So it addresses the reasons for fluctuations in unemployment over historyŠin recessions, 

but also in recoveries.  The reasons for unemploym
ent increases also explain the reversals that 
take place during recoveries.  That is, as there are fewer unemployed
, firms cannot afford to be 
as demanding and thus are more likely to turn to the pool of the supposedly less 
valuable 
workers. 
This seems
, to me at least
, more a 
cyclical than a structural explanation
, and thus, 
again, whatever the ultimate merits of the paper, I don™t think 
it really undercuts the consensus 

reached in the papers to which I referred earlier. 
One final thought on structural unemployment, 
and this relates a bit to what Janet was 
saying a moment ago.  The Richmond paper describes something as the ﬁtrue duration 

dependence
ﬂ position, as opposed to the ﬁunobserved heterogeneityﬂ position that it takes.  The 

true duration dependence position is that, quite apart from any inherent worker qualities, the bad 

luck of being unemployed for an extended period will itself begin to erode the overall 

employability of enough workers that there 
will 
be macroeconomic effects. As Janet said, 
histo
rically
, we haven™t seen much evidence of this in the United States, though many, myself 
included, have thought that the severity and duration of the current employment problem could 

produce some observable h
yste
resis effects this tim
e around.  L
ogically
, one would think that at 
some point these effects would manifest themselves.
  But I have to say, 
to date
, there still isn™t 
much indication of any such effects.  And indeed, I think if one looks at what™s been happening 

to long-term unemployed, you might sa
y there™s actually been a little bit of an improvement in 
                                       
their performance, which would suggest that we™re not sliding closer toward h
yste
resis, but that, 
once again
, for reasons not entirely understood, the U.S. 
labor market seems relatively insulated 
from those effects. But again, as Janet said, basically
, whether you believe that h
yste
resis is 
around the corner or not doesn™t change your policy prescription.  If you think that it hasn™t 
clicked in to date but it might, that™s an argument for greater stimulus now in order to stop it 

from happening.  If you think that there™s unlikely to be h
yste
resis and thus the cyclical 
explanation dominates, then obviously the unemployment should be susceptible to increased 

aggregate demand stimulus.  So, in that sense, I think 
these arguments
 happily converge around 
the same policy prescription.  And for me, 
this all, again, reinforces the view that the story of the 

economy is still one of inadequate aggregate demand.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  First
, I™d like to thank Governor Tarullo for reading the Richmond Fed 
paper
.  Second, I™d like to point out 
that
Šin terms of the distinction I was making before 
between what the unemployment rate would converge to in the long run and the reference rate 

that™s relevant for current policyŠ
a shock that hits the economy today, if it™s a structural shock 

that™s permanent and long lived, 
it is going to affect the longer-
term normal rate of 
unemployment
. But whether it™s permanent or transitory is irrelevant for whether it affects the 
policy-
relevant rate today.
  See what I™m saying? It doesn™t matter if it fades out right away or if 
it™s going to last a long time. It could affect the policy
-relevant rate to
day either way. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How does that handle policy lags?  Monetary policy doesn™t 
work for 
a while. 
       
                     
                 MR. LACKER.  I think that™s orthogonal.  I think that™s tangential to this question.  In the 
models, you™ve got policy lags.  Policy tak
es effect over time, but it™s still the case that you™re 
carrying around this reference rate
ŠPresident Bu
llard talked about a flex price equilibriumŠ 
and it™s affected by both transitory and permanent shocks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook has not changed materially since 
the JulyŒ
August meeting.  Maybe incoming data ha
ve been mixed, but forward-looking 
indicators still remain consistent with an economy growing in the near term in 
a range between 
1½ per
cent and 
2 percent. 
Similarly, the fact
ors shaping the medium-term outlook have not 
changed significantly
; the general contours of my outlook remain the same.  Yes, some of the 
incoming data during the interme
eting period suggested modest increases in household spending 
and employment, and the household sector showed some further slight signs of improvement.  

But no data 
are 
yet showing a basis to believe that these modest increases will be sustained to 
such an extent that faster momentum might be expected
.  Indeed, other data, such as those for 
business spending and consumer confidence, remain soft.  It is not yet obvious that this path, 
or 

even
 a couple of months of stronger-
than
-expected economic activity
, could reduce the amount 
of slack in labor market
s or alter the trajectory of expected inflation to a degree that would 
obviate the need for a further easing of monetary policy.  
Last week™s employment report
Š payroll employment only 55,000 higher than reported in July, 
after taking into account 

revisionsŠdoes not suggest above-trend 
economic 
growth or a declining trend in the 

unemployment rate.  It suggests, 
instead
, that the unemployment rate is likely to move sideways 
with no sign of a substantial and sustainable strengthening in the pace of economic recovery. 
               
                          And this unsatisfactory modal projection is what exists 
before
 even considering downside 
risks to the outlook.  One particular downside risk that remains quite elevated relates to what 
we™ve been talking about
Šthe depressed level of labor participation and the enhanced level of 
long-
term unemployment. 
The decline in the labor force participation rate since the
 beginning of 
the recession is ominous, and although the Board staff predicts that over the next couple of years 

the labor force participation rate will flatten out, the recession
, as Governor Yellen described, 
may well have permanent effects on the labor force participation rate
, just as the high-
pressure 
labor market of the late 1990s pulled people back into the labor force 
who
 had been excluded for 
a long time
Šonly now, unfortunately, 
in reverse. 
In addition, with a substantial and growing 
proportion of unemployed workers having been jobless for long periods, we face an elevated risk 

that such a high level of long-term unemployment will persist long enough to permanently 

depress labor supply and potential output.  Unlike downside risks emanating from the European 

crisis and U.S. fiscal policyŠ
which
, were they to occur, 
theoretically can be addressed with 
accommodative monetary policy after the fact
Šthe potential h
yste
resis created by drops in the 
labor force participation rate and increases in long-
term unemployment will prove intractable to 
address with accommodative monetary policy that isn™t inflationary.
  So I find the particular 
downside risk of h
yste
resis to be especially pernicious because it™s difficult to address after the 
fact. 
But
, more optimis
tically, it is one downside risk that monetary policymakers do have some 
ability to mitigate prior to its occurrence. 
Similarly, I wonder about the permanent or transitory nature of household and business 
expectations.  The economic outlook appears damped by some form of pessimism.  Look at the 

Michigan survey question on the proportion of households expecting unemployment to improve.  

Earlier this year
, that number had recovered, but now it has dropped down again.  
Similarly, 
      
        
     
                         
  households™ income expectations for the coming 12 months have hardly recovered at all since the 
recession despite the fact that actual income has somewhat increased.  On the business side, 

expectations for business conditions six months hence as measured in the Empire State and 

Philadelphia Fed surveys have dropped back sharply again.  In the case of the Empire State 

survey, they™re back close to levels seen during the recession.  Capital spending plans also don™t 

look great.  Surveys from the National Association 
for
 Business Economi
cs show capital 
spending to have dropped sharply in the second quarter.  Surveys from the National Federation 

of Independent Business show capital spending to be gradually rising, 
but still remaining at less 

than half of 
its pre
-recession level. 
It™s diffic
ult to project whether these expectations will 
transition from being temporary blips to permanent shifts, but the fact that these expectations 

have tried to recover from the recession before but been knocked back, sometimes more than 

once, might be a facto
r that could keep households and businesses from getting too hopeful 
again. The longer we have an economy that looks bleak as far as the eye can see, the more this 

bleakness gets built into expectations.  Households and businesses now see a recovery slow to 

materialize.  They assume that things will get better because they always have, but then th
ings 
don™t 
get better
.  So households and businesses start to wonder if this is just a delay or if it™s just 
the new normal.  If they think it™s the new normal, it could become just that.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In terms of the outlook, I™m reasonably close to 
the consensus forecast you put forth, and just a shade more upbeat than I was at ou
r last 

meeting
Šthat is to say, maybe a tenth or two lower on the unemployment rate for 2013. 
I™ve 
interpreted the incoming data since the last meeting inclusive of the jobs report on Friday as 

approximately a 
wash and feel 
as though the situation in Europe looks just a bit brighter.  So, 
             
       
     
   
                    
  
 overall
, I would say it appears we™re still about as 
ﬁstuck in the mud
ﬂ as we have been over the 
last several months, and I agree with Governor Tarullo™s characterization that it™s largely an 
aggregate demand phenomenon. 
In trying to think about the factors that are leading demand to be so sluggish and about 
the channels by which monetary policy might be able to help, I™ve been struck by a few pieces of 

survey evidence.  Now, they turn out to be the s
ame pieces of survey evidence that Governor 
Raskin was just referring to, thereby scooping a fair portion of what I was going to say. 
MS. RASKIN.  It happened to me for a long time.  [Laughter] 

MR. STEIN.  I™m going to 
just start juggling next time. 
Anywa
y, just to underscore, 
really
Šon the Michigan survey, we had a very interesting briefing a few weeks ago by Claudia 
Sahm,
 in R
esearch and 
Statistics
, who
™d been looking carefully at these data.  And the gist of the 
finding is, not only 
is it 
low, but 
also, basically
, it fell 
from
 2007 to 2009, and it really hasn™t 
recovered since.  Moreover, it™s not well explained by household characteristicsŠt
here™s a large 
negative residual there in a way that seems different from previous experience. 
In a similar vein 
but mu
ch less scientifically, I looked at a different survey, the Conference Board™s Consumer 
Confidence Index, which also fell in August.  Very much to your point, they do a breakdown of 

the index into views of the current situationŠ
a present situation in
dex
Šand a future 
expectations piece, and all of the drop was coming from the future expectations piece.  
So I was 

curious.  I went back and compared it 
with
 previous peaks of unemployment that we™ve had.  
The ones I looked at were May 1975 and December 1982.  W
hat you see is
, at those times when 
unemployment was also very high, if you ask
ed people about the present situation, it was dismal, 
but if you ask
ed them about future expectations, it was not nearly so bad as it is today.  These 
are 
just a couple of data points, but 
they™re 
consistent with what I take to be the spirit of Claudia™s 
                  
             
         
    
 work, which is, it™s as if, given where we are today and given the current situation, 
people feel 
the future is considerably more pessimistic
.  And again, I think this is pessimism as opposed to 
uncertainty, which has a slightly different implication because it™s less clear that, if the fiscal 

cliff resolves itself, this kind of thing gets fixed. 
Another survey on the business side
: I just yesterday got a s
urvey that Duke University 
does in conjunction with 
CFO 
magazine
, where they talk to 900 CFOs of U.S. firms.  One of the 
new questions in there this time
ŠI think, 
actually
, Steve Sharp
e helped them design this 
questionŠasked the firms if they would in any 
way change their capital spending plans for a 
given change in interest rates.
  Here
, it is strikingly like a large
-sample version of President 
Fisher™s CEO conversations, where only 3 percent of the firms say they would in any way 

change their capital spen
ding for a 50 basis point movement in rates.  
Now, I take Vice 
Chairman
 Dudley™s critique here.  First of all, in this one, unlike consumer confidence, we don™t 
have a benchmark
, so I don™t know what people would say in normal times
.  But as a Bayesian
, I™m inclined to think that there™s something going on here, even though I wouldn™t say it™s a huge 
thing. 
So, putting this together
Šnow, 
this part is very impressionistic, but I gue
ss the overall 
feeling I get 
from 
looking at these various pieces of survey e
vidence is the sense that when we 
make a policy move now, we™re playing more for whatever effect we can have on consumer and 

business confidence than for the normal hydraulic 
effe
ct we would have on financing conditions 
per se.  That is to say, we may know more about how to move interest rates than about how to 

influence confidence, but it™s the latter that, in some sense, is the dragging anchor.  This is not an 

ﬁalways
ﬂ situation.  I think it™s, in some 
respects, 
the opposite of where we were in 2009 at the 
                     
                    
  
  time of QE1
, when really the thing to do, the imperative, was to fix financing conditions, and 
people would figure it out one way or the other. 
I don™t know if this has any implications for policy. I
t strikes 
me that
, if this is right, it 
should color particularly how we think about the communications aspect.  I, 
like many others 
here
, believe
 that the need for action is clear, but I think, less so than usual, the bond market is 

not really our primary audience.
  So maybe when we think about policy, 
we want to worry less 
about putting together the biggest, most inclusive package that has the maximum bond market 

impact
, and worry more about, how do we deliver a simple and coherent message that normal 
humans can understand, as opposed to mainly Fed w
atchers
?  I think we™ll have a chance to talk 
about some of these issues.  I™m not sure if this concept is fully operational, but I have this 

conviction that we really have to think about our audience as being business m
anagers and 
householdsŠ
more so 
than at other times
.  There™s so much talk about, what are the Fed watchers 
expecting us to do
?  And I think we don™t want to get overly caught up in delivering just to them.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Than
k you.
  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
It does seem to me that there™s a decent 
degree of agreement
, or at least overlap
, about the status and outlook for the economy, and that 
the real question is, what can monetary policy do, 
and
 what should it do going forward?  And 
I™m going to defer that to tomorrow. 
In that spirit
, I propose to deprive the Committee of my 
detailed recitation of intermeeting events and proceed to 
the executive summary part of it
, which 
is, 
really
, that we™ve b
een on a round trip.  We had positive news early in the intermeeting 
period, which 
was a trip to hope and back, and it left me very much in the same place where I 
started
:  I see an economy with a substantial amount of slack that is growing at about 2 
percent
;          
                     
        
       inflation that is bouncing around just below 2 percent on commodity effects, 
but close to target
; and better financial conditions for now.  But as Europe improves, the fiscal cliff begins to 
approach in a serious way, and what I am hearing is that there is little to no hope of action in the 

lame duck.
  Of course, that depends on the arrangement of forces after the election, s
o it™s 
completely unknowable. 
Ultimately and most important
, there is little, if any, reason to expect 
significant improvement in job creation in the coming months. 
My conversations with a group of about 10 diverse industrial companiesŠ
this is not 
auto
s, so it™
s away from one of the real strengths
.  The other parts of the industrial sector, 
let me 
say
, are pretty weak
, and they s
trongly confirm that last point about employment.
  Outside of a 
couple of bright spots like housing and li
ght
 vehicles, it™s soft everywhere, especially in Europe.  
Big customers are postponing orders
; they™re not canceling them.  It™s nothing like from 2008 to 
2009, but the softness that began about six months ago is now the new normal for these 

companies.  The game is about share gain and taking out costs.  It™s 
a low
-growth environment.  
All new projects are on hold, and there is no hiring.  In fact, the 
entire goods
-producing sector of 
the economy lost 16,000 jobs in August.  If you look just at the manufacturing piece of that and 

go back over a quarter, there was a net creation of 15,000 jobs, and two-thirds of that is auto.  I 

want to say that you hear, 
ﬁUncertainty, uncertainty
,ﬂ 
from all 
of 
these people, but they™re really 
talking about two different things.  These are not people who roll over at 4:00 a.m. to check 

Twitter for the latest news from 
Karlsruhe
 on the German decision.  A 
particular compan
y in the 
beverage manufacturing business had a big order from a German OEM for a beverage line, and 

that order has been pushed out at least a quarter.  That™s uncertainty.  It™s about demand.  
As far 

as Europe relates to these companies
Šand 
these are pretty global companies
Šit™s really focused 
on demand.  The fiscal cliff is something different.  There™s a sick feeling in people™s stomachs 
                   
  
     
  
       
              
 that this is really bad, that this is our country not being able to function, and 
it™s like last August 
on steroidsŠnot that there™s anything wrong with steroids.  [Laughter]  They™ve been very 
helpful to me lately. 
Let me say where that leaves me
.  The question that looms isŠ
and I™m going to
, again
, leave aside monetary policy
Šwhen do we break out of this
?  And I really do believe that we 
will.  We always have. 
I can 
remember many of these cycles where you really wonder if this is it 
and we™re never going to get out. I really do feel that
 if you look at our own projections, 
essentially
, all of us project that we™re going to have those 3 
percent, 
4 percent catch
-up years.  
They™re now scheduled for 2014 and ™15, but really, there™s a ton of uncertainty around that.  So 

I™m going to share this highly anecdotal evidence in an effort to end on something of a high note. 
I talked to both private equity investors and hedge fund investors, and it™s always very 
interesting to compare the two of them.
  The hedge fund investors are in a really difficult 
environment.  They™re traders who get marked every quarter, 
and
, in a world that has very few 
ways for them to make money, they™re generally very conservatively positioned, and their 

investor base seems to be fine with that.  
Private equity firms are feeling quite differently about 

things.  They basically think about creat
ing value over a three
-to five
-year period, and many PE 
firms right now, large and small, think that this is a great time to buy. In fact, a str
ing of large 
industrial properties, which would ordinarily have been expected to trade to corporations, 
has 

trade
d to private equity.  T
here are three reasons why the private equity firms are feeling 
aggressive.  First, the
ir natural competitors
, these big companies
, are all frozen on the sideline
s, 
sitting on their cash, ruled by risk-averse public boards, and out of the game.  If anything, 
they™re 

going to wind up being net sellers as the recession goes on.  Second, leveraged 
finance markets, 
as Andreas was discussing this morning, are very attractive
, with low rates and issuer-
favorable 
            
                                    
      
   terms that are just about
 reminiscent of the bubble days, and all 
of 
that provides critical 
flexibility in case deals don™t go well. 
Third
Šand really the one that™s relevant for this policy 
exercise
Šprivate equity firms think about the medium term, and they see the future as bett
er. 
These large private equity firms 
are completely global; 
they 
each own hundreds of companies in 
every major economy and 
in 
every vertical
; and they systematically mine the data that they get 
and they™ve got the talent on board to do that.  This is not the private equity industry of 20 years 
ago.
  So they™re seeing something.  They really are.  It™s pretty consistent, and what™s holding 
back the volume of deals is only supply.  There was quite a similar pattern back in the early 

2000s after the dot-
com c
rash.  In that period, as many will recall, the S&P lost about half of its 
value.  We had a very soft economy in 2001 and 2002, a stri
ng of corporate accounting scandals 
leading to Sarbanes
ŒOxley, and a deflation scare in 2002.  Across the board, 
net sellers of 
businesses were
 on the sidelines, and the private equity firms were extremely aggressive during 
that period.  Those deals turned out to be, 
in many cases
, some of the best investments in the 
history of the industry.  It turned out to be a great time to buy.  I would also add that they were 

net sellers in 
2005 and 2006.  So the question is, 
why take any signal from this, right? I realize it 
doesn™t tell us anything at all about the next few quarters
.  B
ut I will say that it™s a bit of a sign
al to me because this is a group of investors with very successful and, in 
some cases
, long track 
records that were looking ahead to strong growth in the medium term, 
and they were willing to 

put more than just an opinion on the line in that belief.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Could I ask the Governor a question?  Geographically, 
do they express any preferences about where they want to have the business? 
MR. POWELL.  Yes.  T
he hedge funds are, as 
a staff mem
o from Matt and Fabio
 pointed 
out, unanimously not believing a long-run solution in Europe.  They™re just very pessimistic.  
I                  
            
       
          
would say the private equity firms are 
in the same place.  You see very little private equity 
interest in Europe.  There™s great uncertainty 
and
 that kind of thing.  
In t
he United States, you see 
a lot of activity
Šagain, restrained only by a lack of supply.  When there™s a good company 
that™s out there, the bidding is furious, and they™re all saying, 
ﬁThis is the time.
ﬂ  This happened 
10 years ago. 
And Asia
ŠI can™t really give you any call on that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  I see I have two hours now.  
[Laughter] Let me summarize and just make a few comments.
  Participants didn™t see much 
change in the o
utlook, on net, during 
the interme
eting period.  Economic grow
th is still sluggish. 
The near
-term growth outlook is modest, and the recovery is in a holding pattern.  Output and 
employment growth are falling short of levels needed to reduce unemployment.  Headwinds for 

recovery include fiscal policy, deleveraging, tight credit, and international factors, including not 

only Europe, but also slowing in China.  
Some felt that we risk a lost decade, but another view is 

that recovery has been consistent with previous experiences with banking and financial crises, à 

la Reinhart and Rogoff. 
Recent labor market reports have been weak, although unemployment has fallen in the 
past year.  Some decline in unemployment is due to reduced participation, and employment-
to-population ratios are at post-trough lows.  H
yste
resis is a risk and a possible rationale for action.  
Retail sales data were a bit better, and households continue to deleverage, but consum
er confidence is soft, and people are unusually pessimistic.  
Real 
estate activity is improving in a 
number of D
istricts.  Sales are up
, permits
 and 
prices are also rising
, inventories are low, and 
delinquencies are falling.  Rising prices may stimulate further sales.  There is some strength also 

in commercial real estate
.         
   
           
  
       
      With regard to measurements of slack, there was, again, discussion of the issue.  Staff 
analysis concludes that slack is high, and it was noted that inflationary pressures remain low.  
Some argued that measurements of slack should distinguish the long
er-run normal rate and the 
current equilibrium rate
, or natural rate, which varies over time.
  Discussion of the structure 
of 
the labor market noted that routine jobs are disappearing, but 
declining dynamism may be more 
chronic than cyclical, and the long-
term unemployed are not completely shut out of the labor 
market. 
Uncertainty remains an important issue for businesses, holding back investment and 
hiring.  Job growth is particularly weak.  Small businesses are concerned about taxes and 

regulation.  The fis
cal cliff is a particular risk, as is electoral uncertainty. Some research 
suggests that higher uncertainty acts like an aggregate demand shock.  Policy uncertainty is a 

headwind, but not the only one, as the Bloom index suggests.  
In agriculture
, the dro
ught will 
impede GDP growth over the next several quarters.  However, farm income has been supported 

by high prices and crop insurance.  Energy activity is expanding.  Manufacturing reports are 

mixed.  Auto sales are up.  Firms are focused on gaining market share, but among financial 

firms
, private equity is more optimistic and aggressive. 
In the financial sector, long-
term interest rates are very low
, with negative real yields, but 
it was noted that the equilibrium real yield in the economy may also be neg
ative.  Financial stress 

ind
exes are not particularly worrisome, and financial froth has not been reported.  
Firm balance 
sheets are strong
, and credit supply is available when loan demand strengthens.  The ECB™s 
actions have again helped calm Europe, but further progress requires action by governments.  

Risks remain serious, 
and economic 
growth on the Continent should remain weak. 
                    
  
   
   
          
         
              
  
 With respect to inflation, the outlook has not changed much.  Inflation seems likely to 
remain near or below 2 
percent in the m
edium term. Low inflation is also predicted by DSGE 
models.  Businesses are not particularly concerned about their costs.  Inflation expectations are 
stable, and there™s little evidence of disinflation. 
There was a good bit of premature discussion of mone
tary policy
, which covered, among 
other things, the effectiveness of possible actions, the risks and benefits of actions and inaction, 

and issues of communication. 
Any questions or comments? [No response] 
I come after Governor Powell
, so I have an 
even 
more difficult task. I™ll try to respond a little bit to some of the comments that were made 
today.  The basic outlook is, as everyone has pointed out, that we have an economy 
that 
is 
growing very slowly, at or below trend, and, by the usual Okun™s l
aw re
lationships, we™re not 
seeing very much progress in the labor market. 
Unemployment is about the same 
as in 
January, 
and I note that aggregate hours 
are 
also only about ½ percent higher than 
they 
were
 in January.  
President Bullard noted that there was a p
eriod of improvement in the unemployment rate around 
the turn of the year.  One interpretation of that is that it was a one-
time payback for the rapid 
drop in jobs during 
the recession. 
In any case, 
economic 
growth, if anything, is slowing relative to earl
ier in the recovery. 
Now, how do we explain, understand, and interpret the very slow growth we™ve been seeing? 

That was also 
discussed in the go-round.  One possibility is that there™s been a once-
and
-for
-all 
level shift, that we™ve dropped down to a lower level and 
are 
continuing a
t trend at about the 
earlier pace.  So the suggestion there is that we are close to potential and output 
growth going 
forward will remain trend
-like.
  This interpretation does not look implausible if you eyeball 
graphs for GDP or consumption growth.  It is consistent with some 
earlier episodes of financial 
      
               
        
           
     crisis, and
, among others, the IMF has given this perspective a little bit of support.  
The 
alternative interpretation held by others around the table is that we remain well b
elow potential.  
I think it™s perfectly possible to rationalize that.  First, there have been ongoing headwinds, both 
endogenous and exogenous.  The endogenous ones include 
financial balance sheet, financial 
accelerator type
s of 
effects 
and the exogenous ones include Europe, fiscal, and the like.  So 
there 
have been continuing headwinds, and, of course, 
sticky prices
Šas was pointed outŠ
are part of 
overlapping price-setting coordination issues and the like.  I think both of these interpretations 

are conceivable, and they probably both have some truth in them.  
As President Bullard 
mentioned, I don™t think it™s very likely that we™ll return to the pre-
crisis trend. 
Now, on the permanent drop in the level, I™m a 
little bit bemused by the appeal to 
Reinhart
ŒRogoff because the
irs is a strictly reduced
-form observation, 
it has no structural 
interpretation, and it could involve any number of reasons, including uncontrolled factors 
such as 
poor policymaking.  So I don™t take that as a very convincing answer unless I understand better 

what the rationale is that is explaining the slower growth.
  The second story does provide a 
rationale, does provide an explanation.  Notably, labor utilization does appear to be exception
ally 

low, and I won™t repeat Governor Tarullo™s comments, but Eddie Laz
ear, who I don™t think is 
necessarily inclined to find 
a cyclical source of unemployment
, is just the latest of the majority 
of studies in this area 
to find a significant cyclical compo
nent.  It™s true that the short-
term 
equilibrium unemployment rate can vary.  There™s no question about that.  S
taff 
members have 
tried to include some of that in their analysis.  B
ut we need 
a story.  It™s possible, based on that 
kind of analysis, 
that the equilibrium unemployment rate is 
above the long
er-term natural rate at 
this point.  We don™t know.  I want to emphasize that on all of these thingsŠon the economy, on 

the effects of policy
Šwe™re incredibly uncertain, and we have to make decisions under 
                 
   
            
      
    
       
   uncertainty.  We can™t let waiting for certainty be the condition for taking any action.  We have 
to make the best choices we can, given a very uncertain situation.  
So, in that kind of world, of 
course, there are 
type 
I and t
ype 
II errors.  This is similar
 to what 
the Vice Chairman was saying. 
We are close to our inflation objective.  We™re quite far from our unemployment objective, at 

least the long
er-run unemployment objective.  Arguments 
have been made that staying far away 
from the long
er-run unemployment level for a protracted period has its own costs 
besides the 
temporary costs of the cyclical unemployment. 
In terms of our policy tools, I do agree with President Plosser that having a good grip on 
the costs and the risks of those tools is very importan
t, and that™s one reason why we have been
, in some ways, not as quick to use the tools as we might have been if we were using short-
term 
interest rates as our policy tool.
  But I feel that I™d like to thank the staff for the work that™s been 
done over the last couple of interme
eting periods. I think the work on market functioning, the 
work on financial stabilityŠ
all 
of 
those things have made me more comfortable, 
at least
, that we 
can manage the costs of these 
unconventional policy tools. 
Now, I might as 
well take the advantage to talk a little bit about the policy tools and some 
of the issues that have been brought up.  I have great admiration for Michael Woodford.  I hired 

him, I coauthored with him, I was his colleague for many years, and I think he™s a 
terrific 
economist.  And I think a lot of what he said in his paper at Jackson Hole was very useful.  I do 

think that he understates the consensus in the literature about the impact of unconventional tools, 

particularly asset purchases, on the economy.  I won™t go through an extended discussion, but I™ll 

make just a couple of observations on the empirical side.  
He focused primarily on the event-
study evidence.  He came to that with a M
odigliani
ŒMiller type of financial markets perspective, 
which has a lot of theoretical appeal but obviously is not empirically very successful.  It doesn™t 
                  
    
    
                 
     explain a lot of premiums
, a lot of volatility
, in actual financial markets.  So
, using that 
perspective, he was inclined to dis
miss the results from the event
-study research. 
But this 
research does tend to find, 
almost uniformly
, that asset purchases do have effects on financial 
conditions, notwithstanding the fact that it™s very difficult to measure the surprise component of 
a change in asset purchase policy. I was very
 much involved in the literature on measuring the 
effects of surprises in the federal funds rate, and there at least you have a futures market that can 

tell you what was expected.  Obviously, 
that™s very difficult in the case of asset purchases, and 

theref
ore you w
ould expect the event
-study literature
, if anything
, to bias down the findings, the 
impact of asset purchases on financial conditions.  But beyond that, in looking at only the event 

studies, Woodford™s paper ignores two other major literatures.  O
ne is a substantial literature on 
the effects of relative supplies of 
Treasuries on term premiums.  I would cite, for example, 
Kutt
ner
 (2006) and Greenwood and V
aya
nos (2010), and this appears also in work by Ga
gnon, Hamilton and Wu, and others.  
And a sec
ond line of research is based on no-
arbitrage term 
structure models, such as the 
Li and Wei
 paper that has been used a lot here at the Board.  So 
there have been 
a number of different approaches, and again, I do think that the bulk of the 
evidence is that 
these tools do have effects on financial conditions.  Obviously, 
there are issues 
about the transmission to the real economy, and I take some of the points that have been made, 

but there are factors there working in both directions.  For example, to the ex
tent that credit 
markets are becoming less tight
Šstandards and terms are becoming less restrictiveŠl
ower 
interest rates will have more effect rather than less effect. 
The central message of Woodford™s paper, though, which I do agree with very much, is 
that expectations management is really critical to managing monetary policy at the zero bound. 

And I agree with Governor Stein that the language is very important.  How we present what 
         
    
              
         
      
   
           
  
    we™re doing is going to be very important.  I
n particular, 
and 
we™ll talk about this tomorrow, 
trying to signal that the Fed, rather than being pessimistic, is determined 
and 
that the Fed will be 
supporting the economy.  We™ll be there.  We™ll be a backstop.  We™ll provide confide
nce. I 
think that™s a very important part of what our communication should be about.  P
ersonally
, I™ve 
learned something from both Woodford™s discussion and th
at discussion around the table about 
how we should be talking to markets and to the public.  And a very small thing, but in my press 
conference statement tomorrow
, I™m going to try to talk a little bit more to the average person 
than I have been, and try to explain what we™re doing and why it™s helpful more broadly.  So I do 

expect the expectations c
hannel to be very important, but I think I disagree that by itself it™s 

sufficient
. The main problem is that we™ve already said that we™d keep rates low for three years. 
How much further out can we go? 
For example, 
Woodford argues that a nominal GDP targ
et, 
if 
adopted, would allow us essentially to make commitments many years in advance.  I™d like to 

actually raise the question once again to the group because we looked very carefully at nominal 

GDP targets more than a year ago now
, I think, and there was 
really no support at that time
.  The 
basic argument is that
, in order to work, people have to be persuaded that you™ll stick to this 
target for a very extended period, many years, even though a nominal GDP target may involve a 

period of inflation well above your normal range of inflation.  Moreover, of course, there™s also 

the risk that, if that happens, then inflation expectations will become unanchored.  So I think that 

was the case against nominal GDP targeting. A few people have talked about it. 
If I™
m missing 
something and you want me to hedge more when I™m asked about it tomorrow, which I™m sure I 

will be, I™d like to hear that tomorrow because, again, the take of this group a year ago was th
at nominal GDP targeting, price-
level targeting, and so on, 
while useful, are limited in 
that they 
             
                 
         
       
     
     require credibility very far in the future. 
And that™s why I think one of the benefits of asset 
purchases is that they can be used as a concrete action, as a commitment device
, to help 
strengthen the expectations ef
fect of announcements and communication so that they really are 
complementary
Šmore than we have given them credit 
for 
and more than I really said in my 
remarks at Jackson Hole. 
So there 
are
 a lot of interesting issues here.  I think what I™d like to end on 
is just to come 
back to the point that I know we™re all in debating mode.  We want to persuade our colleagues, 

and that™s certainly laudable, but the fact is that nobody really knows precisely what is holding 

back the economy, what the correct responses a
re, 
or 
how our tools will work.  A
nd I believe we 
all have to try to think hard about, 
in a Bayesian context
, using information that we have and 
thinking about both the risks of action and the risks of inaction, what the best choices are, 

acknowledging and
 understanding that whatever we do, it™s going to be a shot in the proverbial 
dark.  I think, 
really
, it™s going to be very important for us to pull together, 
in a sense
, to support 
whatever efforts that we make.
  Any questions or comments?  President 
Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thanks for those remarks.  I 
found them very useful in my own thinking.  I, too, thought the staff™s work on LSAPs over the 

last couple of inter
meet
ing periods has been really helpful, but even mor
e broadly, I certainly 
came to the question of the efficacy of the LSAPs from the same M
odiglianiŒ
Miller framework 
that Mike sketched, and I found the empirical work on the asset pricing side very informative.  It 

certainly shaped my thinking moving away from the Mo
digliani
ŒMiller framework. 
Our statements, 
alternative A and 
alternative B
, make reference to continuing to study the efficacy of 
the LSAPs.  Part of that will have to be ongoing work and ongoing study of that linkage between 
                               
        what™s going on in the financial markets and how that™s getting through to the real economy.  
At least for me
, that™s a major source of uncertainty still. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me make one comment on that, which is, 
you 
sometimes hear the following kind of statement:  
ﬁTight monetary policy is not causing the 
problem
; therefore, easing monetary policy won™t help.
ﬂ  That™s a non sequitur.  If, say, tight 
fiscal policy is the problem, if that™s the reason the economy is growing slowly, it doesn™t mean 

that 
monetary policy can
™t mitigate that.  So I think that kind of argument needs to be looked at 
very carefully.
  We are doing a lot.  We are absolutely doing a lot.  There™s no question about it.  
Nobody can blame the Federal Reserve fairly, in my opinion, for being tightfisted and stingy and 

not willing to take risks to try to support the economy.  
But the fact that it™s not our fault that the 
recovery is slow doesn™t mean that we can™t try to help if we think, in fact, that the benefitŒ
cost 

ratio is appropriate. 
What I™d like to do is let Bill English do his introductory remarks for tomorrow.  I™m in 
your hands.  The reception starts at 5:30.  Would people like to continue with the policy round, 

or should we just have Bill and then start fresh at 8:30? 
PARTICIPANT. 
Break
. PARTICIPANTS
.  Fresh. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fresh.  Okay. 

MR. 
FISHER
.  Governor Powell needs to take a nap. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  He™s not the only one.  [Laughter] 
All right.  We™ll ask Bill 
to make his opening presentation and take any questions, and then we™ll recess for reception and 

dinner.  
Bill. 
         
    
  
    
          
   
  
     
          
                                                                         MR. ENGLISH.
7  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think the policy 
alternatives are being handed around right now.  They are the same as the ones we 

distributed earlier this week. I guess I™ll wait just a mome
nt until everybody has 
them. 
The first page of the handout illustrates the effects of three different policy paths.  
The black
 solid lines in the charts depict the experimental consensus forecast, which 
is conditioned on unchanged policy.  The 
red
 dashed lines show the results of a more 
accommodative policy, one 
that™s 
consistent with an a
lternative B that shifts back the 
date in the forward guidance to mid-2015 and, in addition to $30 billion of MBS 

purchases a month and completion of the MEP this year, involves buying longer-
term 
securities at a rate of $75 billion a month through the middle of next year.  The 

balance sheet implications of this alternative are shown at the top right.  So long as 

the public correctly anticipates that the Committee will follow this policy, the result is 

a more rapid economic recovery that takes the unemployment rate to 
6.3 percent by 
the end of 2015, about ½ percentage point lower than in the consensus baseline; the 

inflation rate (shown at the bottom right) is a bit
 higher but remains near your 

2 percent longer
-run objective. 
The 
blue dotted lines show the results of an even more accommodative policy; 
this corresponds to alternative A and includes a new $1.25 trillion LSAP and a shift in 

the date in the forward guida
nce to mid
-2015.  
In this case, the unemployment rate 
falls to 
about 6.1 percent by the end of 2015, and inflation runs a little higher than 
under the other policies. 
If, in reviewing the outlook under 
the 
unchanged policy, the Committee views the 
likely outcomes for employment and inflation as inconsistent with its mandate, it 

might choose to ease policy by strengthening the forward guidance in the statement 

and engaging in additional asset purchases.  Alternative B
, on page 5, 
may offer the 
Committee an attractive approach to moving strongly in that direction at this meeting, 

but without committing now to a large, discrete purchase program.  Alternative B 

completes the MEP and starts buying additional MBS, with an explicit proviso that 

the Committee will c
losely monitor developments ﬁin coming monthsﬂ in deciding 
whether to continue the purchases and scale them up. 
The first paragraph of 
alternative B updates the description of the economy to 
reflect the mixed incoming information over the period.  The second paragraph 

differs from past statements by expressing the medium
-term outlook as a conditional 

forecast, noting that the Committee is concerned that ﬁwithout further policy 

accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained 

improvement in labor market conditions.ﬂ  Then the third paragraph announces that 

the Committee will complete the MEP as planned and will commence purchasing 

MBS each month.  The options you™re offered here are rates of $30 billion or 

$40 billion a month.  The higher rate of purchases would have the advantage of 

providing more impetus to growth, but some policymakers may prefer the lower rate, 
7 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
      
                          
             
      
      
    
              perhaps to allow for some future ramping-up in reaction to shocks, such as a full 

encounter with the fiscal cliff or
 a worsening of the problems in Europe.  Staff work 
suggests that purchases even 
at the higher pace would be unlikely to cause problems 
with market functioning. 
The fourth paragraph signals another decision point coming in the future.  It says 
that if, ﬁin
 coming months,ﬂ the ﬁoutlook for the labor market does not improve 
substantially,ﬂ the Committee will continue its MBS purchases 
and undertake 
additional asset purchases ﬁas appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a 

context of price stability.ﬂ
 The paragraph offers an option to include the possibility 
of employing other policy tools as well.  Participants may find that additional 

reference attractive if they think that changes in forward guidance, new lending 

programs, or a reduction in the inte
rest rate paid on reserves might also be appropriate 
in the future.  The paragraph concludes by noting that, as always, the likely efficacy 

and costs of asset purchases will be taken into account as the Comm
ittee calibrates its 
purchases. 
In paragraphs 5 and 5
, the statement offers two options for restating the forward 
guidance.  Both versions begin by putting the Committee™s decision with respect to 

the forward guidance in a more positive light and in the context of making progress 

toward its objectives by indicating that
, ﬁto support continued progress toward 

maximum employment and price stability, the Committee expects that exceptionally 

low levels of the federal funds rate will remain appropriate for a considerable time 

after the economic recovery stren
gthens.ﬂ  Paragraph 5 then continues by shifting 
the 
date of the expected commencement of policy firming out to mid-2015.  By contrast, 

paragraph 5
 replaces the calendar date with new conditional language that ties the 
timing of liftoff to the path of the
 unemployment rate, subject to constraints on 
inflation and inflation expectations.  Some participants may see this conditional 

language as preferable to offering a specific date because it will allow market 

participants to adjust their expectations for li
ftoff flexibly as information bearing on 

the economic outlook is received. 
The immediate market reaction to 
alternative B is hard to predict, in light of the 
policy expectations currently in the market and the decision point that would be 

highlighted in paragraph 4.  Primary dealers appear to place high odds on a new 

program of securities purchasesŠ
generally expected to increase Federal Reserve 
holdings by around $500 
billion 
to $600 billion by the end of 2013Š
and some see it 
as likely to be described in flow terms.  But it is not clear how they would gauge the 

likely scale of purchases under 
alternative B. An 
al
ternative B in which the 
Committee decided over coming months to purchase $75 billion in securities per 

month during the first half of next year would be roughly equivalent to the 

$500 billion 
to $600 billion now expected.  With most outside forecasts anti
cipating 
only slow improvement in labor market conditions over coming quarters, the market 

may come to expect the purchases to exceed this amount.  With regard to the forward 

guidance, ﬁmid
-2015ﬂ is in line with expectations, but the language in paragraph 5
 might be seen as pointing to even more accommodation.  On balance, a
lternative B 
might prompt a modest decline in longer-term interest rates, higher equity prices, and 
                          
              
                     
  
          
    
        a depreciation of the dollar.  However, the magnitude and persistence of the effects 

will depend importantly on what investors see as the implications of the statement for 

the ultimate size of the SOMA portfolio, as well as which version of the forward 

guidance the Committee chooses. 
Alternative A
, on page 3, 
may appeal to members who see 
the Committee as 
having persistently missed its dual objectives in the same direction and believe that, 

with the fiscal cliff looming and uncertainty about Europe unresolved, the downside 

risks to economic growth are very large.  They may believe that the 
Committee needs 
to send a clear signal that it is willing to substantially increase its holdings of 

securities and extend the forward guidance.  They may be concerned that the 

effectiveness of 
alternative B would be undermined by investor uncertainty about 
both the Committee™s decision to extend purchases beyond the next few months and 

the ul
timate size of such purchases. 
The first and second paragraphs of a
lternative A are close to those of 
alternative 
B.  The third paragraph of alternative A announces a new lump-
sum LSAP 
program, comprising $750 billion of longer-term Treasuries and $500 billion of MBS, 

at a combined pace of about $75 billion per month through early 2014.  The fourth 

paragraph clarifies that the new program replac
es the MEP and that the Committee™s 

reinvestment policy will continue.  The fifth paragraph, as in a
lternative 
B, extends 
the forward guidance to mid-2015.  Alternative A also provides possible language for 

a 10
 basis point reduction in the IOER rate. 
Beca
use $1.25 trillion lies well outside the range of most market forecasts 
for a 
new LSAP program, alternative A would likely lead to a notable drop in longer-
term 
interest rates, as well as higher equity prices and a lower foreign exchange value of 

the dolla
r.  These effects could be increased somewhat and accompanied by some 
decline in short-
term interest rates if a reduction i
n the IOER rate were included. 
Alternative C, 
on page 7, might appeal to policymakers who see the recent 
economic data as consistent 
with the view that the economic recovery is on a 
sustainable path and proceeding about as well as could be expected given the effects 

of the financial crisis.  They may see the elevated size of the Federal Reserve™s 

portfolio as well as the recent rise in 
oil and other key commodity prices as implying 
some upside risk to inflation.  As a result, they may judge that there is no need to ease 

policy through a change in the forward guidance or a new LSAP program, and they 

may even anticipate that the funds rate 
will need to be raised significantly earlier than 
markets anticipate. Other participants may have views that are shaped less by 

concerns about the outlook, but believe that the costs and risks associated with 

additional asset purchases are likely to exce
ed the benefits in terms of improved 

economic conditions. 
The first paragraph in a
lternative C is somewhat more positive about economic 
developments than in alternatives A and B.  The second paragraph is similar to the 

August statement but projects somewha
t stronger growth and higher inflation.  There 
are two versions of paragraph 3:  The first maintains the ﬁlate 2014ﬂ forward 
                                                    guidance, with an option to change the date to ﬁlate 2103ﬂ
; the second version, 

ate
-dependent forward gui
dance 
with language describing 
the factors the Committee would consider in determining the appropriate time to raise 

the target federal funds rate.  The fourth paragraph is similar to the August statement, 

except that it provides a more balanced outlook for policy. 
The markets would be greatly surprised by a statement along the lines of 
alternative C, especially if it signaled an earlier rise in the federal funds rate. Interest 
rates would likely jump higher, and stock prices could drop sharply. 
Draft dire
ctives for each of the alternatives are presented on pages 9 through 12 of 
your handout.  
Thank you
, Mr. Chairman.  That 
completes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there any questions for Bill? 
President Fisher. 
MR. FISHE
R.  Mr. Chairman, if I could ask Simon and the D
esk
Šagain, just to have a 
factual grip here
:  What kind of market penetration will we have on mortgage-
backed securities 
under the 
program of 
$30 and $40 billion per month?  You mentioned this earlier.  I apo
logize. 
MR. POTTER. 
That™s the flow rate relative to gross issuance. 
MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir. 
MR. POTTER. 
If we™re about one-third right now, if we added $30 billion, we™d be 
about 60 percent
; at 
$40 billion
, we™re about 70 percent.  
But i
n terms of the stock, I think that 
wouldŠ
what was that
, L
orie
? MS. LOGAN.  I don™t have the exact numbers for the particular scenarios, but the stock 
would be 25 percent under the $30-
billion
-per
-month pace, and it would be slightly higher under 
$40 billion per month
. I 
don™t have that exact number, and it depends on the length, but just for 
a maximum
, under the $2 trillion scenario that we had run, the maximum was 36 percent.  So 

that gives you the very upper bound. 
MR. FISHER.  And if w
e assume that we finish the MEP at 
year
-end, what will be our 
duration? 
       
      
     
    
        
     
                 
    
 MR. POTTER
.  The duration will be eight years, but we™ll own quite large amounts of 
some of the longer-duration securities.  T
hat™s 
in the Treasury part of the portfolio. 
MR. FISHER.  And of some of the particular issu
es, we have significant
Šabove 
70 percent
.  I
s that
 correct now? 
MS. LOGAN. 
We™ve a 70 percent per CUSIP cap.  So we can™t buy any
Š MR. FISHER.  That™s our cap per 
CUSIP? 
MS. LOGAN
.  That™s the c
ap. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 
MS. LOGAN
.  We™ve only hit the ca
p on ten issues, I thinkŠthe number that we™ve hit 
the 
maximum 
70 percent on
.  And most of those were old bonds in 
very small size. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you very much. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chai
rman. Bill, I just wanted to clarify since we have 
a few minutes here.  When we do this on page 1 here, there 
are 
three lines
, and then 
alternative 
B has a couple 
of 
options in it.  Are you saying that this is a rough guide to what 
alternative 
B would del
iver? 
MR. ENGLISH. Ye
s. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Or 
do you feel as though it wouldn™t make too much difference which 
option is chosen within the subgroups that are proposed?  O
r is it just 
that it™d get too cluttered
? MR. ENGLISH. 
What we tried to do here was write
 down something that seemed 
plausibly in line with 
alternative B. Alternative B has a couple of different choices that the 
Committee would have to make.  One is, 
later on
, what do you do in a few months after you™ve 
observed the economy?  Do you continue purchasing into next year? We™ve assumed that you 
                   
                
    continue purchasing for about, I think, seven months in this.  And then the other question is, 
what do you do with the forward guidance? 
We™ve assumed
, basically
, that the forward 
guidance goes out to mid-2015 and is compellingŠe
verybody believes 
it.  It™s possible, as I 
mentioned, that because market participants™ sense 
of 
the outlook is a bit weaker than our sense 

of the outlook, they may read that 6½ percent unemployment rate as pushing the liftoff even 

later
.  If that were picked up, then you™d get a little bit more impetus to the economy out of that, 
but we™ve not modeled that here. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  And the other thingŠI™ve been concerned about the withering 
of 
alternative C here.
  Alternative C isn™t mentioned in the graphs. 
MR. ENGLISH.  Alternative C would be, as long as you left the liftoff date unchanged, 
pretty similar to the consensus forecast.  What I™m taking out of that is the sense in the words in 

alternative C that mig
ht hint that things could move more quickly than that. 
So the straight 
consensus forecast is no change in the forward guidance, no additional purchases beyond the end 

of the year.  That broadly is consistent with a
lternative C but maybe doesn™t quite get 
the sense 
of what the words in a
lternative C could mean to market participants. 
MR. BULLARD.  Well, when you describe it, 
you say, ﬁ
Markets would be surprised
.ﬂ  
I think 
that™s 
accurate
Šthey
™d be very surprised by a statement like thatŠand that you proba
bly 
would have some 
effe
ct.  Plus, if we were going in that direction, which I guess we™re not, you™d 
have the possibility of moving up the date 
of liftoff
. MR. ENGLISH.  Right. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
One important point here
:  The black lineŠ
the consensus 
forecast
Šimplicitly has in it
 a significant disappointment 
for
 the market because they pull back 
      
           
       
     
               their expectations for liftoff to late 2014, and they 
remove 
their expectations of any furt
her 
expansion of the portfolio. 
MR. 
BULLARD
.  I see.  So I should read this as ﬁConsensus forecast/a
lternative C.ﬂ 
MR. ENGLISH.  Roughly. 
MR. BULLARD.  Roughly speaking.  Well, I guess, Mr. Chairman, 
I have a concern 
whether 
we have three options that are live options.  And I think it™s been hard while the 
Committee has been
 trying to think about ways to ease, and when the Committee shifts in the 
other direction, the same thing will happen.  But I think you want to have some things that are a 

little bit tighter, a little bit easier, and might actually have a chance of
Š CHAIRM
AN BERNANKE. 
We circulate this and ask whether it spans the range of 
views
 so, of course, we always welcome suggestions. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Well, it™s up to you.  But if you try to span the range of views, you 
might have to put something on the table that™s not going to be adopted.  But from my point of 

view, I
™d like to see three live things that we could do and things that we might be able to 
maneuver around. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The other way we
™ve used the alternatives
, of course, 
is to 
try out different lan
guage or alternative language. 
And in the past, 
we™ve co
mbined, mixed 
things together. 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  One is for you, Bill.  
I™d like your help 
with 
understanding the second sentence in B(4).  I™m having trouble with it.  I 
don™t think I understand it correctly, particularly the role of price stability.  So let me tell you 
      
   
     
      
    
                                 what I think it says, the way I read it. 
It says, ﬁIf the outlook for the labor m
arket does
 not improve substantiallyﬂ in coming monthsŠ
so, if that happensŠthen we™re going to do X.  So X, 
I think, 
is, as I read this, ﬁundertake additional asset purchases 
. . . as appropriate until 
such 
improvement is achieved in a context of price sta
bility.ﬂ
  As I think about that, if that 
improvement is achieved but it™
s not in a context of price stability, that seems to say to me that 
we™re going to still keep purchasing assets.  Have I got this wrong? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I want to defend Bill because he pointed out this problem. 
MR. LACKER.  I actually pointed it out to him yesterday. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You
 pointed it out to him.  Okay. 
MR. 
ENGLISH
.  You™re not 
the 
first
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
We have poetic license here. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  You 
don™t mean that literally, right? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It means that we
™re looking for improvement in a context of 
price stability. If we see improvement 
without price stability, that
™s not a good thing, and we 
won™t continue purchases. 
MR. LACKER.  But th
is says you
™re going to wait until you get im
provement with price 
stability. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it™s clear what
Š VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It™
s ﬁsubject to
.ﬂ That™s really what it means. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It
™s ﬁsubject to.ﬂ  W
hen we actually clari
fy this, assuming 
we go ahead and do more in January or whatever, we™
ll be a little clear
er in this kind of language 
here. 
                 
  
         
      
  
          
                 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  The second question I haveŠand I probably should have 
asked this during our first agenda item.  I™
ve asked t
his at times in the past
.  On the table is a 
flow of purchases of mortgage-backed securities.  I™
ve asked in the past 
about the thought 
experiment of buying mortgage
-backed securities versus buying an equivalent amount of 
U.S.
 Treasuries.
  What I
™ve asked 
about is, all right, comparing those two options, undoubtedly 
your forecast, as you™ve said, is that 
mortgage
-backed security yields 
will be lower with 
purchases of 
mortgage
-backed securities than 
with 
purchases of 
Treasuries, and that mortgage 
rates will 
be lower. 
Now, my gut instinct is that some other rates will be higher.  And I™
ve asked 
about this in the past, but did you do any work on that this time? 
MR. POTTER.  Which rates? 
MR. LACKER. 
Aren™t other rates going 
to be higher if we buy mortgage-
backeds rather 
than T
reasuries?  Because presumably
, that means 
Treasury rates will be higher than they 
otherwise would be.  Presumably, some other rates are linked to T
reasuries 
and not mortgage-
backed securities, and presumably, they™
re higher. Isn™t there some other rate that
™s going to go 
up if we buy mortgage-
backed
s rather than 
Treasuries? 
MR. ENGLISH. Not 
go up
, but go down by less. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Go down by less. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I think that™s right. 

MR. LACKER.  Oh, okay.  Well, noŠbut, see, I™m asking to compare buying X amount 
of T
reasuries 
with buying 
X amount 
of mortgage-
backed.  So rates 
go downŠ 
MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we are still buying Treasuries under the MEP in this 
program. 
       
           
           
                      
MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know.  But instead of buying $30 billion of mortgages, buy 
$30 billion of 
Treasuries. 
MR. ENGLISH.  I think the answer to your question is in table 1 in the options memo 
that we sent, which had an experiment where you do $500 billion of T
reasury purchases or 
$500 billion of MBSŠjust one or the other.  T
he term premium effects are a little bit smaller if 
you buy the MBS, so T
reasury yields decline by less.  They still decline. It
™s still a purchase of a 
longer-
term security and still taking duration out of the market and still p
utting downward 
pressure on longer-
term rates, but by less.
  The mortgage rate goes down by more if you buy 
MBS than if you buy T
reasuries, because you
™re pushing MBS down more and mortgage rates 
down by more.  And our estimate of the effects on inflation and output are similar in size.  
They
™re a little smaller for the MBS purchase
, based on our modeling and our assumptions, than 
for 
the 
Treasury purchase, but they™
re in the same ballpark. 
MR. LACKER.  So what other rates go down by less or are higher b
ecause you™
ve 
been 
tilting toward 
mortgage
-backeds
? MR. ENGLISH. 
In FRB
/USŠDave Reifschneider 
will tell me if I™m wrong
ŠI think, 
basically
, that 
other long-term rates, corporate rates or whatever, would go down by more if you 
bought Treasuries than if you bought MBS. 
MR. PLOSSER.  So the MBS would provide 
less pass
-through, in some sense, to 
corporates and other things.  Is that the idea? 
MR. ENGLISH
.  Yes. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Depends on what you think the 
degree of substitutability 
is between 
them. 
          
       
       
    
   
             
     MR.
 ENGLISH.  Yes.  And this really is pushing pretty hard on our ability to model this 
stuff, but that™s what our modeling 
says
. MR. LACKER.  So that takes away some stimulus, right? 
MR. ENGLISH. Ye
s, that™s right. 
MR. LACKER. 
And the MBS, on netŠ 
MR. POTT
ER.  Well, not overall, 
necessarily. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Well, it doesn™t take away stimulus relative to doing nothing.  
It takes away stimulus relative to
Š  MR. ENGLISH. 
Buying
 an equivalent amount of T
reasuries
. MR. LACKER. 
Right. 
MR. POTTER.  On thoseŠ 

MR. 
LACKER
.  In that sector. 
MR. POTTER.  Not necessarily for the economy as a whole. 

MR. LACKER. 
Right.  So the rationale for MBSŠ
is it that
, on net, 
real outcomes are 
better?  Or is it more of a sectoral argument? 
MR. ENGLISH.  The argument we gave in the memo was that you want to have a 
balance across the two so that you can ramp up or ramp down.  We know from the capacity 

memo that we sent the Committee before the last meeting that there
™s a maximum amount
, roughly, 
that we 
were comfortable saying 
we could buy over the next couple of years.  That 
maximum amount 
has a ratio of 
Treasuries to MBS, 
and 
we™ve roughly maintained that ratio in 
these purchase programs. 
MR. LACKER.  I understand.  Thank you. 
                              
                   
      MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
That
™s the main argument.  
There
™s a second argument, which 
is not in the model sims we
™ve run, but a lot of people believe that MBS could have effects that 
the model isn™t picking upŠ
say, large
r effects on house prices
, bigger effects on mortgage 
refinancing, 
or 
something like that
. CHA
IRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart has a two-
hander. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Is there a connection or correlation between lowering mortgage-
backed rates and other securitization vehicles such as auto, student loan, credit card? 
MR. ENGLISH.  There might be in practice, but we™re not picking that up in the 
modeling that we
™re doing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just one observation.  Presumably, the reason why you 
also might want to split it is a market functioning issue. 
You can go 
bigger if you split it 
between two markets than if you conce
ntrate all on one market. 
MR. POTTER.  We are still buying in the 
Treasury market. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
That was just a comment, but I have a question.  It 
seems to me 
as though the key money line in B is, ﬁIf the outlook for the labor market does not 

improve substantially, the Committee will continue its 
purchases of agency 
mortgage-backed 
securities and undertake additional asset purchases.
ﬂ  That
™s the key money line.  
Now, I
™d like 
to get st
aff members™ 
views of what they think people are going to interpret that line to mean in 
light of, say, the SEPs that are going to be put out 
and the Chairman™s press conference 
statement.  How do we think people are going to interpret that line?  That™s c
ritical
Šyou have to 
have a view on that to know what you™re really voting for, in some fundamental sense.  I know 

it™s judgment, but I™d love to 
hear your view. 
                  
    
   
  
     
      
          MR. ENGLISH. 
We™re not sure.  
I think we argued in our memos that it might be 
something like a
 ½ percent
age point 
decline in the unemployment rate that
™s sustained. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, I don™t mean the effects on the macroeconomy.  I 
mean, when people write the articles at the end of the day, what are 
they going to think about 
how big this is likely to be? 
MR. POTTER.  I don™t think it will showŠ 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They
™re going to have our SEPs, and they™
re going to 
have this information that shows that this unemployment rate trajectory
Š MR. 
KOCHERLAKO
TA.  You mean the purchase program itself? 
MR. POTTER.  The total amount forŠthey™re going to try 
to work out an expected date. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  And so I guess I™m asking, what kind of expected 
date do we think they can work out? 
MR. POTTER. 
The SEP will give them some information.  I don™t believe that shows a 
substantial improvement in the labor market for quite some time.  So that means that they
™ll probably be looking for sometime in 2013.  That™
s the way we
™ve been modeling this, I think.  
And the assumption you had, Bill, was something like $600 billion of total purchasesŠi
s that 
right? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Including purchases under the MEP, it was $750 
billion
.  But
, as I said 
in my remarks, it could easily be more.  P
eople might see that the e
conomy is expected to be 
weak for quite a while
; they might carry it out further into 2013 and get a bigger amount. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
For me, the obvious question to you, Mr. Chairman, at 
the press conference might be
, given the SEP and your views, wh
at does the SEP forecast imply 

in terms 
of ﬁi
mprove 
substantially
ﬂ?       
                
                              
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  My answer will be that 
we want to see
Šnot what we saw 
last 
Friday
.  We want to see increases in payrolls.  We want to see some progress
Šnot sh
arp 
progress, but some pro
gress
Šin the unemployment rate
.  And we want to have a sense that the 
economy is moving in a 
direction that will help labor markets get better. 
We used the word 
ﬁoutlook.ﬂ  So a pickup in GDP growth would certainly be a factor in the outlook for labor 
markets, for example. I think we have a fail
-safe here
, which is that if it doesn™t have any effect, 
then we have the efficacy clause here as well.
  But the idea would be that we want to see 
something different from the current 
waiting
-in-place kind of situation where there™s no 
progress, 
the 
unemployment rate stays about the same, and monthly payrolls are 100,000 and 

less. 
And I will emphasize that it
™s not a single indicator or a single trigger number; 
we™re 
looking holistically at the labor market indi
cators and, in fact, more broadly because it™
s the 
outlook for the labor market that matters, not just the current number. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you
™d have to see improvement in the labor market 
that you thought would be sustained in the future. 
CHAIRM
AN BERNANKE.  Right. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
For what it™s worth, the B
lue 
Chip forecasts 
for the 
unemployment rate going into the middle of 2013 are very flat
.  Then, in the second half of 2013, 
they™
re expecting to see a more noticeable downtilt in the unemp
loyment rate.  So that™s another 
way of 
looking at it. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So the market would presumably put in nine months 
or 
more
Šthat
 would be a reasonable guesstimate, 
I guess. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Again, it™s
 the outlook and not the actual. 
VICE CH
AIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Yes. 
                         
                    MR. PLOSSER.  I just want some interpretation of the word ﬁsubstantiallyﬂ here because 
the market is going to ask you that as well.  What constitutes substantial progress? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Substantial progress means that we are seei
ng ongoing 
progress in the direction of improved labor market conditions. 
MR. PLOSSER.  So it
™s not something about 
the magnitude of the rate of change. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It
™s not the magnitude, but really a 
movement in that 
direction 
that 
is, I m
ight 
say, persuasive or indicative that there is now progress in the right 
direction
, as opposed to simply remaining static or 
getting 
worse.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  This is on the same point. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  David Wilcox showed us employment in his forecast summary, and 
when they do all of the seasonal adjustment right, it looks as though half of the improvement we 

got in the labor markets this past winter or the winter before, was spurious, seasonal stuff.  

Would what we saw last w
inter suffice? Would we stop after that? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would think so.  It dropped 1 percentage point between 
August and 
April. 
MR. LACKER. I
™d be on board with that.  But his 
analysis suggests that 
that 
would be 
like another seasonal head fake. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we
™d look at a range of variables.  O
f course, there™s 
nothing that says if you stop, you can™t start again. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No
, but l
ast winter, though, it wasn™t really that 
convincing because, remember, payrolls were strong but GDP was weak, and we had this riddle. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We had this riddle.  Yes, that™s right. 
                    
          
     
             
     
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And so you could argue that you wouldn™t necessarily 
stop 
last winter
, because 
you didn™t have the GDP growth to support the 
labor market. 
MR. POTTER.  I don™t think our outlook changed that much.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We basically want to see progress in terms of the key macro 
labor market variables. 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  Well, let me ask Bill Dudley™s question again.  What do you 
want the 
USA 
Today
 headline to be? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
ﬁBernanke, 
the Hero
ﬂ? [Laughter] 
ﬁFederal Reserve 
Says 
It Will Support Economy.ﬂ 
MR. 
FISHER
.  That™s the 
sports section, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. 
PLOSSER
.  ﬁFederal Reserve All In.ﬂ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
ﬁFederal Reserve Will 
Provide Support to Labor M
arket.
ﬂ MR. 
LACKER
.  By buying 
MBS? 
MS. 
DUKE.  And housing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Housing.
  People understand that. 
MR. 
LACKER
.  Okay. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  D
id you have a question, 
President 
Pianalto? 
MS. PIANALTO.  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, you made some comments about the 
6½ percent unemployment trigger in 
alternative B, paragraph 5
. You said that some forecasters 
have slower progress on the unemployment rate, so they may view 
what is in alternative B 
as more accommodation than markets expect.  If you look at your page 1, 
ﬁAlternat
ive Monetary 
Policy 
Scenarios,
ﬂ that 6
½ percent rate, as you mentioned, is about mid-2015.  I know we™
re 
            
      
         
                      trying to get away from the date, but you made those points.  You didn™t say very much about the 
inflation rate, because here it says ﬁ
no more than a half percentage point above the Committee™s 

2 percent objective.ﬂ  When you look at those scenarios, with alternative B, we don™t get 

anywhere close to 2
½.  We™re just slightly above the 2.  At one point, we looked at some 
language that said ﬁclose to the Committee™s 2 
percent objective.ﬂ  And I see that 
alternative 
B, 
and even a
lternative A, is 
close to our objective.  What are some of your thoughts
?  J
ust as you 
had
 some thoughts about the 6½ percent being interpreted by some as being more aggressive, 
would that 2½ percent objective be viewed as, again, more aggressive, and is it necessary given 

the scenarios that you™ve laid out here? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLE
Y.  It™s not an objective, though, right? 
GOVERNOR YELLEN
.  It™s not an objective. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It™s not an objective.  
It™s just a tolerance level.  That™s 
quite different. 
MS. PIANALTO.  But it™s 
a matter of
 perceptions also.  We™
re talking 
about 
communications.  And we™ve made a lot of progress and laid out a 2 
percent objective.  What are 

the advantages? 
Using
 ﬁclose to 2 percentﬂ 
would still 
give
 us the 
flexibility that
™s laid out in 
these scenarios
, but we
™re not communicating to the pub
lic that we
™re throwing out ½ 
percentage 
point.  I
t seems 
as though 
we™re throwing out a number, 
whereas
, ﬁclose toﬂ gives us some of 
that flexibility. 
MR. ENGLISH.  I think the ½ percentage point buffer was intended just for clarity.  If 
you said ﬁclose t
o,ﬂ everybody would ask the Chairman at his press conference, ﬁWhat do you 
mean by 
‚close to
™?
ﬂ and t
ry to extract that information.
  People will be looking at the SEP, and 
the SEP shows inflation below 2 or at 2, roughly, but not going above.  So I don™t think they™d 
                                      
    misread the 
½ percentage point buffer as suggesting an intention to set out to push inflation 
above 2.  It would simply be seen as a buffer.  There could be transitory shocks that would 

change the inflation outlook for a time, and the Committee could look through those and say, 

ﬁOkay.  We™re going to go up as high as maybe 2½ 
for a little while, but after that
, we think 

inflation is going to come back.  In the end, we™re getting to our objective, and that™s okay.ﬂ 
But 
whether you want to say e
xplicitly ﬁ
½ percentage pointﬂ or ﬁclose toﬂ is a question of 
communications.  It™
s a little clearer to say the number and not use ﬁclose to.ﬂ  But this is a 
communications issue for the Committee. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Can I ask one more press conference 
question?  Suppose somebody says, ﬁWe get to the end of 2013, it™s December 2013, and we™
re 
exactly where we are today.
  So 
the 
unemployment rate, job growthŠeverything is pretty much 
exactly where we are today. 
Do you envision that we™
ll still be continuing asset purchases at that 
point?ﬂ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  As we go through time, as the balance sheet grows, as we 
observe the effects on the economy, we™
ll be 
continually reevaluating the efficacy of the program 
and the costs that it is imposing.  And if we feel that we
™ve 
reached that point and the program is 
not being effective, then we w
ill have to stop.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes. I
™ll just add on to what you said, Mr. Chairman.  This 
question is an important one, but I think there 
are 
just 
two ways you could end up being in the 
same place.  It could be that there were a lot of bad shocks and the asset purchases helped you 

stop that, or maybe not.  We™
ll have to make that call at that time. 
                                 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
We have overnight
.  If any genius around the table would 
like to come up with better language, I would be more than happy. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I counsel you against 
offering 
that
.  [L
aughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  Are we all set?  [No response] 
Bill, 
what do you want us to do with these handouts? Do you want us to take them home and bring 
them back? 
MR. ENGLISH.  You have lots of Class 
I informat
ion in your Tealbook, so you 
can 
keep 
them. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right. 

MR. ENGLISH.  But please don™t leave them on the subway.  [L
aughter]. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Don™t leave them on the subway.  So 8:30 tomorrow 
morning.  T
he reception is available at 5
:00 p.m. 
[Meeting recessed] 
        
    
           
     
      
           September 13 Session 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We should have a reasonable 
amount of time.  We need to get the statement in by 11:30 and close the meeting by noon.  But 
first
, to get started
, why don™t we begin our policy go-round
? I have President Williams first on 
the list. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B with the forward 
guidance on the funds rate in paragraph 5
.  The case for further action is clear. In the absence of 
significant additional monetary stimulus, progress toward our policy goals would remain stalled.  

Such an outcome is simply inconsistent with the notion of appropriate monetary policy and, in 

my view
, is unacceptable. 
We must aim for a
 path that brings us measurably closer to our goals 
over the forecast horizon, and we must take concrete actions that get us on that path.  
Open
-ended purchases of MBS represent a substantial step in that direction.  With this action, 

unemployment will fall more quickly and inflation will return toward 
2 percent faster than under 
the status quo. 
The flow-
oriented asset purchases in 
alternative B also provide flexibility that™s 
particularly valuable, given all the uncertainties of the economy, the fiscal cliff, and Europe.  

They serve as a useful automatic stabilizer as market expectations about the ultimate size of the 
program adjust in response to changes in economic conditions 
and
 the outlook.  
If the 
labor 
market shows signs of substantial improvement sooner than expected, the program can be 

curtailed.  In contrast, if the recovery falters, the program can provide additional needed support. 
There would be similar benefits from incorporating such an automatic stabilizer into our 
forward guidance of the future path of the funds rate.  The language in p
aragraph 5
 does just 
that.  Incorporating this language into our statement would allow us to finally get the calendar
-                   
                        
 date monkey off our back and provide better guidance on our policy reaction functionŠ 
importantly, at least, on economic conditionsŠ
for funds rate liftoff that 
is both clear and 
consistent with our dual-mandate objectives.  It™s also flexible enough to handle a variety of 

future paths for the economy and inflation.  Indeed, the beauty of this approach is it provides 

guidance for contingencies where our forecasts go wrong, which they inevitably do. 
Finally, I continue to favor lowering the interest on excess reserve
s rate, the IOER rate, to 
15 basis points.  We should be using all of our tools in the same direction.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
.  Thank you very much.  
President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support 
alternative 
B with the 
$40 billion per month mortgage purchase program and prefer option 5
 which moves us away 
from dates and fo
cuses on the economic outcomes we seek to achieve. 
Inflation is quite low, and 
unemployment is quite high, and most of our forecasts for the past nine months have 

overestimated how quickly we would see improvements in 
either element of our mandate. 
Altern
ative B embraces the sense of doing what it takes to move the economy at an 
acceptable pace toward full employment with stable prices. 
Alternative 
B continues to take out 
duration, provides some direct support to housing, which is just beginning to recover, and 

extends guidance on the funds rate liftoff, which, given our lack of progress toward our mandate, 

seems appropriate. 
I strongly support the $40 billion rather than the $30 billion monthly 
mortgage purchase program. 
I would also prefer to include economic targets rather than date targets in our guidance.  
Thus, I would prefer the conditionality language in 5
. The language has two advantages.  
First, 
the conditions for changing our policy stance are clear and observable to the general public.  

Second, 
date
-conditional language can be subsequently undercut by Committee members™ 
                 
                       
   
 comments that suggest a different date may be appropriate, thus altering the effect of policy 
relative to the intent of the consensus reached 
by the Committee. 
Because 5
 conditions the 
policy on observable outcomes, the public can adjust its expectations automatically to changing 

economic circumstances, and there is less likelihood of perhaps inadvertently diminishing our 

policies™ effectivene
ss due to Committee disagreement. 
There seem to be two arguments against taking action at least as strong as B at this 
meeting
.  F
irst, that it would be ineffective.  Estimates in Boston are that following 
option A 
would reduce unemployment by approximatel
y 0.8 percent by the end of 2015.  This is roughly 
in line with the Board staff memos and the consensus policy submissions from three other banks 

that reported a preferred policy that was close to A.  
If accurate, this implies creating more than 
1 million jobs relative to doing nothing at this meeting. I do not view that as de minimis. 
The second argument against more aggressive action is that it will cause inflation.  Again, 
the consensus forecast exercise is instructive.  Among banks that provided numeric submissions, 

those that assumed further easing assume underlying inflation will remain well anchored.  This 

assumption is consistent with the Boston forecasting model.  Two of the Banks that provided 

numbers and assumed earlier tightening than we do have 
virtually identical unemployment rates 
with and without tightening, but a dramatically higher inflation rate under the baseline policy.  

This is markedly different than the staff forecast, the DSG
E models that we have seen, 
and the 
models used by B
anks as
suming the need for easing.  It would be interesting to discuss the 
theoretical basis and empirical evidence for such an inflationary process, which I presume is tied 

to dislodging of inflation expectations.  However, absent a strong empirical basis for su
ch an 

inflation process and with inflation tracking below our target and roughly consistent with the 

staff forecast in models that assume expectations remain well anchored, I view the risks of 
                      
     
    
           
 inflation as being well contained through 2015, even with a more aggressive policy than in 
alternative 
B.  Thus, I support B but would strongly prefer the forward guidance in the language 
of 5
 and the larger mortgage purchase amount.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the Committee™s outlook 
and overall assessment of the economy, I would say that additional accommodation is 

appropriate.  I think the question then becomes what form that accommodation should take. 
Alternati
ve A and 
alternative 
B offer 
the Committee the opportunity to do large-
scale 
asset purchases.  As you said in your Jackson Hole speech, Mr. Chairman, and 
as the staff 

analysis indicates, the benefits of large-
scale asset purchases are still under study and 
still 
uncertain.
  And the question is, how do we deal with that?  How do we deal with the 
issue that 
we don™t know exactly how much the benefits are, even though we might feel confident about 

the sign?  Governor Yellen and the Vice Chair
man
 said the right things yesterday about this, 
which is to act forcefully 
and
 to enhance the benefits of our large-
scale asset purchases as much 
as possible. 
How do we enhance our purchases as much as possible?  Well, the stimulus from our 
purchases hinges critically on th
e forward guidance.  They work together.  If you buy assets and 
hold them for one day and then sell them the next day, they are providing no stimulus.  If you 

buy assets and hold them for 10 years, they™re providing a lot of stimulus.  T
he stimulus 
that 
the asset purchases are providing the economy depends on the timing of exit.  T
o enhance the benefit 
of our large-
scale asset purchase
s as much as possible, 
we need the best possible forward 
guidance, and I would say that B(5
) as opposed to B(5) provides that forward guidance. 
                 
  
              
       
  
      
         
 I talked yesterday about the ambiguities that come 
by trying to communicate our reaction 
function with a date.  Today I™ll focus only on the economic aspects of B(5
. One, 
it provides 
an automatic stabilizer against macro shocks.
  Two, 
it offers protection against inflation.
  And, 
three, I want to talk about the mechanism through which it™s offering stimulus. 
The automatic stabilizer feature of B(5
 is relatively clear.  We talk a lot about downside 
risks in this room.  We have a bad shockŠ
and there 
are 
many possibilities out there
, I won™t go 
through them all.  If unemployment goes up 
and we have B(5) in place, which is date guidance, 
people 
will
 wonder
:  What is the Fed going to do?  How are they going to respond to that shock? 
With B
(5
 in place, 
if 
unemployment goes up
, it means automatically it™s going to take us longer 
to get back to the 6½ percent.  That means that people know th
at interest rates are going to be 

low for longer, andŠ
this is important because the extra accommo
dation that™s going to be 
provided at this meeting is likely to take the form of asset purchasesŠ
the assets that are being 

bought are being held for longer.  So a bad shock automatically translates into more stimulus 

because of the explicit numerical marke
rs being provided in the guidance. 
I™ve painted this as an ex post story of why B(5
 is preferred, but it actually has an ex 
ante component to it.  Essentially we™re offering insurance to the economy against bad shocks, 

and that means that people have less need for saving 
to deal with those bad shocks, and that 
stimulates spending.
  We™ve talked a lot about uncertainty.  H
aving the Fed have a reaction 
function in place that 
it has 
communicated clearly helps reduce uncertainty because people know 
how the Fed is going to react to those disturbances.  That™s the kind of stabilizer property that™s 

in B(5. Let me talk a little bit about inflation protection.  It™s a part that matters a great deal to 
me.  I™ve been and remain concerned about the possibility tha
t the long
-run natural rate of 
            
     
   
                          unemployment may well exceed our current estimates.  Here™s how I™ve been thinking about this 
issue.
  Suppose we only had one mandateŠprice stability.  How would we go about 
operationalizing that goal?  Well, presumably we would choose monetary policy so as to keep 

the medium-term outlook for inflation close to 2 
percent. 
Now, we have to struggle a little about 
what ﬁclose toﬂ means, and I™ll talk a little bit more about this later, but for me I™m willing to say 

that 50 basis points is close enough.  I would say that if you had a price-
stability mandate, 
then 
promoting price stability means keeping the medium
-term outlook for inflation within 50 basis 

points of target, 50 basis points below or 50 basis points above.  
This is 
only the price-
stability 
mandate, and this is exactly the language about inflation in B.  In other words, the way I read 

alternative 
B(5
) is 
it™s saying that the Committee has the option of raising the fed funds rate if it 
ever perceives that it is not satisfying its price
-stability mandate because inflation exceeds 
2½ percent. 
Now, this is not a trigger, to be clear.  And we should be clear when we talk about this 
that it 
is not a trigger.  It™s a threshold, and it™s a threshold for conversation.  At that point, 
the 

forward
-guidance commitment is no longer operational.  In some sense, we™d be back to business 
as usual in this Committee.  The Committee would have to weigh the cost of violating its price
-stability mandate against whatever performance it™s ac
hieving on the employment mandate and 

decide what to do.  And those conversations would inevitably be interesting ones.  
I actually 
think that B slices through what might appear to be a very challenging problem.  It provides 

valuable accommodation while al
lowing the Committee to be able to protect its price
-stability 
mandate. 
Let me turn now to how it does that.  What™s the magic behind B(5
) that allows it to give 
us this protection against inflation as well as providing the accommodation? It comes from t
he 
                 
    
    
       
    
       
   
      
           fact that a lot of our estimated rules of past behavior, like a Taylor rule, have us raising interest 
rates just because unemployment is too low.  The mechanism behind B(5
 is to say we don™t 
want to raise interest rates just because unemployment is to
o low, w
e want to raise interest rates 
because we™re worried about inflation.  If it turns out that unemployment is low but inflation is 

under control in the sense that our medium-term outlook is within 50 basis points of 2 
percent
, there™s no reason to raise interest rates just because unemployment is too low.  The way B(5
) is 
providing stimulus is by saying 
the 
FOMC will tolerate low unemployment. 
There™s a lot of talk about how we should stimulate the economy by having high 
inflation.  That is not what™s going on in B(5
. What™s going on instead is 
that 
the FOMC is 
going to hold off on raising rates until unemployment is lower, and that provides stimulus 

because people know that we won™t be choking 
off 
the party
, as it were
, before it™s really under 
way.  This willingness to tolerate low unemployment is exactly how the optimal
 control 
exercise 
works in FRB/
US. 
If you look at 
the o
ptimal 
control exercise 
in 
FRB
/US, in the fourth quarter 
of 2015, unemployment is 5¼ 
percent
, the outlook for inflation is 2.3 percentŠthat™s not what™s 
providing the stimulusŠ
and you get liftoff at that time. The Committee in that FRB
/US simulation is holding off on raising rates, and that stimulates a faster return to low 

unemployment, 
to the natural rate. 
For those of you who are suspicious about FRB/
US, it™s 
obviously just one of many models, but you get exactly the same mechanism in a N
ew Keynesian model.  
Iván Werning 
has a great paper along these lines.  High future output after 
you leave the zero lower bound stimulates high output at the 
zero 
lower bound.  
There™s no extra 
inflation at all in 
Werning™s paper because actually prices are fixed. 
It™s all about the 
commitment to deliver on lower unemployment and higher output than you would otherwise 

think. 
               
       
        
                      
  If you™re liste
ning to me about the mechanism, you should be thinking
: If you™ve got 
such great inflation protection and low unemployment provides good stimulus, why not have a 
lower unemployment threshold than 6½?  I would agree with that.  I think we should be willing 

to consider that.  President Pianalto raised a concern that maybe 50 basis points was too large a 

spread.  As I said, I™m willing to go that far out, 50 basis points, but maybe one way of shaping a 

compromise along those lines is to have a lower unemployment threshold.  That™s a good thing
; it provides stimulus.  And then have a tighter inflationŠnot even tighter, j
ust say 
ﬁclose to
ﬂ 2 percent, which actually
 is vague enough 
that
 it could allow for 50 basis points.  But I put that 
on the table as possibly one way to shape a compromise.  I think B(5
 is very valuable in this 
context. 
Alternative 
B(5
 provides an economic stabilizer, it provides inflation protection, and 
it™s a credible mechanism. It™s a way to provide a credible mechanism to say we™re go
ing to be 
willing to tolerate low unemployment. 
Yesterday Governors Raskin and Stein talked about low expectations in the economy, 
that really what we have to be thinking about is ways to bolster expectations.  Communication 

along the lines of B(5
 is goi
ng to be very helpful 
in that regard
.  We often pay a lot of attention 
to the words in this room, and the words are important in what we say, but in something like 

B(5
 the numbers 
appropriately are 
going to be the main focus.  How do we explain these 
numbers to the public?  I certainly have thought about this.  I
t™s very easy to communicate the 
idea that we have a target, 
2 percent, but we need a tolerance around that target.  I think every 
businessperson, 
at least
, will understand you have targets for 
performance, but there™s some 
tolerance that you have around that as well.
  Some people are going to say 50 basis points is too 
large, but we should be able to make a case about why we feel 50 basis points is appropriate, 
                             
   
                   
 given the kinds of shocks that could hit the economy on an ongoing basis, but the idea of having 
a tolerance is a very reasonable one. 
Why 6
½ percent? 
As I™ve suggested, we could go lower, but I think 6½ 
percent says 
we™re trying to minimize the possibility of being in breach of our tole
rance range.  We have a 
tolerance range
Šit doesn™t mean we want to exceed it.  We™re very prudent about minimizing 

the possibility of any breach of that. 
I will wrap up at this point.  We™ll hear, I™m sure, from others that the LSAPs have costs, 
and 
I shar
e some of those concerns about those costs.  I think the response to that is to try to 
make the benefits as big as possible, and the language of B(5
 is the way to go along those lines.  
I offered a suggestion for changing B(5
 yesterday. I™ll offer tha
t up for the Committee™s 
consideration.  I do worry, 
as written in the draft statement that the staff circulated yesterday
, that t
he last sentence is a little confusing.  At least I found it so, but if we feel we could go out 

and explain it to people, I™m happy to live with that; however, I hope people are willing to 

consider my suggested alterations.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
We™re going through at a rapid pace. 
We™
re going to be done within the hour here, I think. 
MR. TARULLO.  Don™t bet on it.  [Laughter] 

MR. BULLARD.  I have just a few comments here on policy, so I just wanted to follow 
up on my comments from yesterday a little bit. I do not think that this is the right juncture to 

unveil a large and aggressive easing program.  I think the road ahead this fall and winter could be 

rocky.  We would be better served to take a more opportune time to take such an action.  
We are 

looking at economic data that 
are 
middli
ng.  We™ve got financial stress, which is relatively low, 
             
               
       
     
        
         
   at least for now.  Our counterparts in Europe, not us, are the ones in recession, and, in my view, 
should be the ones that are easing aggressively.  U.S. equity markets suggest continuing faith in 

U.S. expansion.  Long-
term rates are exceptionally low. 
We may also be playing down the costs around the table here of walking farther into the 
woods than we already have on balance sheet policy.  President Plosser has emphasized those 

costs, and I think rightly so, and he has done a good service to the Committee in emphasizing 

those costs.  One thing that hasn™t been mentioned very much 
is that there is a distinct possibility 

that we would be feeding into commodity price increases, which is part of what happened during 

the QE2 episode and was a bit counterproductive.  We could argue about that.  We haven™t 

talked about it a lot, but I am a little bit concerned about that based on the action that we are 

likely to take today. 
I am not one that buys into the critique that monetary policy has been a long ways off 
target in the 
past five years. It is true that the economy is not performing as well as we would 
like.  There is a clear hypothesis for that based on the fact that we are dealing with a collapsed 

housing bubble and the aftermath of a financial crisis.  
But the Committee, by all accounts, has 

done a lot.  Much of it has been quite innovative, and the call of the Committee and of the 

Chairman has been essentially correct during the 
past several years.  So 
I am not one that thinks 
that we are 90 degrees off from where we should be or could be at this juncture. 
For our action today, as encapsulated in option B, we can cite two things that do make 
some sense and that I am sympathetic with as a rationale.  One is that we do have a global 

slowdown.  I am concerned about it.  I think it is very legitimate to worry that that slowdown is 

going to 
affect the U
nited State more than it has so far, and that that is a compelling argument for 
getting ahead of that and tak
ing aggressive action here.  T
hat is one reasonable rationale. 
And I 
                           
     
                        also think we have some room to maneuver on the inflation front, but only some.  I think 
it is nothing like 2010 when all measures of expected inflation were down a lot and trending down 

further. 
We can cite these factors.  I don™t think we have as good a rationale as I would like to 
see for a move of this magnitude. 
Within alternative
 B, I do think it is a good moment to adopt a meeting-
by-meeting 
approach to balance sheet policy that I have been advocating for a long time.  I hope that this will 

put us more into a mode that is similar to the one we are in under normal interest rate policy 

where we
 can sensibly adjust the policy at each meeting, given the change in the outlook and the 

change in the economic situation.  T
his will likely serve the Committee pretty well going 
forward, and I appreciate that 
alternative B has that feature. I am satisfie
d with the formulation 
in B with respect to that dimension. 
On paragraph 5, I definitely support 5 and not 5
. As many of you know, I have argued 
that explicit mention of an unemployment number is a tactical mistake
 that may not serve the 
Committee very well.
  As Governor Yellen remarked yesterday, hysteresis in unemployment 
cannot be ruled out in the U.S.  And I might remind the Committee again that Europe has not 

seen 6
½ percent unemployment for a couple of decades.  Today it is over 11 percent in Europe, 
despite some major countries undergoing structural labor market reforms. 
I am concerned that 
we are telling the public that we can do more about unemployment than we really can.  It is more 

labor market policy than it is monetary policy, and it could possibly throw monetary policy off 

for a generation to tie explicitly to unemployment and to promise that monetary policy can do a 

lot about unemployment. 
The story in Europe is exactly that there are structural problems that 
developed over time.  Unemploym
ent 
has remained very high for a very long time, and the 
structural reforms have not been undertaken by the various governments across Europe.  It is one 
                 
      
                         
    thing to have bad labor market policy.  It is another thing to have bad monetary policy because 
you ha
ve bad
 labor market policy.  I am concerned about this, and I™d advise against going in 
that direction. 
In addition, I think there are hazards of tying to any particular measure of economic 
performance because all of our metrics have clear deficiencies, and many of them are mentioned 

around the table here.  One of the 
deficiencies 
for unemployment is that unemployment can fall 
for the wrong reasons.  W
e were just citing yesterday that the unemployment rate did fall, but it 
didn™t fall in a way that we thoug
ht was indicative of better labor market performance.  So you 
could have a situation where you feel like unemployment has gone down to 
a relatively low 
level, but you are not very satisfied with labor market outcomes, 
and you still feel like the 

Committee 
should be aggressive in that circumstance.  T
his is a problem that we have with all of 
the economic data that we look atŠ
that each piece of dat
a only tells a part of the story about the 
overall economic performance. 
We would be better off to preserve the 
Committee™s judgment 
on economic performance. 
Outside of the statement it™s fine for various members to say, ﬁI™d really like to see 
unemployment come to here,ﬂ or ﬁI™d like to see labor force participation come to here,ﬂ or 

whatever other metrics 
that you
™d like to see certain types of labor market measures hit certain 
thresholds.  But I™m not sure that you want to tie the Committee™s hands in making a judgment 

about overall economic performance.  So I™d have no problem beefing up the language on labor 

markets, if people feel like we maybe have been insufficiently attentive to this and saying that 

we are going to pay more attention.  That™s fine with me.  But I™m counseling against putting an 

explicit number on this or really any other data, to the extent w
e can avoid it, in the statement. 
         
                     
    
       
                   And, finally, on this paragraph 5
Šand then I have a few more comments
ŠI think 
thresholds or triggers like this draw lines in the sand that we may not want to be drawing.  W
e are all in agreement that if we are inside the 
boundsŠ
say, 2
½ percent and 6
½ percent
Šthat we 
are not going to raise rates.  But if you cross the bound, you are implicitly sending a signal that 
you are going to do something.  I™m not sure the Committee has really decided that we would 

actually do someth
ing in that circumstance.
  Putting on my dovish 
hat for a minute, you are 
creating this thing where you are saying you will act if the triggers are violated. I don™t think we 

have really discussed that or really think that that™s what we would do.  If inf
lation is at target, 
and unemployment comes downŠand President Kocherlakota was at least in part touching on 

this
Šthe Committee may not want to tighten at that juncture.  What if you don™t want to tighten 
at that juncture?  Then why are you giving that 
as the trigger? 
That part to me has not 
been 
formulated
 in a way that I can get my head around. 
Let me comment just for a few minutes on Mike Woodford™s Jackson Hole paper, which 
I do think was a seminal survey of monetary policy at the zero lower bound.  If you haven™t 

looked at itŠand I know many of you haveŠthe paper is divided into 
just 
two parts.  There is 

balance sheet polic
y, and there is policy 
to commit to stay at the zero interest rate for longer. 
If you know Mike, you know that he is very pessi
mistic about balance sheet policy, being an anti
-monetarist kind of guy.  He does not think balance sheet policy is very effective, except to the 

extent that it has a signaling effect and that the Committee is better served by doing something 

rather than j
ust promising to do something. 
I agree with the Chairman™s assessment that Professor Woodford is underestimating the 
effects of balance sheet policy.  I do think QE2 did have a significant influence on the United 

States and especially on expected inflation
 and actual inflation.  The effects to the real economy 
      
           
  
     
         
      
      
           
   are harder to trace out, but those are always hard to trace out.  So I think today™s 
alternative 
B action is a sensible way to manage the balance sheet policy going forward and that policy does 
have s
ome prospect of being effective, so I™m not going to argue against the efficacy of the 
policy. 
Professor Woodford thinks that the only way to provide accommodation, in large part, is 
to commit to stay at the zero lower bound for longer.  I agree also with 
the Chairman that the 

length of time that this Committee may be able to commit to stay at zero gets less and less 

credible as you go farther out in the future.  That is something that is not well captured by the 

model.  If you start going out many years, so many things can happen over that period, in reality, 

that it is not clear that you are communicating anything.
  But the main message I took from the 
paper, and an effective message, was this: 
If you are trying to make this commitment to stay 
lower for l
onger, it is a very subtle matter to get it right.  And he reviews a lot of central banks 
and a lot of central bank actions, some of which he characterized as counterproductive in terms 

of trying to get the right type of commitment from the perspective of 
the model on staying lower 
for longer.  
In fact, 
what 
I took away 
from it 
was
, the main danger is that continuing to commit 
to later and later liftoff could be sending this pessimistic signal
Šif we don™t do it correctlyŠ
that 

the reason we are staying lower
 for longer is not that we are trying to make up for the fact that 
we have been stuck at the zero lower bound, but instead it is that the outlook is deteriorating and 

is continuing to deteriorate in a very negative way.  And 
I think we have to be careful a
bout that, 
and that 
maybe
 we have sent that signal, unwittingly perhaps, in some of our actions. 
I am going to give a suggestion, not a policy suggestion, but a suggestion about the 
proper way to think about this from Professor Woodford™s perspective 
in my interpretation.  T
he 
whole point is you are constrained by the zero lower bound for a period of time.  Then, after you 
               
           
       
                    would otherwise raise interest rates, you stay at the zero lower bound for a time to make up for 
the fact that you were constrained duri
ng the earlier period of time.
  My example about how we 
should think about this is as follows.  Suppose the Committee was committed to a Taylor r
ule the 
way John Taylor likes to use itŠhis is a much more aggressive and 
hawkish 
Taylor 
rule, which 
would even 
call for raising rates today.
  And suppose everyone agreed on that.  This is just 
hypothetical, obviously.  And that rule would call for us to raise rates today, but we would say, 

ﬁWe are not raising rates today.  We are staying at zero today.ﬂ  The reason we are staying at 

zero today is exactly the Woodford reason, which is that we were constrained by the zero bound 

for a couple of years.  T
herefore, we have to stay at zero for a while
.  And it is exactly at that 
point that you gain credibility for the po
licy
.  You are trying to make up for the zero bound 
constraint by st
aying at zero
 even though the data are telling you, according to the standard 
Taylor rule or other Taylor
-type rules
, to be more aggressive at this juncture.  Y
ou are staying at 
zero 
because you need to make up for the fact that you were at the zero lower bound for some 
time. 
I do not agree with Professor Woodford that the nominal GDP targeting approach would 
do this.  My main complaint about nominal GDP targeting is that it ignores th
e possibility of 
what is likely an altered real GDP growth path.  And certainly, if you look at the data, as the 

Chairman was saying yesterday, on levels of real GDP or consumption, it looks like we are on a 

different path than we were. 
So to commit us to
 get back to the previous real GDP trend, which 
is partly driven by 
the 
bubble economy in the mid-2000s, I think would be a mistake. 
However
, for 
price
-level targeting
, I have looked at graphs and tried to get an analysis of 
where we are with respect to th
e price level.  If you look at the price-
level path established 
during the period from 1995 to 2005, which was a relatively successful monetary policy era for 
             
      
    
     
   
       
   
            
the Committee in terms of hitting our inflation target, we are actually very close 
to or right on 
that price
-level path.  And in that sense, that has been a great success of the Fed during this 
episode.  Unlike the U.S. in the 1930s, w
hen policymakers allowed the price
-level path to 
deviate from the previously established path, or Japan in the 1990s, in which, again, they allowed 
the price
-level path to deviate from the one that had been established, we did not do that.  We are 

right on the 1995 to 2005 price-
level path. 
In that sense, policy has been successful, and we have 
not committed the mistakes
 of the past.  That is also one reason why I think we have made 
essentially the right call over the 
past several years. 
I am going to stop there.  Those are my 
thoughts on monetary policy.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes, just a point of clarification.  I view the language of 5
 as a 
threshold, not a trigger.  Threshold language would be, 
ﬁlow rates appropriate, at least as long as 

the unemployment rate exceeds 6
½ percent.ﬂ  A tri
gger would be, ﬁA low rate is appropriate 
only as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6
½ percent.ﬂ  So I think it is written as a 
threshold, not a trigger. 
MR. BULLARD.  Can I respond to that?  I agree that that is the language in there, but I 
think mark
ets will interpret it as a 
trigger.  
Or let me say, as a fair
 way, I think there is a danger 
that markets will interpret that as 
a line in the sand or a t
rigger
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it™s pretty easy for the Chairman in the press 
conference
Šif we
 were to go this routeŠto explain what a threshold means.  I don™t think it is 
that complicated. 
MR BULLARD. If it™s not a t
rigger
, why put the number in? Put a lower number in. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s okay, too. 
       
                
           
               
     
   
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President 
Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to support 
alternative 
B. Having said that, I have some reservations about going down the path of a new LSAP, 
particularly the whole-hog approach that™s in a
lternative A. I am reticent on two
 counts. 
First, I remain unconvinced about the likely efficacy of expanding our asset purchases.  
As I said in the economy round, I think the conditions that made the first two LSAP programs 

successful
Ša lack of liquidity in MBS markets in the case of LSAP1 and elevated concerns 
about outright deflation in the case of LSAP2Šare not present in the current environment.  
This 

time around, it seems to me that we face a more conventional problem of inadequate demand, 

and I am not convinced that lowering general 
market rates will stimulate much credit expansion 
and spending.  
Furthermore, it is not clear to me that credit conditions in mortgage markets have 

eased quite enough to the point that more MBS purchases w
ill have a significant impact. 
Second, I have learn
ed to be humble as regards outlook certainty.  I have not completely 
abandoned the hypothesis that the willingness of businesses to hire and businesses and 

consumers to spend will improve on the other side of the election and fiscal cliff negotiations.  

As I commented yesterday, I believe there is some upside risk.  Though the European situation is 
not rapidly converging to a truly comprehensive resolution, I see some hope that the process of 

incremental steps may cumulatively lead to a large leap in overall confidence. 
I don™t have a 
whole lot of conviction that these optimistic outcome
s will be realized, so I accept the case for 
some policy response to current circumstances 
in the Committee™s outlook. That said, I will 
support 
alternative 
B™s modest pace 
of 
$30 billion per month.  That would be my preference 
for 
expansion of our MBS portfolio. 
      
     
                        
   
          
   
   With respect to the choice between paragraph 5 and 5
, I am sympathetic to the idea of 
replacing calendar dates with economic conditionality.  I have said that in e
arlier meetings. But I 
am not in favor of the formulation in 5
, at least today. 
I have views 
similar to 
President 
Bullard
™s.  The unemployment rate is a partial and potentially misleading indicator of labor 
market performance.  The pace of employment gr
owth needed to attain a given unemployment 
rate can be very sensitive to changes in the participation rate. For example, at current 
participation rates, it will take just over 200,000 jobs a month to get to a 7 percent 

unemployment rate by the end of next year.  I would consider 200,000 jobs a month over the 

next 16 months to be consistent with sustained significant improvement in the labor market. 
But the Board staff, and many on the Committee, have noted that labor force participation 
rates appear to be 
well below the levels that can be explained by demographic trends.  My own 
staff estimates that only 40 percent of the drop in participation rates since the beginning of the 

recession is due to labor force aging.  
If the participation rate were to revert t
o the level it was 
just last September, job gains of 200,000 per month would, everything else being equal, yield an 

unemployment rate that would be barely below 8 percent by the end of 2013.  And I would not 

be willing to say that such an outcome would con
stitute a lack of progress in meeting our 

employment mandate. 
Paragraph 5
, as it is written, contains no reference to broader labor market conditions.  I 
believe there was a reference in an earlier version, but it is has been removed.  I think that this i
s a significant omission, particularly with an unemployment threshold as ambitious as 6
½ percent
.  I™m not comfortable with a number that low, combined with a lack of any reference at all to our 

broader employment objectives.  T
here are enough facets of the 6
½ percent decision to consider 
that it feels a little rushed to me at this meeting. 
      
          
    
      
      
    
             
 As regards paragraph 4, I would include the reference to other policy tools. I think the 
meaning of this paragraph should be that if conditions don™t improve, the Commi
ttee will 
continue the MBS purchase program and may undertake additional asset purchases, 
employ 
other policy tools, or both.  If I misunderstand the meaning of that paragraph, then I would ask 
for a little bit more work on this paragraph and further clarification this morning.  
Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart, in 5
, the very last sentence does 
reference labor market conditions.  Did you note that? 
MR. LOCKHART.  Let me look at that.  I stand corrected.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Resource slack is large, labor market 
conditions lack momentum toward improvement, and the inflation profile in our projections is 

slightly below our long
er-run objective for the most 
part. 
I support strong and meaningful policy 
actions today to address these deficiencies. I accept that 
alternative 
B delivers on these 
requirements.  I think that the $40 billion of MBS and 5
 are very helpful in delivering 
that. I 
will simply note th
at the formulation of forward guidance in 5
 is not quite as strong as I have 
preferred in the past, but I do think that it is a good, careful approach that will in fact boost 

monetary policy accommodation, and I can certainly support that, if it is adopted. 
I think that the wording paragraph 2 is extremely important. It states the monetary policy 
concern 
as follows:  ﬁ
The Committee is concerned that
, without further policy accommodation, 
economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained improvement in labor market 

conditions.ﬂ  That is very important.  It follows through on the minutes from our July meeting, as 

well as your grave concerns
 and 
remarks expressed at Jackson Ho
le, so I favor that. 
                         
         
  
       
    I favor this combination of essentially open-
ended asset purchases, which are flexible 
when you put paragraphs 3 and 4 together, plus the enhanced 
state
-contingent 
forward guidance 
in paragraph 4.  
President Bullard went through this rationale a little bit. Let me just summarize 
and say I put a lot of weight on the research literature that Mike Woodford described.  I thought 

he did a terrific job.  In Woodford™s formulation, clear expectations of forward guidance are 

important and effe
ctive for delivering policy accommodation. 
In fact, I held my breath when I 
read the page where he described when I had talked about the 7
/3 thresholds, and I thought that 
Mike was kind and gentle in criticizing but saying that that type of forward guidan
ce did deliver 
more accommodation than what his best choice was.  In that sense, the language in 5
 would 
indeed be helpful.  The evidence for LSAPs that you mentioned yesterday, 
Mr. 
Chairman
, was 
very important.  The two reinforce each other very well. 
In paragraph 3, as I mentioned, I favor the stronger pace of MBS at $40 billion.  I think 
that paragraph 4 makes this essentially open-ended by conditioning further LSAPs on substantial 

improvement in labor conditions, joint with price stability, and 
with
 policy effectiveness, as you 
mentioned yesterday.  So there are important safeguards there.  It can be flexible and can turn 

around if in fact it is not working as best we would hope. 
In terms of labor market improvement, it would be unambiguously an improve
ment if we 
got something on the order of payroll employment increasing 200,000 per month for several 

months.  If the unemployment rate declined either with momentum or continuous improvement, 

and, indeed, we got 
GDP growth above trend, those would be all of the markers that we would 
expect for a strong recovery that would be associated with an 
improving labor market.  We may 
well not be lucky enough to see all three of those at the same time, so we will have to pay 

attention t
o that. 
       
   
                 
   
             
   
        
      
      
As you mentioned, the l
ast sen
tence
 in 
paragraph 
5 gets at this larger characterization of 
labor market improvement beyond just the unemployment rate, but the unemployment rate is a 
very important marker.  I think that 
the 
paragraph 5
 forward guidance is explicit
ly state 
contingent, and it allows us to remove the calendar date.  I
t is very easy for us to be against 
calendar dates.  I think that most of us are uncomfortable with this formulation, that policy can 

remain low until late 2014 or beyond.  But we are uncomfortable because of the ambiguous 

nature. Is it a forecast?  Is it commitment? It is easy to be against that, but you have to be in 

favor of something in order to actually take it out.  The state contingency in 5
 is very useful.  So 
the 6
½ unemployment rate marker, 
with the 2 plus ½ percentage point on inflation, is a useful 
safeguard.
  Presidents Williams, Rosengren, and Kocherlakota spoke well about how this works, 
and that it is critical to describe our attitudes about inflation above our goal of 2.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by saying something positive 
about alternative B.  [Laughter] I very much like the idea in paragraph 5
of replacing our 
problematic calendar
-based guidan
ce with language that is conditional on future economic 
conditions.  I think this is much needed change.  It focuses our communication, our forward 

guidance, on a reaction function, and reduces the danger that Michael Woodford very eloquently 

laid out that our forward guidance is actually just making people gloomier about the economic 

fundamentals. It™s a very real danger, and I think there is a very real possibility that that is 
the 
effect our forward guidance has been having over the course of the last y
ear. 
Okay.  That was my positive remark.  I would like to move on now to some improvement 
opportunities I see.  [Laughter] I think in 5
 that it would be better if we avoided using a specific 
numerical value for the unemployment rate as a threshold or tri
gger, whatever we are going to 
         
     
            
              
           
   
    do. I took a step back.  T
his is a large change in our statement.  This is a fairly dramatic change 
in the set of language we use 
to characterize our forward guidance. It™s an ambitious statement. 
In view of our experience with the forward guidance earlier this year, where we got 
boxed in for something that in hindsight we could have anticipated, I tried to think of ways in 
which this language could unexpectedly box us in or tie our hands in ways that we don™t 

anticipate now.  I think this numerical unemployment rate is one of them. 
President Lockhart 
was very eloquent about this.  This makes us hostage to labor force participation rates.  W
e would be vulnerable to a scenarioŠhe sketched it outŠin which employment picks up, and that 

starts drawing people into the labor force.  This is not an unfamiliar phenomenon historically, in 

which labor force growth that 
tails off 
and turns negative when the unemployment rate goes up, 
then picks up when employment growth starts rising.  Given the behavior of the labor force over 
the 
past several years, I don™t think we should have a lot of confidence in our ability to project 

how the unemployment rate would behave in a scenario in which employment growth picked up 

a lot.  I think this is a really serious risk.  I
t would be better to write the statement in terms of the 
qualitative language used earlier that President Lockhart was referring to. For example, we 

could say, 
ﬁThis exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least 
until the Committee has seen substantial ongoing improvement in labor market conditions.ﬂ 
I think that formulation would be preferable to the language that uses a specific numerical target. 
The s
econd opportunity I see has to do with the inflation language in the same statement.  
We used the phrase that 
ﬁthis 
exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate 
will be 
appropriate at least as long as
ﬂ blah, blah, blah, ﬁprovided that inflation at a one-
to two
-year 
horizon is projected to be no more than 
a half
 percentage point above the Committee™s 2 
percent 
objective and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.
ﬂ  So the logic is 
                
  
              
      
          
     clear, to give ourselves an out if the inflation picture deteriorates substantially.  Personally, I 
think the ﬁclose to 2 percentﬂ language would be better.  That™s more consistent with the kind of 

standard we described in our consensus statement.  Proliferating conditionality language can be 

confusing.  But there is a deeper problem with this language.  My sense is that it has been true 

for the 
past 20 years in which we have achieved price stability
ŠI believe it has been true
Šthat 
inflation over the medium term, the next couple of years, was projected to be close to 2 percent 

or below that.  I haven™t gone and checked, but I am virtually sure that™s true.  T
his was a period 
during which we achieved and maintained price stability.  I
t is essential to maintain that 
credibility because it can be co
stly to re
gain, but we started this period by moving preemptively, 
before the forecast of inflation moved away from that low rate.  And in the future, 
it is going to 

be important for us to be able to move preemptively. I
f this condition is violated, it is
 in some 
sense too late. 
It
™s not like we are going to go back to the 1970s right away if this condition is 
violated, but I think this sets too low a bar.  T
here is a way to word this that tightens this. 
We 
can say, instead of ﬁprovided that inflation at a one-
to two
-year horizon,ﬂ we could say, ﬁunless 
inflation, at a one-
to two
-year horizon, would be projected to be more than ½ percentage point 
above the Committee™s 2 percent objective.ﬂ  S
omething lik
e that makes clear that we would 
move to keep this condition true, that we are not going to wait until this condition is violated in 

order to move. 
The t
hird suggestion I have for improvement in B(5) 
concerns the last sentence. I suggest 
we delete it. I think it is quite confusing.  This represents the fifth different statement of 

conditionality on the second page, in two paragraphs. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Are you saying the last sentence in 5
?            
          
                                        MR. 
LACKER. 
Yes, , the last sentence. 
It is not clear if it only applies after we get to 
6½. Does it apply before or after that?  It is tempting to think, well, the second sentence is pretty 
strongŠthat must trump it.  But it™s not obvious.  And then, it
™s expressed in terms of the pace, 
and the rest of the conditionality is about the level of the unemployment rate.  So does this mean 

that if we get to 6
½ percent 
but unemployment is not continuing to fall rapidly enough, we are 
going to keep tightening po
licy
? I don™t think you mean that.  I
t just seems unnecessary and 
confusing to me. 
The f
inal suggestion I will make
 is, 
again, the lack of grammatical accuracy in the way 
inflation is referred to in 4 is unbecoming to 
the Committee.  We take a lot of care
 to 

communicate precisely. In something so critical, it is a little disturbing. It just seems like a limp 

and tepid sort of boilerplate reference to inflation.  ﬁ
In the context of price stability
ﬂ has always 
struck me as a little bit vague. 
Why not say 
ﬁunless doing so would compromise 
price stabilityﬂ? 
We are committed to price stability. It™s in the mandate. I would prefer to see something 
stronger like that. 
Let me take a step back here. 
If you look at this language, it™
s complicated.  The 
conditionality is expressed in four or five different ways in various parts of these two paragraphs.  

Just in terms of complexity, I think it™s going to be hard to boil it down and simplify.  
ﬁUntil 
labor market conditions get better
ﬂ is probably going to be the 
headline, but the nuances are 
going to be hard to parse out for people just reading it.  Your press conference is going to be 

really critical here. 
The broad thrust of the language of this thing is to very significantly intensify our focus 
on unemployment.  We have been moving in that direction for some time, but I view this as 

implicitly weakening our commitment to price stability
.  Taking this statement as a whole
, that™s 
        
              
                  
     how I view this.  I know the worry about price stability seems like a remote and distant concern 
right now.  I know that it looks like it is under control.  It looks like we have things covered, 

looks like we are far from breaking out, looks like we have gotten away with it 
the 
past couple of 
years.  We™ve seen inflation rise up and not have it trigger any erosion of expectations.  But the 

potential, if we lose it, is for far more costly effects on the economy than the incremental impact 

of the 1 
million jobs that the staff 
has shown might be associated with today™s actions.  I think 
that shift in focus represents a broad overconfidence about our models; a broad overfocus on 

point forecasts
, forecast means, mean forecast paths
, and their analytics as well as a lack of 
humilit
y that would be appropriate here. 
As for the deeper issues of the day, I cannot support a new asset purchase program.  W
e are fluctuating around a sluggish growth path, and I don™t think we should react to the downside 

wiggles that are of this magnitude.  F
urther stimulus at this time is unlikely to improve 
economic 
growth much without causing an unwanted increase in inflation.  I have talked about that before.  

This will complicate risks, 
creating 
greater complications in our exit strategy. 
The larger we 
make the balance sheet, the more vulnerable we are to small miscalculations in policy along the 

exit.  It just provides so much scope for expansion in bank lending and deposits that it makes us 

very vulnerable.  And the larger we make it, the more vulnerab
le 
we are
. I strongly oppose purchasing more mortgage-backed securities.  Central banks should not 
choose which economic sectors to support.  Doing so, if it has any effect at all, restricts credit 

access in other sectors. And I don™t see how we can defen
d that.  Such allocational initiatives go 
far beyond our mandate.  They undermine our claim to deserve independence for the conduct of 

monetary policy, and threats to our independence have been growing recently.  I think these are 
                                 
    
     
             just going to heighten th
ose threats. 
Buying MBS is bad policy and bad politics.  The only 
circumstance in which I
™d support it is if there weren™t enough T
reasuries out there to buy.
 One final comment.  T
here was some discussion at the last meeting of the slogan ﬁWe™ll 
do what it takes.ﬂ I think we haven™t given enough thought to the possibility that what it takes is 
patience.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I want to comment on one of your observations, 
President 
Lacker, about the last sentence of 5
. I read it slightly differently than you do, and I 
don™t know how 
other people read it. I read the sentence preceding it 
as saying 
that we currently 
anticipate that th
ese are 
the right metrics, but then the last sent
ence says that that current 
anticipation 
could be modified by what we see over time.
  You are basically saying that you are 
not completely locked into the first thing, regardless of what economic information you see in 

the future.  So I think the sentences 
actually do work together in a reasonable way. 
MR. LACKER
.  So the policy we™re adopting here is that an exceptionally low rate for 
the funds rate is going to be appropriate as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6½ percent, 

inflation is well contained,
 or we decide that some other indicator of labor market conditions 
is more appropriate. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We currently anticipate that this is the right range, but 
our view is going to be modified by future information about a broad range of indicators.  
That is 

how I read it.  T
hat seems to be more intelligent than saying we are locked into this, regardless of 
what happens, regardless of what we see, and we are not allowed to learn about anything as the 

economy evolves.  I
t creates a little nuance, 
which is reasonable in terms of how one would 
expect the Committee to operate. 
                 
    
    
     
    
       
         
        MR. LACKER.  Well, then, why not soften the 6½ and use 
more general 
labor market 
conditions. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Because 
you are trying to give guidance about what the 
Commit
tee
 thinks 
at the time, what we think today that might be modified 
or might not be 
modified by future information.  But clearly it would be unintelligent not to modify your view if 
the information strongly contradicted your prior view.  That™s how I read i
t. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Despite massive monetary policy 
accommodation over the past four years, a stronger recovery has not yet materialized, and last 

week™s labor market report was a frustrating remi
nder of this long slog.  Like others, my forecast 
accounts for any number of risks related to Europe, the U.S. fiscal cliff, and 
the 
regulatory 
environment, and does recognize that policy accommodation may need to remain in place for 

some time in order to 
support the recovery.  I understand the case for taking action in order to 
spur the recovery and bring down unemployment faster.  To that end, the Committee agreed to 

undertake additional balance sheet actions only a few months ago.  Today, we contemplate doing 

more.
  Certainly, the data flow since the last meeting was a bit softer than I had expected, but not 
sufficiently so to warrant a further expansion of our balance sheet.  In that regard, I note that the 

Tealbook had pulled forward the timing of the f
irst rate increase since our last meeting. 
As I weigh the cost of action versus 
the 
status quo, I have appreciated the thoughtful 
analysis of Board staff and a number of my colleagues around this table about the effects of 

another asset purchase.  Unfortun
ately, I find 
that the risk
s associated with further action carry 
less precise measurement, but, to the extent they are possible, pose significant cost if realized.  

Impairing market functioning in certain financial markets, the potential for the Federal R
eserve 
                 
             
               
      to experience financial losses in the future, and risk
s to financial stability 
due to the extended 
low rate environment all strike me as significant when weighed against potential benefits.  A 
larger balance sheet also has the potential to further c
omplicate an exit strategy. 
Another LSAP also may have near-term adverse consequences.  Given the recent rise in 
gasoline prices, additional asset purchases could generate a further rise in oil and gasoline prices, 

which would weigh on middle- and lower-
income households and, thus, partially offset 
estimated benefits. 
I also remain concerned that a balance sheet expansion could at some point raise inflation 
expectations.  Longer-
term measures of inflation expectations
, or breakeven inflation, 
appeared 
to re
spond strongly to past LSAP announcements.  Given that current longer-
term breakeven 
inflation measures are consistent with our stated goal, I am concerned that another LSAP 

program could push longer-term expectations above a level consistent with our obje
ctives. 
If this were to occur, we would face a difficult tradeoff between allowing longer
-term expectations 
to drift higher or reversing course by reducing the size of the balance sheet.  Either option strikes 

me as damaging to both the real economy and o
ur credibility. 
In terms of the forward guidance, I agree with those who note the time-contingent 
guidance has been problematic.  And so conceptually I agree that the state
-contingent guidance is 

preferable as long as we can articulate this guidance in a m
anner that is fully consistent with our 
January 2012 strategy statement, including our assessment of risk to the financial system.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 
         
    
  
                 
   
    
        
          MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I mentioned yesterday when I made very 
short comments about the economy, 
I would interlocutate today at greater length 
[laughter], 
so I 
ask you to bear with me. 
We seem to be mesmerized by the siren call of LSAPs. I can™t sing like Orpheus, and I 
know I will have no success in tying you to the mast or stuffing wax in our crew™s ears.  So what 
I am going to do is simply give my very best advice as a loyal officer on your ship.  I believe we 

are getting further off course. I believe we were misled by our navigati
on equipment.  
We have 
very sophisticated models, and we have a superb crew of analysts but, as you yourself said 

yesterday
Šand I quoteŠﬁnobody really knows what is holding back the economy, and nobody 
really knows what really works.ﬂ 
One thing I learned as a midshipman at the Naval Academy was that great battles at sea 
or on land are fought with modern tools, but they are decided ultimately by judgment.  AndŠ 

always
Šone listens to and respects the elements. I think everybody agrees at t
he table that 
inflation is not an immediate or presently foreseeable threat.
  Our desired port, given our 
mandate, is increased employment. I happen to believe personally we are way off course. I 

believe we are ignoring, at our peril, the elements. I ha
ve reported from my watch station again 

and again that the very people we wish to stoke consumption and follow demand by creating jobs 

and expanding business fixed investment are not influenced by our policy initiativesŠ
that is, by 

our LSAPs. 
Small and med
ium-sized businesses are job creators, and yet the soundings, as mentioned 
yesterday by President George, 
of the 
National 
Federation of Independent Business
™ s
urveys and 
others, tell us that over 90 percent of those businesses are either not interested in borrowing or, 

as I mentioned yesterday, 
have no problem accessing cheap financing.
  Monetary policy is not on 
           
            
  
     
    
   
   
        
      
        
 their radar as a concern, except that it raises fears among some 
of future inflationary 
consequences.  Their principal concern, as President Georg
e mentioned yesterday, is with fiscal 
and regulatory uncertainty. 
With regard to fixed investment and job creating 
cap
-ex, as I said yesterday, the math is 
pretty straightforward.  Big businesses dominate that theater, and again and again I have reported 
to this Committee that with some exception
ŠDisney, for example, being one led by a very 
clever contrarian CEO
Š90 percent or so of those I survey will simply not be motivated by 
further cuts in the cost of capital to invest in job-
creating cap
-ex beyond their maintenance needs.  
And 
this 
is 
due to 
the uncertainty of taxes and final deman
d and federal spending prospects. 
This time, as I mentioned yesterday, I asked my CEO contacts if 
their 
cost of borrowing 
were to decrease by some 25 basis points or more, how 
they would 
react. 
Would this induce 
them
 to spend more on expanding payroll or job-
creating cap
-ex?  And the answer 
from
 9 out of 
10 was, you could cut the cost of borrowing by 1 full percentage point 
and 
we™ll use it to buy 
back stock.  That™s what we™r
e being directed 
to do by our board.  Governor Stein mentioned the 
Duke™s Fuqua School survey yesterday, which is even more comprehensive. 
But one of my CEO contacts, by the way, reminded me of the work I used to do for him 
and the company he then managed 
going back to 1975, and our recommendations for strategic or 
green
 field investments.  We focused on ROI:  As long as you get paid back and as long as you 
earn a profit
, you can justify it to your shareholders.  And presentlyŠ
and perhaps because of 
what we 
have already initiated
Šthe cost of capital, as President Dudley mentioned earlier, 
unlike the conditions of 1975, 
is just not part of the calculation.  And if they are going to be 
buying 
back stock, as they are being directed 
to by their boards, there is, 
to be sure, a wealth 
effect.  But 
based on 
the people I talked to, it just does very little to result in
 job creation sooner 
        
        
  
   
   
                       
      rather than later. I™ll give you a specific example. 
This is inside information and off the record.  
A company that ordinarily h
as cap
-ex expenditures between $15 
billion 
and $20 billion a year 
and has the option presently to either lay cable and facilities that would expand their 4G network 
to 90 percent of the country or buy more stock has been directed by their b
oard of 
director
s to 
buy more stock because of the economics that these low interest rates make possible.  Even 

though it strengthens 
their balance sheet, it defers their 
job-
creation capacity. 
Again, I am suggesting, as one of your loyal crew, respectfully, that the effi
cacy of the 
course you are leading us upon is questionable.  M
y best guess is that we will end up this 
program, if we proceed with B, with excess reserves that exceed $2 trillion and money lying 

fallow, unused, and underutilized toward achieving our goal o
f increased employment. 
When we last talked, it was suggested that perhaps my interlocutors were unsophisticated 
and didn™t see the whole picture.  I note now that some sophisticates have come to question the 

efficacy of this LSAP cruise, among them Mr. Woodford, who has been talked about excessively 

at this meeting [
laughter], and my friend and respected economist Bill White, who has not been 
mentioned whatsoever.  Using monetary policy to overcome bad fiscal and regulatory policy is, 

to my mind, not only faulty but a 
pyrrhic
 strategy. It won™t work, and it may be used against us 
in a backlash and lead us onto the rocks. 
Now, all of that said, Mr. Chairman, you™re the captain of the ship.  It appears that you 
and many of our colleagues wish to now plot a course with coordinates outlined in B.  We have 

decided to proceed, and we have instructed our boiler room, 
as we say in the 
navy
, to pour out 
another $750 billion or so in steam, and the boiler room has replied, ﬁ
Aye
, aye.ﬂ
  This is doable, 
and 
the staff h
as indicated that 
ﬁt
he challenges posed by exit remain manageable
,ﬂ though I do 
sense some timidity in their confidence.  There are warnings in the 
memos on LSAPs that exit 
                
    
  
            
      
  
                 following an even larger pro
gram
 can probably not be accomplished without violating what the 
Committee has heretofore said is our exit strategy principle. 
The engine room has replied, ﬁYes, 
we can do it.ﬂ  But there are murmurs among the crew that their conclusions are subject to
Šand 
I am taking words out of the LSAP 
memos
Šﬁsubstantial uncertainty,ﬂ and they c
ouch their 
responses with qualifying phrases like ﬁcurrently judgesﬂ and ﬁwould likelyﬂ and ﬁseems 
plausible.ﬂ  And as I said, listening to Seth very carefully yesterday, his qualifications or his 

disclaimers sounded very much like an Allegra commercial.  But, again, you™re captain of the 

ship; you™ve decided to proceed on a course.  The course is outlined in B.  Bill tells us that it may 

aggregate to another $750 billion or so depending on how much time we let this run.  
I am a 
member of your loyal officer corps.  And even though I doubt the efficacy of what we wish to 

do, and in fact feel that this is most definitely not the right course, and feel that this course may, 

as President 
Lacker just said, compromise the Fed™s security with regard to its independence, m
y job is to give you the best advice I am capable of rendering.  Your decision is to steer us along a 

course outlined in B.  I would say that the least worse of the options in Tealbook 
B is alternative 

B, 
reg
ular B, the first paragraph 5. 
I sent around a memo earlier in preparation for this meeting, and I argued that one could 
make the case that this could help offset the drag from higher GSE fees, 
lower 

mortgage
Treasury spre
ads, even though they are quite low, and help one of the three positive 
durable goods sectors that is assisting the recovery, the others 
being aircraft and motor vehicles
.  It is still operating below long
-run potential, so there is very little danger, in my view, of 
inducing cyclical mal
-investment. 
In addition, the general effects of inducing more refinancing 
may aid housing and households in ways that we can™t quite quantify. 
          
       
          
    
         
  
            
   
 may be laudable in the minds of some at this table.  We™ve heard good 
arguments for it.  But I agree with President Lockhart, andŠ
I believe
ŠPresident Lacker, that it 
is going too far too fast, that we are rushing it, and I would recommend against it.  I am referring 
specifically to the 6
½ percent unemployment rate 
and 2½ percent inflation cap over the one- to 
two
-year horizon
.  You have the phrase that ﬁlong
er-term inflation expectations 
continue to 
remain well anchored
ﬂ attached to that, but my guess is just ooching the now commonly 
accepted medium
-term or longer
-term t
arget of 2 percent 
by o
ne-half percent
age point would 
raise eyebrows and doubts amongst our skeptics, and some question marks, no matter how we 

state it
, in the marketplace. 
If you wish to proceed on this course, Mr. Chairman, my advice is to go with 
the 
Tealbook™s alternative B, not B
. Specifically, I would go with $30 billion, the lesser number.  
As Bill English said yesterday, it allows some ramping up in case the Committee decides, against 

my adviceŠand others™ 
like me
Što do more.  A $30 billion program, if I understood the Desk 
yesterday, 
on a flow rate basis means we are already taking down 60 percent of supply. 
I would edit paragraph 4 to take out reference to ﬁadditional asset purchases.ﬂ I would 
leave it more vague by simply referring to employi
ng 
ﬁits other policy tools as appropriate.ﬂ 

And after the phrase ﬁin the context of price stability,ﬂ I would add ﬁand well anchored,ﬂ another 

great naval term, ﬁand well anchored inflation expectations.ﬂ We have it in B
. I don™t see why 
we don™t have 
it in B
.  This is enough, in my mind, to bind the hands for some time to come for 
all of those who are with you in the wheelhouse of the ship we™re steering.  It is going to make it 

very hard to raise short-
term rates, as I mentioned yesterday, even if we 
end up with a stronger 
recovery 
than we currently foresee or imagine. 
       
     
       
     
   
         
                    
   
      I would recommend, as I suggested in my memo of last week 
and 
discussed yesterday, 
that in your press conference you emphasize that this is to help along the recovery in housing.  I 
would advise that you say that the majority of the Committee concurs, but emphasize that the 

Committee, as you said yesterday you would, will be constantly scrutinizing the efficacy and 

costs of the program.  In other words, Mr. Chairman, I would take ownership of this issue.  It is 

one of the distinct areas of recovery. It is an area where I believe we have had impact. I did 

support the MBS program when it was originally announced.  I think it is vital for regular 

people, not just for economists. 
The headlin
e you should be seeking in 
USA Today
 should be ﬁBernanke Acts to Support 
Continued Housing Recovery.ﬂ  You mentioned yesterday you plan to speak in different terms 

than usual, making it more simple and directed to what you refer
red to as the ﬁaverage perso
n.ﬂ 
I think that™s good.  You™re a great teacher.  I saw you do that most forcefully and effectively 

when you visited Fort Bliss.  And as I mentioned in our phone conversations last week, your 

objective should not be to communicate to a few dozen sophisti
cated economists 
about 
this 
model or that model.  It should be to convinceŠ
what was referred to in the last meeting
Šthe 
unsophisticated interlocutors who run America™s businesses, and the consumers who buy the 

goods and services produced by those businesses, and the press, particularly 
what
 the consumers 
read as opposed to 
the reference literature. 
So, in summary, Mr. Chairman, I disagree with this course.  I think it is a mistake.  I
t steers us closer to the rocks.  But I have offered you my best advice un
der the circumstances. 
I wish you luck.  I will do my very, very best in my public appearances in the upcoming week to 

support what we are going to announce, even if I have to take Allegra to do it.  [Laughter] 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
         
            
   
        
     
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
  Thank you.  President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There are two policy actions under 
consideration today.  One is additional asset purchases, the other is an effort to extend and 
strengthen our forward guidance.  I would like to make 
a few comments about each of these. 
As I explained in the earlier go
-round, I am not in favor of undertaking a new round of 
asset purchases today.  In my view, the forecast has not changed enough to warrant further 

action.  Indeed, many of the Tealbook™s simple rules on page 2, Tealbook B, including the 

outcome-
based rule, suggest that policy is approximately well calibrated. 
Just like President 
Bullard, I do not see the urg
ency 
for large, aggressive actions at this time.  I™ll remind the 
Committee, we didn™t move earlier this year 
as the economy brightened and the outlook looked 
better
.  We did not take action.  We were patient.  
It t
urned out to be the right decision.  The 
econ
omy then weakened.  But we seem to be anxious to do further accommodation every time 
we see weakness and not do the reverse as the economy strengthens.  The message I take from 

that is that 
we 
need to be patient, that we need to not react to short-
run fluc
tuations. 
The recovery is frustratingly slow.  
The u
nemployment rate is uncomfortably and 
tragically high.  But, again, we have been told and we understand there is reason to expect this, 

given the size and nature of the economic shocks that have hit the economy.  The slow recovery, 

in my mind, is not evidence that our monetary policy stance is inappropriate.  The benefits of 

further asset purchase
s in curing what ails the economy are imprecise and tenuous at best.  
Indeed, the Board staff memo lays out numerous caveats and assumptions necessary in assessing 

the possible benefits of further asset purchases. 
While financial participants may be chomping at the bit for a new program, many 
economists throughout this country have raised doubts about the efficacy of such a policy 
       
                     
         
              strategy.  Despite sizable purchases and zero interest rates for four years, unemployment remains 
elevated.  But rather than question the efficacy of the policies, which would seem natural, our 

strategy seems to be to double down.  Now, th
e further sizable expansion of the balance sheet 

carries costs and will greatly exacerbate the challenges we face when it comes time to exit, as I 

talked about yesterday. 
In my view, embarking on another asset purchase program at this time is 
a highly risky strategy.  The consequences may prove very disruptive to the U.S. economy and 

harmful to the reputation and credibility of this institution for years to come.  We should not 

ignore these risks, even for the 
best
-guess outcomeŠa 50 basis point drop in the unemployment 
rate over two years. 
The proposal in 
alternative 
B is for a flow
-based program.  But to me, this seems to run 
counter to the theory of how such purchases are purported to work in the first place and the logic 

we have used in the past. If we 
believe that the effects of purchases are through a 
portfolio 
balance channel, then the public needs to understand the stock of securities the Fed intends to 

buy.
  The Board staff memo on the flow-
based balance sheet policy says
 that the conclusion of 
the 
simulation exercises
, and I quote, ﬁreflects the strong assumptions that investors, price-
setters, 
and 
wage
-setters all understand the Committee™s goals and its
 stopping rule for the flow 
LSAP
.ﬂ  How do we communicate that when we ourselves don™t even know what that stopping 
rule will be? It is remarkable to me that the Committee has not been able to communicate to the 

public our reaction function for setting the funds rate even in normal times.  And now it seems 

we expect the public to believe and unders
tand what our reaction function will be for LSAPs and 
balance sheet rules
.  LSAPs are not a nimble instrument.  If this program doesn™t produce the 
desired results or the predicted outcomes for 
the 
unemployment rate, what will we do? 
I would 
predict that with a 
flow
-based program, if we don™t get the results, we won™t stop.  We will 
            
                
   
        
     
   
   continue.  How will we know when to stop? W
e seem to have convinced ourselves that such a 
policy is effective and important.  Maybe so.  If it proves not to be, and we don™t g
et the desired 
results, will we just keep on buying assets, reevaluating, and say, ﬁOh, yes, it™s going to work.  
We just have to do some more.ﬂ I am not terribly confident of our ability to manage that 

effectiveness and give us a stopping rule. 
If we get
 the reaction function wrong, and we find ourselves with ever-
more larger 
balance sheets, the Fed may face balance sheet losses, no returns, no flows to the Treasury, or 

unacceptably large losses of some kind or another.  This could undermine our ability to 

implement an appropriate monetary policy in the future, to the detriment of both households and 

businesses.  Now, 
if the purpose of the balance sheet expansion 
is as a commitment 
device to 
keep rates low for longer precisely because it makes it harder to exit, then we need to be 

explaining this.  
We don™t tell this to the public.  We need to be more communicative about what 
we expect our policy to achieve and why 
we are 
doing it, and we™re not doing 
that
.  How do we 
expect the markets to understand this 
when we are reluctant to say so directly
 ourselves? 
This leads me to the issue of forward guidance, the other policy tool under consideration, 
either in conjunction or separately.  The intent of our forward guidance is for the Committee to 

commit to holdin
g interest rates lower longer than it normally would after the economy begins to 
recover.  The idea, as President Kocherlakota said, is 
that 
the commitment to do this is supposed 
to signal to households that the future is going to be brighter.  The future is going to be more 

economic 
growth, higher spending than they otherwise might anticipate.  And this helps 
stimulate less saving and more spending today.  The strategy works well in many of our models.  

Agents are completely forward
-looking.  Many of those 
have expectations that are right. 
But 
implementation, in my view, is very tricky. One needs to get the expectations right. 
                   
  
                   
                      We wouldn™t want the public to believe that we will let inflation run away from us, of 
course.  Michael Woodford has argued that t
here are 
way
s to implement this strategy
.  He has 
given us two examplesŠ
an earlier 
one is 
a price
-level
-targeting strateg
y and, of course, recently 
at Jackson Hole, 
nominal GDP targeting. I see the problem with this strategy in implementation, 
not the conceptual idea.  First, it presumes that households and businesses will correctly inter
pret 
our guidance and what it means, and that it means future growth will be higher.  
But it seems just 

as reasonable to assume, and perhaps so far that has been the react
ion, 
that 
they will read our 
actions as a signal that we believe the economic outlook is going to be a lot worse for longer.  

The public does not have that positive outlook, and if we don™t convey that to them in very 

strong language, the strategy won™t work.  It will not bring spending forward. 
This strategy requires us to manipulate the public™s expectations in a very particular way. 
That
™s the communication challenge with this strategy.  To follow th
e strategy requires placing a 
lot of weight on our abi
lity to communicate. You will recall that this Committee decided not to 
adopt price-level targeting not too long ago and did not adopt nominal GDP targeting when we 

had the opportunity to do so.  And we rejected those for a variety of reasons, one was 

com
munication and, of course, 
with nominal GDP targeting
, one of the major issues was 
defining what the right level of real GDP needed to be.  We found those both either risky or 

diff
icult communication strategies. 
What do we think that we have done now that will overcome those problems? Why do 
we think that the thresholds w
ill overcome those difficulties? We seem to be willing to 
implement the strategy in a half
-hearted way.  I™d note that I have been a strong advocate, and 
continue to be a strong advocate, 
for systematic reaction functions. It is very important to this 

Committee. 
But 5
 is not a reaction function.  

 says nothing about what happens, for 
              
          
      
       
   
        
                example, after we pass one of the thresholds.  And this is very important, 
because the 
public 
doesn™t understand what our reaction function is in normal timesŠor we don™t know what they 
perceive it to be necessarily
Šand we are not telling them what it is going to be afterwards
.  L
et™s 
suppose, for example, that the public believes that after 
we reach the 6
½ percent threshold, and 
we say nothing about what we will do after that, they presume we may go back to the Taylor 

rule.
  Well, if that™s what they expect to happen, it would lead perhaps to a view of 
very fast 
tightening of policy after we get to the 6
½ percent unemployment rate.  That would undo some 
of the positive effects that we are trying to gain by this forward guidance.  If that turned out to be 

the case, then this strategy won™t work.  How do we make that commitment?  The public has to 

believe, beyond just the thresholds, how we are going to conduct policy, and as 
of 
now we 
haven™t explained 
that. 
I don™t think we agree amongst ourselves enough about what our policy 
reaction function is, and as much as I desire a more contingent eco
nomic-
based reaction 
function, I don™t think the thresholds help us very much there.  
The language in 
alternative B
(5

 again, says nothing about 
how we will behave afterwards. 
In the end, I agree with Woodford that LSAPs are perhaps ineffective.  But if 
we are 
going to adopt forward guidance and use that as our powerful tool, we need a much more 

deliberate and extended communication strategy to lay the groundwork to explain how our 

reaction function and how our policy strategy 
are 
going to work, and a com
munication strategy 
that convinces the public that we are serious about it, so that they understand how it works, 
if we 

are to get the outcomes that we want. 
Obviously, I am not in favor of B.  But if I had to choose, at this point I would choose 
5 over 5, not because I don™t like the direction that 5
 is headed, I™m just not sure it is ready for 
prime time yet. 
I™ve never 
been in favor of the calendar date.  It has created many problems for 
      
   
          
           
           
           
   us over the last year, and I am anxious to get rid of it.  But we need to get rid of it not by a one-
time change in a statement. 
It is going to take more preparation and more analysis. 
Thank you, 
Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Unlike some of my colleagues, my policy 
statements have usually been on the shorter side because I have generally been supportive of the 

version of the policy alternative that the Committee has eventually adopted.  I™m finding today™s 

policy decision much more of a strug
gle.  So I™m going to take a little more time than usual to 

explain my policy position and to share my views on the benefits and risks of additional policy 

action
s. 
With the unemployment rate at 8.1 percent and the August employment report as 
disappointing as it was, I would like to see the expansion proceed at a faster pace.  I know that 

we all would.  So the question on the table is:  Can additional monetary policy accommodation 

spur economic growth and improve labor market conditions?  And if so, which actions would be 

most beneficial and pose the least risk? 
I agree with the staff assessment that large
-scale asset purchases have been effective. 
Our first LSAP program was effective at the early stages of the financial crisis when financial 

markets were i
n severe distress.
  Our second LSAP program was effective when it was launched 
in 2010, a time when financial stress was still significant, the risk of falling back into a recession 

was high, and the risk of an outright deflation was very real.  
Our LSAP p
rograms provided 
strong support to financial markets and helped to appropriately realign inflation expectations.  In 

today™s circumstances, I see the benefits of another LSAP program as being far more limited. 
                    
       
                       The circumstances that prevailed when we init
iated our previous LSAPs are not evident today.  
Financial markets are not in disarray, and deflation is not a serious risk. 
I also worry that another large
-scale asset purchase program carries the risk of 
complicating our ability to withdraw policy 
accommodation smoothly and in a timely manner, as 
well as the risk of exposing us to reputation risk in the event that we incur large financial losses. 
I commend the staff for doing yeoman™s work to develop exit tools, to identify some of 
the potential 
complications of operating with a very large balance sheet, and to simulate our 
balance sheet under various assumptions.  I know that we™ve taken precautions, but it is 

impossible to be fully prepared for the environment that we might actually face three y
ears from 
now.  So after putting together my thoughts about the benefits and risks associated with the 

available tools and considering my economic outlook, I was not in favor of launching another 

large round of asset purchases along the lines of 
alternativ
e B as it was originally proposed in the 
Tealbook.  That option called for the immediate launch of an asset purchase program until labor 

market conditions substantially improved, and the purchase program was committed to run at 

least through mid
-2013.  That option also called for an extension of the forward guidance on the 
fed funds rate through mid-2015. 
I recognize that the strategy behind this policy option is predicated on the theory that 
additional monetary policy accommodation will only reduce the une
mployment rate substantially 
if this Committee actually commits to act aggressively and persistently until that goal is 

achieved.  I understand why the commitment strategy works so well in theory, but we have not 

had much practical experience to learn from
.  I understand the value of commitment, but 
commitment can take many forms. I think there™s value in waiting a little while longer before 

deciding to initiate another large
-scale asset purchase program. 
The Committee™s better choice 
                  
           
      
   
  
    
           at this juncture is 
to find a way to commit through forward guidance about the federal funds rate 
liftoff and not to launch a significant asset purchase program.  
I™m of 
the 
view that easing 
monetary policy through forward guidance has also been a powerful tool for reducing long-
term 
interest rates. 
As I noted, I think that our first two LSAP programs were successful in countering 
financial market stress and deflationary pressure
s. We may yet encounter a crisis
Šeither from 
the fiscal cliff or from Europe
Šthat once again 
cause
s serious financial market distress or 
deflationary pressures.  We would be better served by using asset purchases in response to these 
kinds of threats or the threat of a recession than to try to eke out a little more 
economic 
growth in 
the current circumstance. 
In coming months we may know more about the prospects for fiscal 
policy and for Europe and about the outlook.  It™s valuable to have the option to respond directly 

to these situations
, and launching a full-blown LSAP program today reduces our flex
ibility. 
For all of th
ese reasons I have preferred to wait for the completion of our maturity 
extension program at the end of the year before deciding whether to purchase more long-
term 
assets.  However, it was clear at our last meeting that many other Com
mittee members judge that 
additional policy accommodation might likely be warranted even sooner, and last week™s 

disappointing employment report seems to have been the decisive piece of evidence for some 

members who have been waiting for more proof of the economy™s lethargic condition. 
While I still have reservations about some of the specifics of the proposal, the version of 
alternative 
B that is now under discussion offers the possibility of an acceptable way forward.  
For one thing, even though 
alternati
ve B does call for expanding our holdings of long-
term 
securities in the next several months, it does so through the acquisition of MBS
.  Because some 
research does suggest the MBS purchases can be more impactful than Treasury purchases, I like 
        
     
                     
    
     
           
this aspect 
of 
alternative B.
  But I would also prefer the smaller amount of MBS purchasesŠ
that 
is, the $30 billion per month. 
One option in 
alternative B also allows for the possibility that the Committee might 
deploy tools other than, 
or at least in addition to
, large
-scale asset purchases if in coming months 
we conclude that additional easing steps are warranted. I was going to suggest some changes to 
the second sentence in paragraph 4.  I preferred that we delete the mention of ﬁ
additional asset 
purchases
ﬂ and in
stead state that 
ﬁthe Committee will continue its purchase
s of agency 
mortgage-
backed securities
ﬂ and is prepared to ﬁemploy its other tools as appropriate until such 
improvement is achieved in a 
context of price stability.
ﬂ  But I do like President Lockha
rt™s 
suggestion that we insert ﬁmayﬂ in front of ﬁundertake additional 
asset purchases and employ 
its other policy tools.ﬂ I think this flexibility of phasing in more accommodation in various ways as 

needed could prove to be helpful. 
In addition to beginning MBS purchases, 
alternative
 B eases policy through forward 
guidance. I like, as many others have already indicated, the state
-contingent concept in 

paragraph 5
, but I regard the 6½ unemployment rate and the 2½ inflation rate to be much too 
aggressive and risky.  If 
the natural
 rate of unemployment turns out to be 6 
percent or larger, I 
think that not lifting the fed funds rate until the unemployment rate falls to 6
½ percent risks some 
build-up of unacceptable inflationary pressures.  I know there 
are safeguards built into the 
forward guidance to prevent 
an unacceptable increase in inflation expectations, but we should be 
more humble about our ability to forecast these conditions with much precision.  
Presidents 

Lockhart and Lacker both laid out so
me risk
s to
 using a number for the unemployment rate, and I 
agree with their thoughts.  But if we decide that we have to include a number, a better approach 

is to set the unemployment rate to 
ﬁat least as low as 
7 percent
ﬂ and to keep inflation at ﬁ
close t
o                                   
  
     
    
    2 percent.
ﬂ  T
hese settings give us more flexibility.  Without that extra flexibility, I do not 
support p
aragraph 5
 and instead I support the language in paragraph 5. 
In conclusion, even though my preference is to wait, I can support a
lternative B with 
paragraph 5 today.  Even though some MBS purchases would begin right away, expanding the 
scope of policy accommodation even further is going to require the Committee to vote once 

again in coming months on the size and the structure of the policy change.  This buys us some 

time to determine exactly what the Committee means when we say 
that we want 
ﬁthe outlook for 
labor market conditions to significantly improve.ﬂ It also buys us some time if the outlook does 

not significantly improve to decide whether additional asset purchases would then be the best 

course of action.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B.  My preference is for 
purchases of 
$40 billion MBS a month, and with respect to forward guidance, my preference is 
for 5
. The data we have received since our August meeting provides yet further confirmation 
that 
economic 
growth is proceeding near or slightly below the economy™s potential, and 
downside risks continue to be substantial.  For quite some time, the Committee has been in 

watch
-and
-wait mode.  We™ve patiently monitored the economy to see whether the MEP 
and
 our forward guidance would be sufficient to produce a stronger recovery.  The verdict now seems 

clear.  Absent further policy action, I see little chance that unemployment will decline in the 

foreseeable future.  We should not delay action any further.  Indeed, I hope we will send the 

message loud and clear that we intend to provide additional accommodation through new asset 
            
                                
   purchases until we observe substantial and sustained improvement in labor market conditions, 
and will maintain policy accommodation for an extended period as the recovery strengthens. 
I support the open-
ended 
and conditional nature of the asset purchase program in 
alternative B. I think it™s very helpful to spell out the goal of the program and to articulate the 
economic conditions we™ll need to observe before halting those purchases.  
In particular, we 
should promise to add accommodation through asset purchases until the outlook for labor market 

conditions has improved substantially, and we would stop doing so only if our outlook for 

inflation or assessment of the efficacy and costs of the program change
s sig
nificant
ly.  The 
challenge with such an open
-ended program is that its effectiveness will depend on market 
expectations of the ultimate size of our asset purchases, and we™re offering no clear guidance on 

how long we expect them to continue.  
In addition, 
we™ve included some escape clauses relating 
to efficacy and costs.  I, therefore, think it™s important that our public communications, including 

the Chairman™s press conference, emphasize our commitment to continue the program until we 

have seen ongoing and sustained improvement in labor market conditions. 
Even though the open-
ended nature of the program creates challenges in shaping 
expectations
, it also has the very desirable property that market participants should adjust their 
expectations about the size of the program in response to changing economic conditions.  And 

this means that the program should induce stabilizing movements in financial conditions as 

expectations adjust automatically to incoming data indicating a stronger or weaker economic 

outlook. 
There™s been quite a bit of debate both inside and outside the Fed about the likely 
economic impact of asset purchases, and there is sizable uncertainty about the effects of LSAPs. 

I appreciate ongoing staff e
fforts 
to refine our estimates of these effects.
  Nonetheless, in light of 
       
     
   
  
              
              the evidence that I™ve seen, I™m persuaded that this program can be a 
helpful 
tool 
for achieving 
our objectives.  And while I™m mindful of the implications of further asset purchases for capital 
losses and remittances down t
he road, these concerns pale in comparison to what I view 
as the 
potential economic and human costs of failing to reduce the unemployment rate as aggressively 

as we can. 
I™m hopeful that a determined commitment to continue providing accommodation 
until we
 achieve more rapid and durable progress in attaining our employment goal may bolster 
household and business confidence 
and
 spending.  Any stimulus provided through this channel 
will boost its 
effe
ct relative to the staff™s estimates. 
I think it makes sense to direct our new purchases to MBS to provide additional support 
to the housing market, and I support purchases at the higher rate of $40 billion per month, which 

is a rate that in the 
Desk™s assessment could be sustained for the next year or two.  Consi
stent 
with the open-ended approach, I™d be prepared to scale the flow of these purchases up or down as 

the economic outlook evolves.  If this flow of purchases is maintained through the middle of next 

year, our holdings of longer-
term securities would incr
ease by about 
$800 billion, which I think 
is large enough to have a substantial economic effect. 
Paragraph 4 of the statement spell
s out the conditions under which we will provide 
additional accommodation through asset purchases.  Paragraph 5, in contrast, 
concerns the 

conditions under which we will maintain the level of accommodation that™s reached when our 

asset purchases end. 
If we end up adopting 5 
rather than 5
, I consider it critical to make clear 
that an extension of the expected calendar date to m
id-2015 is intended as a policy shift to 
improve the economic outlook, and that it does not convey a downgrading 
of our outlook in the 
face of disappointing new data.  Whereas our previous language tied exceptionally low levels of 
               
    
   
      
          
    
 the funds rate to economic weakness, the new language incorporated into the beginning of B(5) 
is much more positive, and I think it™s a very significant improvement. 
As between the alternative versions of 
paragraph B
(5), while I can support B(5) today, 
I strongly 
prefer 
version 5
. We contemplated a formulation along these lines when we introduced 
calendar
-date guidance in August of last year, and we have discussed this formulation 
extensively for many months now.  President Evans, 
in his speeches
, and Presidents 
Kocherlakota, 
Williams
, and Rosengren have explained in detail and very persuasively why a 
formulation like this makes sense.  I don™t want to go over the arguments again that they have set 

before the Committee. I simply think that clarifying the economic conditionalit
y of the funds 
rate path is useful for precisely the same reasons that it™s useful to tie our asset purchases to 

economic conditions.  
And I also think
Ša point that President Kocherlakota emphasizedŠ
that 

the language has the possibility of bolstering household and business expectations about their 

future incomes, and this would be a very important mechanism potentially for supporting 

additional spending. 
In summary, I support the provision of additional monetary accommodation.  I anticipate 
that continuing our additional purchases w
ill be warranted
 well into 2013.  I also support 5
 today 
and hope that if we end up going with 5, 
we will make further progress in future meetings on 

refining our forward guidance. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I prefer 
alternative B.  As I™ve been saying for 
some time now, I believe it™s important for us to take stock of our remaining tools and make sure 

that they™re used to maximum effect.  I do not view reducing the IOER or any sort of discount 
         
    
   
     
           
        window program to promote lending to be viable options.  So for me, 
that leave
s us at asset 
purchases and future guidance about the fed funds rate. 
I find the idea 
that the MEP has just as much efficacy as the LSAPs to be plausible, an
d I 
supported both the original program as well as its extension through the end of this year as an 
accommodation move.  If the MEP does the job on long-
term rates
, without increasing the size of 
our balance sheet or drawing the same criticism as LSAP
s, so much the better.  But in not 
drawing criticism, the MEP might also be less visible and thus less likely to engender a 

confidence effect.  So it™s important to not only use the tool, but to be quite vocal about our 

estimates of its potency. 
In addition to continuing the MEP, I™m in favor of adding purchases of MBS.  There have 
been many discussions in this building about how LSAPs work and the extent to which long-

term rates affect equity prices.  I™m not, frankly, quite sure about the equity effect, but I™
m 100 percent certain that interest rates have a direct effect on real estate prices, and house prices 

are important components of household wealth.  They 
affect the 
number of households 
underwater on their mortgage, 
and, most important, rising prices help
 instill the confidence to 
buy a house either to live in or as an investment. 
Reductions in the yield on mortgage-
backed securities have not necessarily translated to a 
one-
for
-one reduction in home mortgage rates, 
as the primary
Œsecondary rate spread rema
ins 
unusually wide.  So our purchases of MBS could very well translate into additional profit to 

lenders rather than cost reductions to homeowners, but ultimately, 
that addition
al profit should 
entice additional capacity and competition into the market tha
t will reduce the cost and increase 
the availability of mortgage credit.
  And while much has been made of the benefit to the 
economy as homeowners refinance into lower payments and free up cash flow for spending, that 
          
   
          
             
   
       
       
   
 reduced payment for the homeowner translates into reduced income for an investor, and it takes 
some pretty heroic assumptions about the differences in propensity to spend for that channel to 

make a big impact on consumer spending.  Still, I think the confidence 
and wealth effects
, along 
with t
he incentive for increasing capacity
, make this a step worth taking.  I confess that I might 
have been on the fence with this if the employment numbers had been better, but given their 

weakness, it™s hard to argue that we™ve been watching closely and still haven™t seen any reason 

to take action. 
For m
y policy preference, 
I start with the desire to finish out the MEP rather than throw it 
overboard and replace it with something else.  Although it™s something of a coincidence that the 

MEP runs out as we approach the fiscal cliff, it™s also something of an advantage.  It gives us a 

logical point to take stock of 
the consequences of reaching the cliff and its resolution.
  To be 
clear, I don™t view it as a potential stopping point.  On the contrary, I think it hig
hly likely that it 
will need to be a point of escalation, 
and I want to make sure that we have some additional fire 

power left
.  I know this goes against the grain for those of you who believe we should launch 
everything we have as early as possible in ord
er to strengthen the economy enough so 
it can 
withstand potential shocks, but those who subscribe to that idea are probably a lot more 

convinced than I am about the actual power of our tools.  I, frankly, don™t believe these tools are 

powerful enough by themselves to strengthen the economy enough so that it will withstand those 

shocks, but I do believe that, 
in announcing their use, there™s a confidence effect that can change 

expectations and halt or slow a downward slide. 
I a
m willing to entertain the possibility that we are approaching the point where we 
resemble the wizard behind the curtain.  [L
aughter] 
If so, I want us to continue to appear great 
and powerful in the face of economic weakness for as long as possible.  
That
 is, I believe that our 
        
                   
   
     
               
 actions still have the potential to inspire confidence over and above any other possible channel 
through which they can work.  But if confidence is the most potent channel, 
the when
 and how of 
new announcements becomes a tool in its
elf. 
The Chairman was telling us at dinner last night that he had the opportunity to go and 
visit the Washington Nationals
™ batting practice and meet the players, and one of the players 
came up and
, upon finding that he was the Chairman of the Fed, said, ﬁHey, how about that QE3, 
man?ﬂ  [Laughter] 
I think this is evidence that there™s a whole world of people out there who 
have no idea what QE3 actually means or what monetary policy is.  They don™t know the Taylor 

rule, and they haven™t spent much time thinking about the Woodford paper.  [Laughter]  They 

won™t read the whole statement or tune into the press conference, but they will likely know that 

the Fed did something and that that something should help the economy. 
In the spirit of conserving some fire p
ower for what I view as a potential two
-step action, 
I prefer to add only $30 billion per month in MBS purchases.  It establishes the 60Œ
40 split that 

was assumed in the capacity memos and leaves room to escalate the amount of MBS, add 

Treasury purchases, 
or commit to a $1 trillion program as levers to be pulled if conditions 
deteriorate, as I fear they might in coming months. 
My own judgment is that a commitment to a 
large program will prove to be a stronger action, but that we can always change from open
-ended 
to a stock commitment.  It would be much tougher to try to go in the other direction. 
In paragraph 4, I prefer to exclude the mention of other policy tools, as those other policy 
tools could be interpreted as an intent to use the IOER or a lending p
rogram, 
neither of which I 
support. 
I prefer 
paragraph 5 over 5
, especially at this meeting.
  The action of adding MBS 
purchases to the MEP is already going to be a little complicated to communicate.  Have we or 
         
     
     
      
                  
  have we not launched QE3?  So our communication focus should certainly be on that action in 
this meeting. 
Use of a date 
in the forward guidance is familiar and it™s expected.  While I™m sure 
there™s going to be an ongoing discussion, I would still continue to use the date, but over time, 

explain t
hat it represents a departure from our standard policy rules and our own historic reaction 
function.  I found the memos about delaying liftoff until there was a greater certainty about the 

likelihood of return to the zero bound to be very reasonable and explainable, and it would be 

helpful to convey that we are also anxious to get back into a more normal environment. 
I have real concerns about expressing our policy in terms of specific triggers.  We worked 
hard on the statement that put the 2 
percent target out there, and I™d hate to create an impression 

that we™re now raising it. I™m especially reluctant to specify the unemployment rate 
as the single 
employment data point guiding our actions.  First, there™s always the risk that it™s perceiv
ed as 
too high or too low, and one has only to look at the most recent employment report that clearly 

showed weakness, even though the unemployment rate dropped 
two
-tenths, 
to get a little nervous 
about tying fed funds expectations to that single number.  
Indeed, last year as we saw a full 
percentage point decline in the unemployment rate, we were only kind of pleased about it, 

because it didn™t happen in the way we expected. 
Someone commented yesterday that we should begin to focus on how the general publi
c receives our messages, and this is a really important point.  I question whether the public will use 

this guidance formulation to adjust their expectations about policy.  I think they™ll hear these 

numbers as our targets.  But if the consensus is to move to conditioning on economic outcomes, 

we should, 
at a minimum
, take some time to set the table for its introduction. In addition, we 

should agree to leave this set-up task to the Chairman, and the rest of us should refrain from 

taking our own disagreements on the finer points public.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
                 
   
    
   
         
   
                  
  
   
      
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and I™d like to point out 
that 
the 
player™s 
financial portfolio is probably bigger than anybody at this table.  
[Laughter]
  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My reaction when you told me about the 
player in question was he has an awfully good financial advisor.  [Laughter] L
et me begin by 
saying that some people have basically asked the question, why act now? For my own 
perspective, I don™t think there is a particularly compelling reason to act at this moment, but that 

is only because I would have thought that action at any of the p
ast several meetings would have 

been equally appropriate.
  Charlie, in response to your questions, why wasn™t I or why weren™t 
others inclined to act earlier in the year when there was a trio of pretty good employment 

numbers? 
The answer 
is that
 they didn™t seem sustainable, 
just as the little bursts in the last 
couple of years hadn™t 
seemed sustainable. 
If they had been sustainable, that would have called 
for some action.  But here I think we are all seeing that the basic diagnosis of a bogged-
down 
economy over the p
ast few years has become a pretty persuasive one. 
The second thing I would say is I don™t think it is reasonable to oppose further action on 
the grounds that action taken in the past has not produced the complete, 
fast recovery that 

everyone would like to see.  T
he real question is the counterfactual one
: In the absence o
f action, 
in the absence of the LSAPs, what would be the situation now?  And there I think, 

notwithstanding 
the efforts of some to deny that there has been any effect
ŠI am not talking 
about people in this roomŠ
while one can debate reasonably and at length 
the actual amount of 
effect of the last couple of LSAP exercises, it is really hard not to see that there has been an 

effect
, and the 
disagreement seems to be 
over how much. 
Of course, we would all be happier if there had been a more aggressive set of poli
cies to 
deal with underwater mortgages and housing a couple of years ago.  I think in retrospect, as 
         
          
      
   
              
  
           people write the history of the Great Recession following the financial crisis, the failure to 
move 
more aggressively on housing is going to be seen as the biggest of the policy mistakes, even 
bigger than maybe not going for a larger stimulus package.  
But
 it is not up to us to determine 
what everybody else does.  We have to take the world as it is presented to us, and then balance 

the costs and benefits of the actions we can take in light of the good and bad decisions that other 

parts of the government and consumers and firms are themselves taking. 
As Jeremy was suggesting yesterday, there is in any set of LSAP proposals an anticipated 
combination of what he 
termed the ﬁhydraulic
ﬂ effects and some confidence or quasi
-commitment effect. 
I think it is hard to disentangle the two, even as we look retrospectively at 
the first couple of LSAPs.  T
here is some case to be made, as some of the skeptics have 
suggested
, that the conditions 
that obtained at the times of the LSAPs made what I have termed a 
confidence or quasi-
commitment effect particularly salient at those moments.  And th
at may not 
be quite as powerful right now. 
But, again, in the face of all of this uncertainty, which the Chairman alluded to yesterday, 
we do have to make a choice.  And it does seem to me that the costs suggested to date, while 

nontrivial, don™t seem overwhelming.  That is, they are a little bit more speculative than they are 

concrete. 
People are saying
, ﬁwe worry that there may be some effect on market functioning
,ﬂ without specifying exactly what that effect would be, or 
ﬁwe worry that there may at some point 
be some effect on inflation or on our exit capacities,ﬂ 
without telling a somewhat more filled
-out 
story as to what they think those might be.  While I would be shocked if there are not some 

unintended consequences, even of the LSAPs we™ve done to date, that is part of policymaking.  

There are always going to be some unanticipated 
consequences, and the best you can do is try to 
dig in as deeply as possible to spin out as many plausible outcomes as possible, and then make 
         
   
                
      
            
   
  
           that balance. 
Obviously, from what I™ve said here, that balance is in favor of taking further 
action
, as it has been before
.  And so I support 
alternative B.  But I just want to make clear to 
those who have questionsŠSandy and Dennis and othersŠthat I share a lot of the uncertainty, 
and I don™t have enormous conviction that anything we do now is going to be, as Eric put it, a 

game
-changer. 
It is going to be something 
that
 helps, not something 
that
 resolves all problems. 
On the 5 versus 5
 issue, Narayana laid out the two key considerations extremely well.  
First, that the use of the more-
specified forward guidance could maximize the effect of LSAPs. 
That is a very important consideration.  Second, and this was an extremely important point, he 

pointed out that 2½ 
could easily be consistent with a price
-stability
-only mandate just because of 
having toleranc
e around any goal that one is ever trying to achieve.
  To me, that might have 
suggested that perhaps, 
because we do have a dual mandate, there might be a different set of 

targets that would be adopted.  But it seems to me, 
at the very least
, Narayana™s rea
soning 
suggests why 
2½ shouldn™t be problematic. 
I don™t find the potential h
yste
resis argument or the potential rise in labor 
force 
participation to be dispositive here.  I don™t think Janet actually disagreed with me yesterday 

when I said that I had been
 surprised that we haven™t seen h
yster
esis.  And given that we haven™t, 
it™s probably less likely than we all thought.  But even if you thought it was, how would it 

manifest itself? Presumably, it would manifest itself in tightness in the labor market and rising 

wages, which are going to pass through into our inflation projections.  At that point, you™d say, 

ﬁOkay.  We are now seeing that the trigger or threshold has been breached.ﬂ 
There is something to what Charlie Plosser said about the market™s anticip
ation of what 
happens as we approach the thresholds.  When Charlie Evans was talking about this publicly, a 

very acute market observer commented offhandedly to me that he was somewhat sympathetic to 
              
                  
            this approach, but his concern was that there may be some expectation of pent-up and rapid 
increases, which markets would think would be coming depending on 
the circumstances as we 

approached
ŠI think, 
at that time
, Charlie™s numbers w
ere
 7 and 3.  I don™t think that is 
something to disregard.  It is probably something to take into account. 
These are all good arguments piled onto the ﬁwhy we all hate the dateﬂ argument for 
trying to develop something like what is in 5
. Having said that, I would remind all of you of the 
fact that I was initially
Šlate last year an
d early this past year
Šhesitant to move in that direction 
for a couple of reasons.  One, the communications issues, which severalŠ
most recently Betsy
Š have alluded to, are significant here.  But I thought they were significant last spring, even in the 

absence of an LSAP initiative
, which is going to take a little nimbleness to explain. 
The 
confusion with the policy statementŠ
what do these numbers actually mean
Šis a real 
consideration.  T
hough I should say
, at the time, I had some hopes that a revised S
EP could fill a 
good bit of the role of these thresholds or targets.  Those hopes have subsequently been dashed.  

[Laughter] I now see the costŒbenefit calculus somewhat differently, which is to say that the 

available alternative may not be as much of a s
ubstitute as I had hoped.  I would say that, 
notwithstanding my strong 
sense that 
this 
is 
the right direction for us to goŠfor the reasons 
Narayana stated
Šand that optimally we would have been prepared to go that way right now, 
I don™t really think the groundwork has been laid.  C
ertainly not externally
ŠI do think some 
underestimate the communications challenge that will exist. 
Second, I™m not totally positive that we have laid the groundwork internally
.  Maybe we 
did eight months ago, but all of those memos and things are in the archives instead of right in the 

front of our computer screens.  It would be a tougher case for me if everybody had converged 

around 6½ and 2½ 
because in those circumstances I might be inclined to say, ﬁAll right. 
         
       
    
         
           
          Communications ch
allenge
ŠMichelle is going to have a tough week, but let™s take the 6½, 2½, 
which is probably, in the end, right, but that™s not where we are.  I would say that not taking an 

employment number means that you are not actually communicating very effectively a
t all 
because otherwise it is just qualitative verbiage. 
You don™t really achieve what you are trying to 
achieve. 
In addition, 
saying a little bit over 2 is going to create even more communication 
problems because everybody is going to 
ask
,  ﬁWell, how much over?ﬂ I
t doesn™t really solve 
much, if anything at all. 
There is not agreement on these propositions right now.  
It is clear that we don™t have a 
consensus even among those who are going to vote in favor of a
lternative 
B on the numbers 
themselves
, so we are probably not prepared to move in that direction.  But I don™t think that 
should dissuade us from doing a lot of memo writing and communicating over the course of the 

next couple of meetings to see if we can move in that direction together.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Incoming data have been consistent with my 
expectations, reinforcing my view that additional policy stimulus is needed.  The inflation 

outlook is subdued, and the employment outlook is unsatisfactory, so a balanced approach 

requires the providing of significant additional stimulus. 
My comments will, again, focus on the communication channel.  First, I think that some 
marginal monetary stimulus could be 
delivered
, without incurring the costs associated with an 
LSAP
, through the use of forward guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook.  
While I 
appreciate the fact that an asset purchase program and forward guidance are not perfect 

substitutes, I 
like 5
 because it is close to a costless way of providing some accommodation. 
          
      
                    
   But even if we were not in agreement that more accommodation is necessary, I see little 
downside in shedding our adherence to a calendar date.  The calendar date, as we have heard, is 
working against us.  It is communicating that we are continuously downgrading our assessment 

of the future.  Why not, instead, show households, businesses, and markets what we are looking 

for in terms of particular economic outcomes?  Why not offer 
a sneak preview of what we need 
to see before we begin contracting?
  With such a preview and credible delivery, households and 
businesses and markets figure out how we are going to react.  Providing that window, and 

keeping the panes of that window clean, 
reduces volatility and pessimism about our commitment 
to support a recovery.  I
n mitigating this volatility and pessimism, as argued by President 
Kocherlakota and others, we maximize the effectiveness of the oth
er actions being contemplated. 
But we have be
en down this road before, so we ask, why now?  Why move to forward 
guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later? We should 

consider forward guidance 
that is 
dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later 
because 
there could be costs to putting this off.  The primary cost is the permanent downward 

shift in expectations that becomes more probable the longer we wait.  The longer we put off 

these contentious decisions, the greater the probability that we let stand the 
perception that there 
is a new
, lower, slower trajectory of economic growth that we are comfortable with; the greater 
the probability we let stand the perception that the FOMC doesn™t adhere to the statutory 

directive of a dual mandate; the greater the pr
obability we let stand the perception that we act 
forcefully when we are off the price
-stability mandate but not when we are off the 
maximum
-employment 
mandate; and the greater the probability we let stand the perception that 2 percent is 

a ceiling. 
      
           
                               Forwar
d guidance that is dependent on an economic outlook counters these otherwise 
pervasive and erroneous interpretations and perceptions.  The longer we postpone correcting 
such interpretations and perceptions, the more pervasive, credible, and intractable the
y become. 
In short, we want to oxygenate the forward guidance before households and businesses 

permanently harden their expectations about both the future path of the economy and our future 

reaction to it.  All of this argues for moving away from a calend
ar date sooner rather than later. 
We still may not know what the right numbers are for insertion into a formulation like 5
, but we have all seen that in optimal control simulations under commitment in the FRB
/US model, the unemployment rate is around 6 pe
rcent at the time of liftoff, and inflation never rises 
above 2½ percent.  We have seen justification for these particular thresholds.  Moreover, 

6½ percent is still above the Committee™s view of the long
-run rate of unemployment.  The 
forward guidance in 5
 has come a long way since we discussed it in August of 2011.  It now 
contains a firm, definitive, non-vague inflation proviso.  A problem 
we 
debated in the August 
2011 meeting was the risk that moving the forward guidance from a calendar date to one bas
ed on economic conditions would dislodge inflationary expectations.  In the current version of 5
, that possibility seems extremely unlikely. Instead, if inflation at a one
-to two
-year horizon were 
above the small 
½ percentage point threshold of 2 percent, the Committee would be required to 
reengage on the federal funds rate debate, even if unemployment still exceeds 6
½ percent. 
It is, 
to use President Kocherlakota™s phrase, a threshold for conversation.  These are hardly putting in 

place conditions by which inflation can brew silently, unchecked, and unaddressed. 
At the end of this round, there are still some who say that the egg hasn™t been cooked 
long enough.  I might have to disagree, noting that I am not sure what we are waiting for.  


 could be in a form close enough to convince the public that the FOMC is following 
                
       
     
      
      
  
    
  
       
 a different strategy; one that tries to achieve its employment mandate more forcefully than the 
public has perceived thus far; one that more credibly delivers accommodation and, at the right 

time, contraction, than the markets have understood thus far; one that has none, if any, of the 

costs associated with an LSAP; and one that may be necessary now to make the MBS purchases 

in 
alternative 
B more effective. 
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B. I will just comment on 
a few of the specifics.  First of all, in terms of the flow rate of purchases of MBS, I would go 

with 
$40 billion per month, though I can™t say I have a particularly strong view on this. 
With respect to the trigger
- or threshold-
base
d policy described in paragraph 5
, I am 
quite sympathetic to the strategy. 
It has the potential to be of significant help.  I appreciate and 
find quite compelling the arguments that President Kocherlakota and a number of others have 

made. 
There is really quite an appealing intellectual case to be made. 
Now, having said this, I find myself in very close agreement with Governor Tarullo in 
terms 
of whether now is the right time to move forward.  As he pointed out, there 
are
 two issues.  
There is the internal issue.  We have to get this right internally.  We have to really agree on the 

design and on the parameters.  T
he numbers really matter here. 
If we don™t coalesce around a 
reasonably strong version, one in which we make it clear that we have, as President 

Kocherlakota suggested, an ambitious unemployment threshold and some tolerance for a 

symmetric loss function on inflation, the intellectual c
ase for it in some sense starts to disappear.  
That™s one issueŠwe have to get that right. 
Second, the external issue is also challenging, and the communication here is crucial. 
To 
give one example, something that is not clear in
 my own mind is, how would we respond to the 
                       
     
            
     following question?  Have we really deviated from our previous forward guidance in the sense 
that now we are making more of what is really a commitment
, in the spirit of optimal control
, to 

do something that we would stick with, even if 
it™s, in a sense, time inconsistent?  Or
, is it just a 
statement, well, that we™ve introspected, we have thought about our reaction function, and we 

have discovered in our souls that we have a different reaction function than we previously knew 

ourselves to have? 
These are challenging things to explain, and it™s absolutely important to get it right. 
The 
concern, then, would be that if we throw something this consequential and tricky into what is 

already a hard
-to-parse statement in other areas,
 it could end up being somewhat 
counterproductive.  Again, I very much have sympathy for the underlying idea and the 

principles, and I would hope that we could further develop and do more work on it.  My own 

preference would be not to push it out the door in the next hour or two. 
With respect to paragraph 4, this is the part I had in mind when I said it was already a 
little bit hard to parse. 
You get a flavor of this in some of the comments that have already gone 
around.  In other words, it seems like it is really open to different interpretations.  Some of you 

have, as I hear it, read paragraph 4 as a quite strong and open-ended commitment to continue 

doing asset purchases as long as it takes until the labor market improves.  
At the other extreme, 
the way I heard Pres
ident Bullard reading the paragraph was, ﬁWell, it doesn™t really say much 
more than that we will do this for several months and then reassess where we are.ﬂ  Y
ou can 
certainly point to various forms of wiggle room in the phrasing.  I suppose the truth is sort of in 

between and a little b
it in the eye of the beholder. 
For my part, I would align myself quite closely with President Pianalto.  I appreciate the 
commitment arguments. I like the idea of having wiggle room, and that is 
because of
 my own 
        
         
        
    
                    understanding of the costs and the benefits, and that in spite of the fact that I do believe the 
benefits of past programs have been significant, I sense that we are verging into diminishing 

returns territory. 
Moreover, flexibility may be particularly warranted with MBS because there is 
a particular kind of market feedback that we might get reasonably quickly, which is to sayŠand 

Governor Duke mentioned thisŠthere is this issue about the pass-through from MBS spreads to 

primary mortgage rates. 
We will see
, presumably in a few months, whether that pass-through i
s weak or strong
, and one might want to update one™s policy based on that. 
In any event, as we talked about yesterday, given the language in paragraph 4, this makes 
the press conference important.  F
or what it™s worth, Mr. Chairman, I thought that the trial 
balloon answers that you were floating yesterday struck a good balance here, so I was certainly 

comfortable in that dimension. 
Given these two 
earlier
 points, one being that I think it is worth giving serious further 
thought to 5
, and the second being that there is some virtue to not getting overly locked in on 
asset purchases, I also
Švery similar to President Lockhart and to President Pianalto
Šwas 
thinking about whether 
there 
is 
an alternative fra
ming that would work here?  And my thought 
was maybe we can lean just as far forward, or even a little bit further, on the general principle of 

giving accommodation if the economy doesn™t strengthen but be more open as to whether that 

accommodation would t
ake the form of asset purchases or a change in our guidance. 
This could be done, in principle, either by rewording paragraph 4 of the statement or 
simply by
 the way the press conference is handled.  In the former case, if it™s done via the 
statement, you c
ould rewrite the two key sentencesŠ
it™s just a suggestion
Šas follows: 
ﬁIf the 
outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue to add 

further accommodation as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a 
context of price 
               
      
                       
   stability. In determining the nature of such accommodation, the Committee will, as always, take 
appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of the tools at its disposal.ﬂ I
t is less precise
, and I take that to be in the spirit 
of what you 
all 
were thinking as well.
  The intent is not to back 
away from being supportive but to be a little bit more flexible in the tools that are used to 

provide that support.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will vote in favor of 
alternative 
B.  My 
support for 
alternative
 B leans heavily on the language in paragraph 4 requiring us to consider 
the likely efficacy and cost of further actions when and if they are proposed and considered, and 

I join strongly Governor Stein and Presidents Pianalto and Lockhart in an editing of paragraph 4 

that moves very much in the direction that Governor Stein just read. 
I am a supporter of paragraph 5.  I think that the arguments that have already been 
raised 
and vetted about 5
 are dispositive at this time.  I will say that the two things that need to be 
doneŠthe good news is there are only two things.  The bad news is those two things are, first, 

the Committee has got to reach agreement on the desirab
ility of moving to a state
-contingent 
forward guidance. I™m very open to the intellectual appeal of that, but going around the table, 

it™s quite obvious that we don™t fully have that, particularly around the levels in the language and 

the conditionality. 
The second is clearly the public communication aspect.  There™s nothing about it in the 
Jackson Hole speech.  There really hasn™t been any supportive discussion of it by the Chairman 

lately that I™ve seen. 
We could get ourselves to a place where this could be announced.  I
t would 
be the work of some months both internally and externally, in particular explaining how it does 
          
         
     
   
   
  
                   
 fit in with the principles that we adopted in January
.  I
t™s 
not something that 
can happen in the 
next 45 minutes. 
I will also vote in
 favor of extending the guidance to mid-2015 as proposed.  My own 
view of this is that the market moves the estimate of the liftoff date every day, and our proposed 
guidance doesn™t contain any surprise element. 
The idea that the date can contain a negati
ve, 
contractionary aspect is certainly
 plausible in a different setting, but not on the facts we face 
today. 
Let me say a couple of comments
 about LSAPs.  As I look back on the use of LSAPs so 
far, I too believe that the evidence supports the view that the 
effects of any LSAP are highly 
dependent not only on some mechanics, but also on the setting in which it is launched.  The main 

driver of real effects is probably that of enhancing confidence, confidence that bad outcomes will 

be avoided, and that there is reason to hope for good outcomes. 
In this view, it is really our credibility, the design of the program, 
and the setting that 
make it work.  For me, an argument in favor of 
alternative 
B is that it is limited to MBS at a time 
when the housing market is consistently surprising on the upside.  This alternative can be well 

explained and understood by the public as welcome support for housing as well as for the 

broader economy.  
So presented, it stands a decent chance 
to actually be noticed and appreciated 
by people who are neither Fed watchers nor professional market participants nor economics 
bloggers.  I encourage an emphasis on support for housing in our public communications around 

this action. 
My view is that alternative 
B can have positive effects on the 
economy but 
that these 
effects are likely to be quite modest, and I do come to that view without a great deal of certainty.  

It does seem clear to me that LSAPs have affected asset prices, and to deny that does call for
Šas          
                   
                 
   was done in a certain well
-ment
ioned Jackson Hole paperŠ
that most hackneyed of all economist 
jokes that while it may be observed in reality, it will simply never work in theory.  [Laughter] 
But of course, affecting MBS and Treasury prices is just the beginning.  We need translation to 

rates that actually matter for private economic activity and then translation to the real economy. 
Looking at the channels through which we believe our policies operate and 
the caveats, 
confidence intervals, headwinds, 
and multiple uncertainties that surround the estimates so well 

addressed in yesterday™s meeting, my strong sense is that the 
real effects will be quite modest, 
and it is all too easy these days to find credible private forecasts that agree. 
The last two 
forecasts that I™ve seen both from well known, credible sources who happened to be broadly 

supportive of accommodation, point to estimates of unemployment effects of around 20 or 

30 basis points for a program the size of QE2Šuse that as a rough proxy for this.  That would be 

300,000 to 450,000 jobs under those forecasts.  That might be equivalent to bringing the 

recovery forward by a couple of months. 
As far as the costs, I certainly agree that they appear manageable in the near term. 
There™s enough risk and uncertainty about the medium and long term that if the view of the 

likely benefits is right, one 
would have to believe further that the likely costs are close to nil to 
want to proceed with a large LSAP.  I also agree with President Bullard™s point earl
ier in the 
meeting that the problem has not been the lack of aggressive monetary policy.  As a separate 

matter, taking the Chairman™s points from yesterday, I do not feel that additional aggressive 

monetary policy is likely to provide much of a solution. 
I know that every member of the Committee struggles to balance these highly uncertain 
costs and benefits.  I™m supporting 
alternative 
B with a certain lack of enthusiasm, and I am 
somewhat uncomfortable with the road that we are on.  As others have mentioned, this is not 
      
            
          
       
        
  
   
   
          2008, 2009, or 
2010.  We™re now using LSAPs as a straightforward jobs program.  There is no 
credible threat of deflation, recession
, or financial crisis
, any of which could present a 
compelling case for action and the use of all of our tools, including LSAPs if appropriate.  Again, 

these are concerns about the medium and the long term, not the next six months.  My concern is 

that for very modest benefits, we are piling up risks for the future and that it could become habit-

forming. 
Thank you
, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  My preference would be to act forcefully at 
this meeting.  I™d favor a
lternative B, 
paragraph 4 as written, p
aragraph 5
, and $40 billion per 
month of agency 
MBS.  Let me just talk about each of these a little bit. 
With respect to the thresholds, what I hear around the table is that there™s really a strong 
sentiment that thresholds can trump date guidance, and the thresholds that we even have today in 

5 in my 
mind
, trump date guidance. But I do accept the view that maybe we can even do better, 
and so in my mind the tradeoff is really between is it better to do something today to have a 

bigger package or is it better to keep working on 5
 to try to improve the communication and 
have it come later
? I would prefer to do it all today as a pack
age
 because if you do it as a package, it™s going 
to have more force in terms of its impact, but I accept the fact that the Committee is not really 

quite there yet.  I would 
hope that at least that the Committee would commit that we™re going to 

bring 5
 home in the next one or two meetings.  It would be very disappointing if we didn™t do 
that because I think most people around the table view the date as really quite problemati
c. The thresholds, 
as President
s Williams and Kocherlakota pointed out, 
are 
more powerful 
than a date.  The date creates a lot of uncertainty. When are we going to move it?  Why are we 
                     
                             
           
going to move it? When we move it, why did we move it?  Thresholds provide more 
information.  The date implicitly rests on some unobserved variables, and so people essentially 

have to look at the date and then infer what the things 
are 
that lie behind the date.  Why not just 
tell them what those variables are? 
Some of the problem 
with
 the thresholds 
is the limits of the statement.  The statement can 
only carry so much water, and we can™t specify all the parameters that would go into our 

decisionmaking as the economy actually evolves.  W
e have to recognize we™re not going to 
get 
to a perfect 5
 because the statement just can™t carry that water. 
We need to do the best we can 
and see what we can come up with.
  Then lastly, the dynamic nature of the thresholds far trumps 
the date guidance.  The market will adjust automatically, 
and as people have said, that™s an 
automatic stabilizer.
  So I™m reluctant to abandon 5
 at this meeting because it would make the 
action more forceful, but I do accept the pretty strong sense that a lot of people who don™t want 

to do it this meeting would
 actually be pretty inclined to do it subsequently once the work on the 
communication was complete and once they were convinced that they got the best 5
 version that 
they could possibly get.  I think we should keep going on that. 
With respect to the rest of the statement, I would not want to alter 
paragraph 4 because 
it™s critical to 
ensure the paragraph is forward leaning and implies the 
commencement of a new 
LSAP program should the economic situation not improve in a meaningful way. 
As I see it, we need 
to decide now what we will do if the economy continues to 
disappoint.  We™ll do more and how we™ll do more, and communicate this decision now because 

that will reduce uncertainty and support confidence, and that will support the recovery.  In my 

view, if we postpone those decisions about what we™ll do in the future if the economy 

disappoints, we just create more uncertainty about what our future policy actions are going to be, 
                  
   
         
       
            
   
   
   
  and that really undercuts the efficacy of the policy choices.  Deciding today so that people know 
that there™s more coming will actually create greater confidence about the Fed™s willingness to 

support the economy.  That reduces the downside risk and actually means, at the end of the day, 

the prospect i
s that 
we™ll
 have to do less rather than more because we™ll be acting today and 
supporting confidence today by communicating what our future actions will be. 
All that said, I am very sympathetic with a number of people™s remarks that don™t put a 
very high weight on the power of additional LSAPs.  I think L
SAPs have modest effects o
n the 
level of long-term rates, and the drop in long-term rates does feed through partially to the equity 

market and the foreign exchange market but not one-
for
-one as in the staff projections because 
that would contradict the whole portfolio balance framework, which is the basis for LSAPs. 
In assessing the 
effe
ct of past LSAPs, I™m not particularly a big fan of event studies.  I 
think the event studies are too focused on the reaction on 
particular days
.  T
he expe
ctation of 
LSAPs evolves more slowly, and it™s very hard to disentangle all the factors that affect financial 

asset prices.
  When we say that we™re going to do an LSAP, that not only affects people™s views 
of what™s going to happen in terms of financial 
markets,
 but also signals a view about our view 
of the economy, and both 
of 
those things affect financial asset prices.  So trying to disentangle 
what the effect 
is 
of the LSAP from what the effect is of our judgment that we need an LSAP is 
very difficult to determine. 
I also agree with Governor Stein and others that probably one of the more powerful 
aspects of LSAPs is the confidence channel and the signal that we™re willing to do as much as it 

takes.  During the heat of the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009 when we were rolling out all of 

these special liquidity facilities, I was very impressed by how much our policy actions supported 

confidence in market function just because we were showing up, just because the fire trucks were 
       
        
                 
  
    
            
    rolling.
  People, as I think Governor Duke noted, don™t necessarily understand exactly why we™re 
doing what we™re doing, but they feel more confident when they know that we™re acting. 
Some around the table have argued that our tools are not very effective and the core 
problems lie el
sewhere
Šin fiscal, the household balance sheet, housing problemsŠand so we 
shouldn™t act because by acting we™re somehow removing responsibility from others where the 

responsibility more rightly sits, and I think there is some truth to 
that argument. 
In an ideal 
world, other things that are outside our purview would happen that would help the economy.  But 

I don™t think that argument carries the day for arguing against action for two reasons. 
First, nothing in our mandate says that if our tools aren™t powerful, don™t use them; defer 
to others.  There™s nothing in our mandate that says that.  It just says this is your mandate.  Use 

your tools to try to achieve your mandate the best you can.  And second, if we don™t act, it™s not 

as if
 that somehow is going to cause others to act. I really don™t accept the premise that 
somehow our inaction would spur action by others.  If you really believe that, then maybe you 

could actually advance this argument.  But I don™t think many people around the table believe 

that our inaction will somehow spur action by others that will improve the economic outlook. 
On the agency MBS, I strongly favor the $40 billion per month over the $30 billion.  
Being more forceful makes sense. 
At the end of the day the staff has concluded that we have the 
room to do $40 billion rather than $30 billion without i
mpairing market function
, so I don™t 
really see the reason for holding back.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you, and thank you all very much, as always, 
for your good advice. 
Let me make a couple
 of comments.  I think that action is needed.  I don™t think we™re 
being precipitous.  We extended the guidance in January.  In June, we extended the MEP.  Both 
       
                     
     
              
    of those things were viewed essentially as temporizing moves and were discussed in that way 
around 
this table.
  The evidence is that while we are not necessarily facing recession or crisis, it™s 
also true that we seem to have stalled
, and that very serious problems with unemployment are not 
improving.  Given our mandate, I think that requires at least a consideration of action. 
The action that
 is proposed here, and it should be very clear, is a cautious action.  
Governor Duke was very helpful in helping me think about this.  What this a
lternative B actually 
does is make a down payment of X per month of MBS for the rest of the year, and then three or 

four job market reports from now we will consider at that point what the job market outlook 

looks like, and then respond appropriately.  
So it is
, in that respect, emphasizing the 
conditionality of the progra
m and the fact that we will be looking
Šin a way that wasn™t 
conveyed adequately by our fixed-
size LSAP programs
Šat what™s happening in the data and 
what™s happening in the economy.  But I do think there is a basis for expressing our support for 

the economy at this point, to help support confidence and to help give the economy a bit more 

strength in case we do face shocks from Europe or from the fiscal cliff. 
So, again, obviously I propose a
lternative B. I™ll come back to the body of it in a 
moment.
  On 5 v
ersus 5
, there was a pretty clear consensus around the table that there™s a lot of 
hunger for moving away from the date toward some kind of state-contingent guidance.  I think 

one of the lessons of the paper whose author™s name will not be mentioned was t
hat clarity about 
future rate policy is a very powerful tool and one that we should make use of.  I would advocate 

that we continue to work on this because the other part of the consensus today was that we™re not 

quite ready for prime time on this issue. 
So I would propose for now that we retain paragraph 5, 
but with a very strong injunction to the staff and to colleagues that we work to figure out how we 

can put language like 5
 in soon. 
        
              
       
              
              In paragraph 3, I™d like to make the following proposal.  I™d like to propose that we do 
$40 billion a month, but I™d like to add the words ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ 
where it says 
$85 billion a month three lines from the bottom.  T
he 
$85 billion, which is the MEP plus the 
$40 billion
Šof course the MEP runs out at the end of the year, and that™s about the time we™ll be 
looking at how we™re going to proceed from here. The advantage of doing $40 
billion
 is, 
first of 
all, that 
$30 billion 
feels a little underwhelming to me in terms of what we announce today, but 
also it s
eems to me that one of the options we might have in January, 
if we are looking at it
, would be just to continue the $40 
billion
.  To me, $40 
billion 
seems like a more plausible number 
there.
  And we have talked about it with the D
esk
, and the
ir view is that it™s consistent with both 
our operational capacity and with market functioning even if extended for a long period, longer 
than I expect 
that
 we would actually do it. 
In paragraph 4, I would proposeŠand there were views on different sid
es here
Šwe use 
the 
second language, ﬁundertake additional asset purchases and employ its other policy tools.ﬂ 

Governor Duke spoke against this because she mentioned IOER and discount window lending.  

Of course, those are Board tools, but the other tools 
that the FOMC has 
are the statement 
language and the guidance, and certainly that could be part of additional steps that we take in 

January or whenever it is that we begin to review the situation.  If no one has too strong an 

objection, I™d like to use that second phrase 
with
 the understanding, which I will make clear if 
asked, that what we mean by that is communicationŠwhich is the other topic I talked about in 

Jackson Hole.  I don™t want to make any other changes.  We do have the phrase ﬁas appropriate.ﬂ 

That already convey
s the notion of conditionality, the fact that we may or may not take action.  It 
depends on what the economic outlook is, and I think that™s very important. 
           
                
          
         I forgot to say, by the way, on 5Ša point that Governor Raskin madeŠ
that I think the 
reason that there has been in the SEP, as well as in th
e guidance, a fairly sharp movement into 
the future of the expected takeoff date is not really because there™s been a massive deterioration 
in the outlook, but 
that 
the Committee has come to the view that a somewhat 
more extended 
period of low ratesŠfor reasons articulated by the artist formerly known as Michael Woodford 

[l
aughter]
Šcan be helpful in a zero lower bound situation, and I will try to make that point also 
in the press conference. 
To summarize
Šand I look 
around the table, if there are any voters who are extremely 
bothered, please let me knowŠI would propose to choose $40 billion and $85 billion from the 

third line from the bottom, propose to insert the phrase ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ after ﬁeach 

month,ﬂ and then in paragraph 4, I propose to take the second option, ﬁunder
take additional asset 
purchases, 
and employ its other policy tools as appropriate.ﬂ 
Are there any comments? 
President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  May I just ask a question? When we say ﬁin a 
context of price stability,
ﬂ we also mean well
-anchored inflation expectations
, is that correct? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We do.  That™s the phrase.  I recognize it™s not completely 
grammatical as President Lacker pointed out, but the implication is that, of course, at all times 

we™ll maintain that conditionality as we undertake our policy. 
MR. FISHER.  And you will work that into your press conference if it™s appropriate. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, yes.  Absolutely. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  P
resident Lockhart. 
                      
   
                          
         MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
In paragraph 4, just a thought to throw 
on the table, and that is take the last sentence of 5
, inject it after the word
s ﬁprice stability,ﬂ so 
that the effect of the last two sentences would be t
o frame this whole question of continuing 
accommodation
Šin effect, framing the way we™re going to deliberate over this over the next few 
weeks. 
It seems to me comprehensive.  It refers to improvement in labor market conditions 
generally, and also of cours
e, efficacy and cost and all of that.  I can see combining those two 
sentences.  Each begins, for what it™s worth, with ﬁIn determining, –
ﬂ and that might make that 
paragraph a good set-up. I
™ll
 also point out that in all likelihood, the 
minutes 
are going
 to portray 
that we have given some consideration to threshold thinking, and so this would serve to frame 

that for the market reaction over the next few weeks.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Because 
it refers to the time horizon, wouldn™t th
at kind of 
language be more appropriate as we look toward the language of 
5?  In other words, I thought for 
a moment you were suggesting taking that and putting it at the end of 5. 
MR. LOCKHART. I™m actually thinking it might fit in 
4.  I put this on the 
table a little 
bit off the top of my head.  T
he Committee will continue its purchases, undertake additional asset 
purchases
, and employ its other tools until such improvement is achieved in the context of price 
stability.  In determining how long we™re going to do that, we™d take into account the pace of 

labor market conditions and so forth.  In determining the size, pace, and composition, as always, 

we™d 
take into account efficacy and cost.  I just saw that as a boxing of all of the things we would 
take in
to consideration if we go to essentially an open-ended kind of approach. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
In my press conference I™m going to be very clear that 
obviously this is not a numeric objective, and we™ll be looking at a range of employment and 

output indicato
rs, which all bear on the outlook for sustained improvement in labor market 
       
         
  
           
     
     
        conditions and declining unemployment, and I™d rather convey that breadth verbally.  I™m afraid 
we™re getting a little complicated. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Fair enough. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Ye
s, I had the same reaction that you had. I didn™t see 
how it would fit in 4 because you hadn™t really explained the forward guidance yet.  One could 

take the last sentence 
of 
4 and the last sentence
 of 5
 and make a new 
paragraph 6 and sum up.  
Then you™d have the statement about asset purchases, the statement about forward guidance, and 

a summary paragraph that said
, ﬁin determining both these things.ﬂ  That would be more logical. 
MR. LACKER.  A paragraph full of escape clauses, in other words. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Essentially. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I was going to ask a question about something else. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead. 

MR. LACKER. 
In the forward
-guidance lan
guage, we deleted the economic conditions 
clause there.  We™ve had a lot of discussion of Professor Woodford™s paper.  We™ve talked  a lot 

about that in the context of 5
 and that language, but I™m thinking that what you had in mind by 
deleting the economi
c conditions clause was in part motivated by his critique as well, the idea 
that by saying it™s conditions that are pushing the time horizon out, we were focusing on how bad 

things 
are
.  The intention, as I read you, is for us to be communicating more about our reaction 
function. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s right. 
      
    
      
          
         
        
    
     MR. LACKER.  I want to re-
ask a question I asked earlier this year.  When
 we adopted 
this 
language
, we never really got clear on whether it™s a commitment or not.  W
e wrestled with 
different versio
ns of what that meant.  Is this signaling that we™re going to pursue an action that 
later on we would not want to pursue then? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it™s still conditional because it obviously depends on 
the timing of the recovery and so on. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  So it™s contingent. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I mentioned the SEP changes and so on
.  I think we 
around this table have moved to the view that communicating low rates for longer 
in a way that 
may require some credibility is an approach to dealing with the zero lower bound, not in an 

extreme way, but I think there is some of that now in the statement. 
MR. LACKER. 
We have a statement
, and we can walk away from this and each interpret 
it in our own way, 
or we can have a Committee sense of what 
we™re doing. Is policy in the 
future to be conditioned on this?  In other words, as Woodford suggests, is policy going to be 

history-dependent? 
Is t
he fact that we said 
this going to alter future policy
? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In my Jackson Hole remarks, 
I talked about the guidance.  I 
said it was conditional, dependent on the state of the economy.  B
ut in explaining the time, I said 
we look at rules and optimal control and those sorts of things, but we also take into account some 
other factors such as downs
ide risks, the effects of the 
zero lower bound, and implicitly I said the 
possibility that the equilibrium real rate of interest is lower than normal
Šthat is,
 headwinds.  So 
I am conveying, I think, some sense that in order to achieve more stimulus today, 
there™s a bit of 

a commitment element there
ŠI don™t think we™ve gone too far out on a limb on this. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 
              
   
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
                      
                                                              CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Can we go ahead? 
MS. DANKER.  This vote is on alternative B, as amended by the Chairman, and the 
associated 
directive. 
Chairman Bernanke 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
Governor Duke 
Yes 
President Lacker 
No President Lockhart 
Yes 
President Pianalto 
Yes 
Governor Powell 
Yes 
Governor Raskin 
Yes 
Governor Stein 
Yes 
Governor Tarullo 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
Governor Yellen 
Yes 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
We have a few other items
.  We™re going to 
hear a little bit about the implementation
, we™re going to do very quickly the forecast, but if 
everybody is okay, why don™t we just go ahead and tak
e a 15 minute coffee break? 
[Coffee 
break] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don™t we 
recommence
? Let me turn the floor 
over to L
orie 
Logan, who will talk a bit about the operational aspect. 
MS. LOGAN.
8  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I will offer a brief descrip
tion of how 
the Desk plans to implement the Committee™s decision regarding the 
SOMA 
portfolio.  
Consistent with recent practices, the Desk intends to release a statement 
with operational details on this initiative at the same time as the release of the FOM
C statement.  A draft of the Desk statement is provided in the handout for your 

reference, with the exception that we will add the clause ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ 

into the second sentence of the second paragraph. 
Based on the directive, the Desk inten
ds to expand the SOMA™s holdings of 
agency MBS by 
$40 billion per month and maintain the existing policy for 

reinvesting agency principal payments.  Our current projections indicate that through 

the end of the year, paydowns on the agency debt and MBS port
folios will result in 
average monthly reinvestment purchases of roughly $30 billion.  Thus, combined 
8 The materials used by Ms. 
Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 8). 
                                   
  
       
    
        purchases will initially total around 
$70 billion per month and constitute about three-
fourths of monthly TBA gross issuance. 
Should the purchases extend for 10 months, as was considered in Tealbook B, we 
anticipate that the SOMA™s ownership share of the outstanding fixed-
rate agency 
MBS market would grow from about 18 percent to 27 percent, and that™s over a 

10-month horizon. 
In line with the current practice for reinvestment operations, the Desk plans to 
conduct the additional purchases 
in the newly issued securities in the to
-be-announced market, or TBA market.  These securities represent the most liquid sector 

of the MBS market, allowing purchases to be made in large size and are most closely 

tied with the primary mortgage rate. 
The Desk may purchase other agency MBS if 
market conditions warrant. 
The Desk intends to conduct these additional purchases internally as we™ve been 
doing for some time rather than relying on an investment manager to conduct the 

trades on our behalf.  We expect to be active almost every day
, and purchase 
operations will continue to be conducted in a competitive auction format with the 

primary dealers.
  Further, the Desk will continue the practice established at the end of 
last year of margining the unsettled MBS transactions with the primary dealers. 
Given the substantial portion of issuance being purchased and the uncertainty 
associated with MBS supply, the Desk will continue to conduct dollar roll 

transactions when necessary to facilitate the settlement of our purchases. 
Dollar rolls 
can be used to postpone or accelerate the delivery of purchases based on indications 

of the availability of agency MBS for settlement. 
In the reinvestment operations to 
date, the size of dollar rolls needed to postpone settlement have been fairly small, at 

about 5 percent of purchases, though this amount is likely to increase with the 

additional asset purchases. 
We will al
so use coupon swaps, 
if needed
, to facilitate settlement, as was the case 
in 2010.  A coupon swap would allow the Desk to exchange unsettled purchases in a 

given agency MBS coupon for other coupons more readily available for settlement.  

However, we do not envision needing to conduct such transactions, except in very 

rare cases where persistent supply problems suggest that settlement of purchases
, even over several months, is unlikely. 
The purchases of agency MBS securities under this new asset purchase pro
gram 
will begin tomorrow.  We plan to have two separate announcements for MBS 

operations going forward, one for the new purchases and one for the continued 

reinvestments.  The Desk will publish the monthly asset purchase amounts along with 

the announcement of the Treasury MEP operations around the last business day of 

each month.  Given there are only 17 calendar days remaining in September, we will 

purchase a pro rata share of the monthly pace in September of about $23 billion. 
           
   
                    
      
          In addition, we will continue to publish around the eighth business day of each 
month the planned amount of reinvestment purchases for the next month.  Thus, there 

will also be a new reinvestment purchase amount target posted today at the same time 

as the Desk™s operating statement is released.
  That concludes my comments.  Thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
Any questions?  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. 
Help us interpret financial market data going forward.  What do you 
expect?  Because
 our purchases don™t include TIPS, should we factor something in about TIPS 

yields?
  Are they in the habitat, out of the habitat? 
MS. LOGAN.  In our MEP purchases, we purchase TIPS today. 

MR. LACKER.  You do? 

MS. LOGAN.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  O
kay. 
MR. POTTER.  The MEP is still ongoing. 

MR. LACKER.  But we weren™t proposing to do it in the overall asset purchase program, 
were we? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Sorry? 
MR. LACKER.  Include TIPS. 

MS. LOGAN. If we 
had added purchases under a new asset purchase 
program for 
Treasuries, we would have done so. 
MR. LACKER. 
Okay.  You would.  Sorry.  I misread something then.  I apologize.  
Let 
me ask another question.  How linked is the private-
label MBS market to agency MBS yields? 
Do you anticipate this pushing that spread apart? 
MS. LOGAN.  I think 
the way we™ve been estimating these effects is that the MBS 
purchases would affect the Treasury term premium, and to the extent that the 
pass
-through from 
the lowering of interest rates moves other asset markets, equities
, or the private-
label market
Š                
      
   
                  
  we t
alked about what that pass-through is.  There™s some uncertainty, but we would expect the 
channel to be through that form.  I guess there could be some other form because it is MBS, and 
private label is a little bit more closely connected than maybe from T
reasuries to private label, 
but overall we have been expecting the pass
-through to happen through lowering interest rates 
more broadly. 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  R
elative to buying Treasuries, we™re tilting credit from the 
private-
label market to the agency market.  Thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  I™d just like to say something about the private label 
because there has been 
almost no issuance of private label in a number of years because there™s just not much supply out 

there.  There is 
a little bit of jumbo issuance.
  Again, in the spirit of things that are cooking out 
there, the Federal Home 
Loan Banks, particularly I think the H
ome 
Loan Bank of Chicago 
is 
now looking at consolidating jumbo securities from banks across the country, not 
just that are in 
the Chicago 
district
, and feeding them through Redwood to try to generate some more broader 
private-
label issuance
, for
 jumbo and more broadly. 
I would expect that to the extent that that 
happens, it certainly wouldn™t be unhelpful.  It 
might be helpful. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, but what they™re saying is that compared 
with 
buying Treasuries 
only, this is reducing agency MBS yields by moreŠTreasury yields will fall, but not as much as 

what they would fall if we bought Treasuries only.  T
hey™re 
tilting the playing field away from 
everything priced on Treasuries toward agency MBS. 
MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we™re still buying $45 billion of long-
term Treasuries 
in the MEP right now. 
                                                                                                     MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, I know that, but the apples-
to-apples thing 
is 
$40 billion agency 
MBS versus 
$40 billion Treasuries in this setting, and comparing those two, private-
label MBS 
yields are going to be higher, given that we™re buying agency MBS, than they would be if we 
were buying Treasuries only. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDL
EY.  They™re not going to be higher.  They™re not going to 
drop as much, presumably. 
MR. LACKER.  Exactly.  They™re going to be higher than they would in the alternative. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In that respect we don™t care because they™re not being 
created. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, they would be even less created now. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I don™t actually think we know very much about what would happen to 
private-
label MBS yields because there™s so little issuance; there™s so little pricing information. 
It™s conceivable 
that pushing down agency MBS would also push down private-
label MBS 
yields, but I don™t think we know because there hasn™t been much issuance there and we don™t 

have information. 
MR. POTTER.  The stronger the housing market is, the more it should support t
he 
private-
label market coming back and having more capacity. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
9 Let™s go on to the consensus forecast.  This, of course, is 
still an exercise.  We™re still working to figure out what we™re going to do. 
You have in front of 
you the consensus forecast.  If you turn to page 3, and we look at the forecast inclusive of the 

policy action today, that would be best approximated, I guess, by the line 
that 
says, ﬁPlus 
$750 billion LSAP program.ﬂ  That™s the post-
action
 policy forecast, and note th
at it includes the 
jointly determined federal funds rate at the bottom.  What I™d like to do is ask each person to say 
9 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 
6).       
   
                           
            one of three things.  Either you broadly agree with the forecast as given or you agree with 
reservations
Šlet me go back a second.
  As part of our exercise 
the staff, I believe, is intending to 
write up our discussion as if it were a quarterly monetary policy report, and what they will do is 

if you agree but with reservations, they will write up your reservations in minutes 
style 
descri
bing without attribution what the concerns were that people raised about the forecast.  
The 
other possibility is if you just disagree with the forecast, you should say so and explain why, and 

then they™ll write up the monetary policy report with attributio
nŠthat™s the plan
Šand say, 
again, what it is that you disagree about.  Y
es, President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  I don™t understand.  Are these two different plans or are these two 
different options for us? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Two different options. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
  You have three choices.  When I go around the table, you 
have three choices. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  We 
can disagree anonymously or 
with attribution? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree modestly and anonymously. 

MR. LACKER. 
Mod
estly and anonymously. 
CHAIR
MAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree violently and for attribution.  [Laughter] 
MR. 
LACKER
.  And there™s a threshold.  
[Laughter] 
Or is it a 
trigger? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Can I bring up just one more thing? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  For those people who strongly disagree, we™re also asking 
them to submit in the next few daysŠby MondayŠa paragraph or so explaining why, and we 

will eventually put this into a document and then circulate it back to the Committee. 
                           
  
      
  
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is everybody o
kay? 
MS. DUKE.  Can I just ask one question about agreeing with reservation?  I
f we™re 
comparing it with 
the 
$750 billion 
LSAP program
, and in voting for alternative B, I didn™t 
assume that the purchases went past the
 end of the year, w
ould that be a reser
vation? 
I just want 
to know how to characterize 
it.  What does ﬁwith reservationﬂ mean? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
I think you assume
 that you should take the Tealbook 
assumption here, the $750 billion, and say:  Would the economic path shown here be a 
reasonabl
e approximation of what you would anticipate, given the policy action taken?  And if 
not, why not? 
MS. DUKE.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay?
  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Am I agreeing that this is a consensus forecast or am I agreeing that 
this is ac
tually my forecast?  Because I submitted my forecast
. And you can see point for point, 
you know, where they™re different and where they™re not. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We™re trying to determine if it is a consensus, and therefore, 
we™re asking if you yourself find itŠ 
MR. EVANS
.  Is it close enough? 
MR. BULLARD.  I think it™s a good consensus.  It™s not as accurate asŠ 

MR. 
FISHER
.  I™m trying to remember my specific numbers.  All I remember is that 
I was in the central tendency. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So why don™t 
you just report what you reported and say if 
you think it™s broadly consistent with this or not? 
            
            
             
     MR. WILCOX.  This is an effort to ascertain the extent to which participants can affiliate 
themselves with the consensus forecast. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Preside
nt Fisher. 
MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry. 

MR. TARULLO.  I think it™s not unlike what we do with policy statements, which is to 
say everybody would have written it somewhat differently, but in the end can you kind of go 

along with 
it? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Ye
s, that™s what it is.  That™s right. 
MR. FISHER.  You said there were three questions.  Do we agree with the forecast?  Do 
we have reservations?  If so, what are they?
  What™s the third? 
MS. 
DUKE.  Do you disagree? 
MS. YELLEN. Do 
you have a fundamentally different view? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you fundamentally disagree with the forecast?  And 
remember it™s not about whether you agree with the policy action or not.  This is conditional on 

the policy action.  Conditional on the policy action, do you agree more or less with the forecast 

that™s been presented? 
MR. FISHER.  And if we have reservations, we should submit them.  Is that what you 
were saying earlier? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, Janet, would you like to 
comment? 

MS. YELLEN. I
f you broadly agree but have some reservationŠyou™re slightly more 
optimistic about the forecast
, you have a different view on oil prices, but aside from that you 

basically agree this is a reasonable forecast contingent on the policy path
Šthen say you agre
e                  
                   
         with reservations.  And 
the write
-up, as in the minutes, 
will say 
people have expressed some 
reservations, but nevertheless associate themselves overall with the view. 
The staff will write up 
the discussion of what the reservations were.  But those who 
just have a basically different view 
of the forecast should say so, and then there will be a few paragraphs they™ll submit, 
and that will 

be included in the document 
with attribution
.  This would be a portion of a monetary policy 
report where there would be a discussion of the diversity of views.  Think of this as a diversity of 

views and say 10 people supported the forecast without reservation.  Several people had 

reservations of the following sort, and four had essentially different views.  Here are the 

submissions.  In your paragraph, 
you™d describe 
and 
explain why your views are essentially 
different. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Let me just make sure I understand.  We™re assuming the 
policy path, this policy action? 
MS. YELLEN. Yes. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes, tha
t™s what we are doing today. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  So we™re not having individual ﬁappropriate 
monetary policy.ﬂ 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
No.  It™s just given what we passed today, is this a reasonable 
forecast
? MR. LACKER.  Wait.  That™s different than a policy path. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I™m going to suggest something slightly different from what 
Chairman Bernanke said, which is:  Given the policy decision today, if you look at the numbers 

that go along with that 
$750 billion LSAP programŠforget about whet
her the 
$750 billion is 
correct or not because you may think it will end up being $500 b
illion or 
some 
other numberŠ 
                              
     
    
              
 do you think that™s a reasonable forecast? I
s it close enough for talking purposes?  But if you 
think this is the wrong model of the world, the economy is just going to look a lot different, so 
much so that you want to, in effect, dissent, then you™re in the third category.  The middle 

category is a little tougher, but I think the two ends are very clear. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Everybody, this is a trial run.  [Laughter]  W
e™re trying to 
find out what works and what doesn™t work.  We may have already found out what doesn™t work. 

President Fisher, did you have a comment or question or you™re okay? 
MR. FISHER.  I™m fine. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You™re 
fine.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
My question was would it be better to try to have a little 
bit better understanding about what ﬁclose toﬂ is or would 
it be everyone™s personal view of what 

ﬁclose toﬂ is? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It™s your judgment of whether you 
sufficiently disagree that 
you want to have your name 
identified. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it does matter if people disagree
 or have different 
parameters in terms of how close is ﬁclose to.ﬂ  
We can do it either way, but you could argue th
at 
if you think the standard error is more than X, then you should disagree, or you could be a 

perfectionist and you disagree for very minute changes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So all of this is about reporting.  We™re trying to report the 
sense of the Committee
, and so how you would 
like the sense of the Committee reported 
is 
basically the question. 
MS. YELLEN. 
Right.  I
f we were really doing this
, the Chairman would be 
wal
king out 
into a press conference
 with these numbers, explaining the policy action, and pu
tting these 
      
     
                        
             
   
      numbers out to the public and saying, ﬁThis gives you a description of how we envision the 
economy unfolding with the policy decisions.
ﬂ  And the question is:  Would you be comfortable 

with these numbers as what he walks out into a press confer
ence 
with
? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I understand all of that, but let™s imagine that there™s half 
the people on the Committee who disagree for very small tolerances and
 half the people 
have 
very large tolerances. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Then no.  It should be 
meaningful tolerances. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It would be better if we had a more common metric 
about what 
the tolerances are. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, put it this way
:  Are you willing to write two paragraphs for Dave 
Reifschneider?  [Laughter]  That™s it, right? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, no, that™s different.  That™s 
a fundamental 
dis
agreement. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
The way I would put it is this.  I
f the consensus forecast came 
out like this
, and you were the sort of person who 
in a speech 
would say, ﬁI want to make an 
important point that my 
personal 
unemployment rate forecast at the end of 2015 would be one-
tenth lower,ﬂ then you should say you have reservations.  [Laughter]  But if you perhaps feel 

uncomfortable about making a big distinction abou
t one-tenth or so, thenŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There™s a standard error
, though, 
implicit in that. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I think there 
are
 two things.  One, there™s obviously a huge 
confidence interval around this, and so one way to look at 
it is 
that 
many 
differences just blur. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course. 
There will 
always b
e fan 
charts
.          
   
      
             
             
   
  MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  But does it make it a material difference f
or monetary policy, 
and the question might be if it™s 
one-tenth or so off on inflation or unemployment, you would say 
probably not. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s a good way of phrasing it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans, did you have a comment? 

MR. EVANS.  I was just thinking we should probably start [l
aughter]
, and then we™ll 
figure outŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNAN
KE.  Excellent suggestion.  All right.  Who would like to go 
first?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART. I endorse it.
  [Laughter and applause] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Very good.
  Anyone? President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Is it a good consensus?  I do think it™s a good consensus.  T
here are 
issues here about the mix between the forecast and the policy assumptions.  The way I did it was 

I had more inflation coming in the out years, and then I applied the outcome-based policy rule, 

which would then have the funds rate moving in a different way from here, and so the policy 

assumption then starts to also look different.  So I™m not quite sure what to make of this exercise.  

It™s fine as a statement of where the Committee is, and I would endorse it in that sense
.  As a general rule on this whole process, I don™t think 
that it
™s a good thing to get into 
the 
business of 

trying to dissent on a forecast because there are
 zillions of points here and a lot of subtleties here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
This is why we™re having a tr
ial run. 
MR. BULLARD.  Mildly different, I guess. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Broadly endorse. 
       
   
          
    
  
           
      
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Conditional on the policy path, I broadly endorse. 

CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Duk
e. 
MS. DUKE.  I actually normally would endorse, except that the reservation I would 
express at this point is that I think 2013 will be significantly lower because of the fiscal cliff. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MS. DUKE. 
That would be a reservation. 
CHAIR
MAN BERNANKE.  That™s a good example of a reservation.  Very good.  
Anyone else?  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Broadly endorse, but I have a weaker outlook.  So that™s my only 
reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor 
Yellen
. MS. YELLEN.  Broadly endorse. 

CHAIRMAN BE
RNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I see what I would term modestly more inflationary pressures 
than what are in this forecast, maybe one-tenth or two-tenths or three-
tenths more in inflation. 
With that said
, it comes 
back to what the Vice Chairman
 was talking about, that the choices of 
the Committee seem to be averse to those kinds of upticks in inflation.  For my own view, I think 

I would say I see modestly more inflationary pressures than what are in this. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fine.
  Governor Stein. 
MR. STEIN.  
I broadly endorse the baseline.  I™m not sure if I would be a weak deviator 
on the conditional effect of policy in the sense that I think that the incremental effect of the 
          
   
           
               LSAP is going to be roughly half of what it™s projected to be.  I™m not quite sure where that puts 
me. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  You sound like a ﬁ
two
ﬂ to me. 
MR. STEIN.  That feels like a 
ﬁtwo
ﬂ to you? 
PARTICIPANT
.  Do you want to write two paragraphs? 
MR. 
STEIN
.  No, I don™t want to write 
any para
graphs.  I want to hide in the weeds.  
[Laughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren said he broadly endorses.  President 
Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  I modestly endorse it.  It might scare people in terms of my forecasting.  I 
was within the central tendency.  They might want to change their forecast based on where I 

would be, with the exception of the funds rate, and I™d have to think about that.  But generally, 
I endorse.  
I will say this, Mr. Chairman
: Fiscal cliff, no fiscal cliff, et cetera
Šand I said this in 
my write
-upŠgoing beyond the first part of 2013 is largely pure guesswork. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In some positive sense, that™s true.  In a normative sense, 
we do need to find some kind of plan. 
MR. FISHER.  I understand that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We h
ave to have some kind of projection to base our 
thinking on. 
MR. FISHER.  With that caveat, it™s a wonderful exercise. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Obviously, yes.  O
ne of the benefits of this exercise
, I hope, 
is that we will be able to show fan charts that will g
ive some sense of the uncertainty. 
President 
Pianalto. 
        
             
  
       
   
  
               
   MS. PIANALTO.  I broadly endorse the forecast, although my forecast is slightly weaker 
for 
GDP growth and unemployment in the later years 
partly because
, like Governor Stein, 
the 
effectiveness of poli
cy is just a little weaker in my forecast. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good.  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  I broadly endorse, but two things about the process as opposed to th
e substance
.  One, the issue that arose at the outset that Betsy mentioned is somethin
g that people 
are going to have to think about, which is, what if we emerge from a meeting with a policy 

action that really isn™t any of the ones that are listed there?
  And, secondly, this 
category 
two
ŠI have a feeling
Šis going to be problematic in the fo
llowing respect. I have heard several people 
already who might have fit themselves into 
category 
two, a
nd if you end up saying, ﬁWe™ve got a 
consensus forecast
Š14 of the 17 members of the FOMC had qualifications on it,ﬂ I™m not sure 
how powerful 
it becomes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, the interesting question is whether or not a number of 
them had the same qualification. If they™re all nitpicks, 
that™s one thing, but if everybody said, 
ﬁThis doesn™t take enough account of the fiscal cliff,ﬂ then that would be something that should 

be communicated I think. 
MR. TARULLO.  Fair enough.  T
here may be some utility in thinking about moving to a 
binary 
system 
as we do with the statement.  You are either endorsing or you are not, but giving 
people a chance 
to comment, so if they say something like Betsy said a minute ago, it could be 

included in the explanation of the consensus. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s fine. 

MR. TARULLO.  But that™s just something to think about. 
                 
    
     
                  
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  Thank you.  We are looking for suggestions.  Anyone 
else?  Vice Chairman
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I agree with Governor Tarullo.  You don™t have to frame 
it as a reservation.  You can just frame it as where people would prefer to tilt the forecast.  I™m 
with Betsy on the f
iscal restraint. I am assuming that 
we will get some fiscal restraint 
next year
, and it will be more problematic to the outlook, so we have somewhat weaker growth in 2013.  

That said, I think this is a pretty good forecast.  T
hat is why I was getting at t
he point of, how 
much do you disagree? I am pretty confident that the economy will be weaker in 2013 than this 

forecast, but if I take this whole thing in its entirety, I wouldn™t really quibble about it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I 
have a tiny reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, the question is, would you object to my 
hypothetically taking this, putting this on the screen, and saying, ﬁThis is the Committee™s 

consensus forecast of what the economy is going to look likeﬂ? 
VICE CH
AIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it would also be good, though, to say, ﬁA few people 
thought that 2013 could be a little weaker becauseﬂ blah, blah, blah.  But I would do it in 

Governor Tarullo™s two-
bucket camp
 rather than three-
bucket camp. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agr
ee. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thanks.  Anyone else? 

MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 
               
  
    
             
       
               
     MR. PLOSSER.  I would say my forecast differs from this, obviously, and I think it is 
likely to show up 
in the assumption about current policy.  We are going to see more inflationary 
pressures and less positive outlooks on output and employment. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 
MR. LACKER.  I still don™t have a clear, coherent sense of what policy I am supposed to 
be conditioning on.  Am I foreca
sting the Committee?  I think I am.  So on that basis, I might 
provide a good test case here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MR. LACKER.  First of all, coming into this, on appropriate policy, I was weaker in 
2013 by a couple of tenths.  And I saw inflation a couple of tenths stronger, closer to 2 
percent 

over the next 
year 
or two, getting to 2 
percent 
next year. 
So I would have put policy to 
rais
e rates earlier. 
Modifying that in terms of making it a forecast of the Committee™s action, I would 
mark up inflation in 2014. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sounds right.  Anyone else? 

MR. FISHER.  Can I ask a question on that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Forgive me.  I™m slower than everybody else at the table.  In releasing 
this, we would be releasing the funds path? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Releasing what? 

MR. FISHER.  The funds path, 
the fed funds rate forecast as well
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes
. MR. BULLARD. If you are a year earlier, is that a significant reservation?  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I™m sor
ry. 
                       
  
                
   
         MR. BULLARD.  A year earlier on the funds rate, is that a significant reservation? 
MS. DUKE.  But is that a difference in the policy path?  Because the policy path assumes 
2015 liftoff. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
  You could have 
a different reaction functio
n. MR. 
BULLARD
.  But then you™ve got to do your presumably out
come
-based
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
Based on the original line of comments where we asked you to 
condition on the forecast, and you submitted something 
that
 had higher inflation, I would have 
said t
hat you were a 
ﬁthree
ﬂ because you showed that, conditioned on sticking with the August 
statement
-type policy, you had much higher inflation than this forecast, and that should be 
exaggerated more based on the policy.  So I would have said that you™re a 
three. 
MR. BULLARD.  But I don™t think I am outside of these confidence bands. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I don™t think that is relevant.  It goes back to the question of, 
do you think that your forecast, from a policy perspective, would be materially different? 
MR. BULLARD. 
Again, I just don™t think getting into dissenting on a forecast is a 
sensible thing to do.  Has the Chairman done a good job of characterizing the center of the 

Committee?  Yes. I think yes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Lockhart. 

MR. 
LOCKHART.  I want to make sure I understand.  The next step is to write up a 
mock quarterly monetary policy report or something like that? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  I™m sorry.  Just a description of this discussion. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Right.  But we see how 
it is going to be communicated, how it is 
going to be implemented, is that right? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  That™s 
the purpose. 
                        
      
            MR. WILCOX.  Just the diversity of views portion. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  Okay. 

MS. DUKE.  For the mock exercise, in addition to my own fiscal cliff reservation, can I 
sign up to Sandy and Jeremy™s reservation about the effectiveness? 
MR. 
REIFSCHNEIDER
.  Oh, sure. 
MS. DUKE.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else?  [No response]  All right.  Yes? 

MR. POWELL.  I™m on that line b
etween the one and the two for exactly the same 
reason
.  I went with the one, but of course I do have the same reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
A question to be thinking about here is
:  What would 
Governor Powell do if he thought that the policy action is 
weaker than we anticipate, but the 
underlying economy is stronger, so that the outlook looks okay for him? 
MR. POWELL.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Because we are not showing a comparison, right?  We are 
just showing the ex post. 
MR.
STEIN
.  Oh, you™re just showing the ex post. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that™s the question.  T
hat™s what we™re discussing 
here.  We haven™t asked the question whether or not you think the baseline is adequate. 
MR. FISHER.  You might 
have to prepare for your press conference. 
CHAI
RMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Do you have a question or a comment? 
MR. FISHER.  Well, the plan is, once we get this nailed down, that you would then refer 
to it in your press conference. Is that correct? 
                             
   
     
            CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And then, we are hoping at some point t
o have a monetary 
policy report. 
MR. FISHER.  Which you would still refer to the consensus forecast in. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nothing is nailed down.  One possibility, which Governor 
Tarullo alluded to, is that we can™t do this in a timely way because we don™t know what the 

policy action is going to be soon enough, in which case it might be something that only appears 

in publication with the minutes, for example, three weeks later. 
MR. FISHER.  I agree with Governor Tarullo, by the way.  H
e makes an excellent
 point.  
My next question would be:  Could you summarize what we just discussed as though we were at 

a press conference? It probably would be difficult at this juncture. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would say that this is the forecast 
of the Committee.
 A few 
people disagreed, thinking that these policies would lead to higher inflation.  Most people 
agreed with the broad contours, except they pointed out a few issues related to the fiscal cliff and 

the efficacy of policy.  
President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. I™m a lit
tle confused.  Someone used the phrase ﬁa diversity section.ﬂ 
But you, at the beginning, describedŠI think you did in this contextŠ
a minutes
-like document, 
and in the minutes, of course, when they discuss participants™ views, the different views are sort 

of woven into the main narrative.  I wasn™t quite clear on what you guysŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I just learned about this five minutes ago myself. 

MR. LACKER.  Okay. Great. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I think the plan is to have a document that describes the 
consensus forecast, gives its main feature, 
and shows 
it in 
a minutes
-type discussion: ﬁ
The 
Committee discussed it. Most agreed with it
 but raised the following points anonymously.  
            
          
 President Lacker thought that it was
 a bunch of garbage.ﬂ  [Laughter]  And that would be the 
content. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay
, we will just have to start. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I hope this was helpful to you 
all
.  [Laughter]  Just 
so you have something to look forward to, our current plan is to talk about this exercise in 
October, so be sure and make your plane reservations now.  [Laughter] 
The next meeting is 
TuesdayŒWednesday, October 23Œ24.  
The press conference 
is 
at 2:15.  There will be a 
TV in 
the Special Library
, and lunch is available if you would like to stay.  No presentations are 
planned.  Thank you very much. 
END OF MEETING 
             
                                                
  Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
 on September
 12Œ13, 2012 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, September 12, 

2012, at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Thursday, September 13, 2012, at 8:30 a.m.  Those present 

were the following: 
Ben Bernanke, Chairman 

William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman 

Elizabeth Duke 

Jeffrey M. Lacker 

Dennis P. Lockhart 

Sandra Pianalto 

Jerome H. Powell 

Sarah B
loom Raskin 
Jeremy C. Stein 

Daniel K. Tarullo 

John C. Williams 

Janet L. Yellen 
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, and Eric 
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Ko
cherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the 
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively 

William B. English, Secretary and Economist 
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary 

Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary 

David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 

Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary 

Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, Wil
liam Nelson, David 
Reifschneider, Glenn D. Rudebusch, William Wascher, and John A. Weinberg, Associate 
Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Govern
ors 
                                                                                                              Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; 
Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, 

Board of Governors 
Andreas Lehnert,
1 Deputy Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, 
Board of Governors 

Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Di
rector, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary 

Affairs, Board of Governors 
Brian
 J. Gross,
2 Special Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 

Eric M. Engen, Michael G. Palumbo, and Wayne Passmore, Associate Directors, 
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Fabio M. Natalucci, Deputy 
Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of 
Governors 

Edward Nelson, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
Kelly J. Dubber
t, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, respectively 
Cletus C. Coughlin, Troy Davig, 
Mark E. Schweitzer, and Kei
-Mu Yi, Senior Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Cleveland, and 
Minneapolis, respectively 
1 Attended Wednesday™s session only. 
2 Attended Thursday™s session only. 
                                                               Lorie K. Logan, Jonathan P. McCarthy, Giovanni Olivei, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,
3 Vice 
Presidents, Federal R
eserve Banks of New York, New York, Boston, and New York, 
respectively 
Michelle Ezer,
4 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
3 Attended after the discussion o
n potential effects of a large
-scale asset purchase program. 
4 Attended the discussion on potential effects of a large
-scale asset purchase program. 
                           
                   
            
                                                          Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
September 12
Œ13, 2012 September 12 Session 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  Our first item is 
a staff report 
on the potential effects of large-
scale asset purchases.  Seth Carpenter will lead, but Vice 
Chairman 
Dudley would like to introduce the other presenter. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would like to introduce Michelle Ezer from the 
Markets Group.  Michelle and I actually had the interesting experience of writing a paper on the 
case for TIPS
, right in the heart of 
the financial crisis, along with Jennifer Roush
. I am not really 
sure how I managed to do that during that period, but, obviously, Jennifer and Michelle did most 

of the work.  So she is a coauthor. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay
, thank you.  Seth. 
MR. 
CARPENTER.
1  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will be referring to the 
material that™s 
labeled ﬁPotential Effects of a Large
-Scale Asset Purchase Program
.ﬂ  The Committee received three memos from the staff discussing various aspects of 
potential new large
-scal
e asset purchase (LSAP) programs.  I will discuss some 
considerations about how LSAP programs might be structured, and Michelle will 

discuss the balance sheet and income implications, along with the associated exit 

issues. 
When considering the financial and economic effects of LSAPs, the staff analysis 
starts from 
a term 
structure 
model that embeds Treasury and MBS supply factors as 
determinants of 
the yield 
curve.  
These effects depend on market participants™ beliefs 
about the entire trajectory of the SOMA
 portfolio™s holdings of securities and the 
types of those securities.  The FRB/US model assumes that declines in the 
10-year 
Treasury yield pass through roughly one-
for
-one to 
other market rates. 
In addition, 
the lower Treasury rate reduces the discount 
factor in pricing equities, boosting stock 
prices.  The foreign exchange value of the dollar falls as well.  For LSAPs that 

include purchases of MBS, there is an additional assumed reduction in MBS and 

mortgage rates.  Finally, the changes in these market 
variables are 
used to simulate 
the macroeconomic effects of these 
purchases using the FRB/US model. 
Of course, the results depend critically on the models used and a wide set of 
assumptions, any of which could be challenged.  First, in the staff models, the one-
1 The materials used by Mr. Carpenter and Ms. Ezer are appended to this transcript (appendix 1). 
                   
             
                    
  
                     
      for
-one pass
-through from the 10-
year Treasury yield to other market rates could 
misstate the connection 
among 
these rates
.  For example, frictions like 
capacity 
restrictions 
for originations may prevent mortgage rates from fully adjusting
, at least 
in the short run.  Another source of uncertainty concerns the embedded effects on 

equity prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar.  Some event studies of 

previous unconventional balance sheet actions point to smaller effects than 

incorporated in
to staff analysis.  Finally, the macroeconomic effects of the changes in 

asset prices are calculated using the FRB/US model, and other models would 
of 

course 
yield results that could be larger or smaller. In short, while the projections 
represent the staff™s best assessment, the effects are clearly subject to considerable 

uncertainty. 
Buying either longer
-term Treasury securities or MBS should, in principle, put 
downward pressure on longer-
term interest rates and
, so, stimulate the economy. 
Although staff models suggest that purchases of MBS have 
a somewhat smaller effect 
than Treasury purchases on most longer-
term interest rates, they have somewhat 
larger effects on mortgage rates, and when translated into estimated macroeconomic 

outcomes, the differences 
are fairly small, especially relative to the substantial 
uncertainty that surrounds such estimates.  As a result, the staff memos did not 

provide clear guidance regarding the allocation of LSAPs between purchases of 

longer-
term Treasury securities and purchases of MBS. 
Looking at your first exhibit, to illustrate the macroeconomic effects that are 
implied by the staff models, we compare a projection in which the MEP, the Maturity 

Extension Program, is continued as plannedŠ
the solid
, dark blue lineŠ
to a 
projection that assumes 
that 
the Committee instead ends the MEP and purchases $600 
billion in Treasury securities and $400 
billion in MBS by late next year
.  That™s 
labeled 
option 1 
as in the staff memo
 and it™s the dotted blue line.  In addition to 
lowering term premiums from LSAPs, this option is also assumed to put downward 

pressure on longer-
term rates by pushing off the first increase in the federal funds rate 
by about six months.  This LSAP program is projected to boost real GDP, 
lower the 

unemployment rate, and increase the inflation rate somewhat.  As a consequence, 

more rapid progress toward both of the Committee™s goals is made.  The staff 

memorandum provided prior to your last meeting concluded that the purchases under 

such a 
program would not likely lead to a deterioration in market functioning.  

Michelle will 
later 
discuss some of 
the anticipated effects of the program on the 
Federal Reserve™s balance sheet and income. 
As I noted 
before
, the estimated interest rate effect of 
an LSAP depends on the 
public™s understanding of the FOMC™s intended plans for purchases and exit.  This 

consideration is particularly important for a flow
-based
 or open-
ended program that 
continues until a certain economic outcome is achieved.  If the public understands the 

FOMC™s stopping rule and has the same forecast for the economy as the Committee, 

and the economy evolves according to those projections, then our models would 

suggest that the flow-
based LSAP is 
roughly equivalent to a stock-
based LSAP 
of the 
same ultimate size.  Of course, the economy would likely not proceed exactly in line 

with expectations, so under a flow-
based LSAP, the anticipated total amount of asset 
             
      
        
         
          
                                 purchases would 
likely 
be more state dependent and evolve as the economy evolves.  
Option 4 in the memo entitled ﬁOptions for an Additional LSAP ProgramﬂŠ 

presented here 
as the dashed red lineŠwas intended to correspond roughly to such a 
program when the economy faces an adverse shock, and, as a result, purchases end up 

at a level tha
t is higher than originally assumed. If the ultimate size of purchases in 

this case is $2 trillion, our models suggest that the net effect would be somewhat 

smaller than if, from the beginning, a $2 trillion LSAP had been implemented.  

However, a flow-
bas
ed approach, if communicated clearly to the public, also could 
boost business and consumer confidence by reducing the odds of adverse tail 

outcomes and limiting the expected variance of economic outcomes.  This confidence 

effect is not captured in the staf
f projections but could be important
.  Alternatively, if 
the 
stopping rule is not clear, and the public believed that the Committee might stop 

purchases somewhat earlier than the Committee actually intended, then the interest 

rate effect 
could be reduced relative to what our models suggest.  
However, a
s the 
public came to understand the Committee™s stopping rule, the expected size of the 

SOMA portfolio would revise up, and the interest rate effects would become larger.  

Michelle is now going to discuss the 
balance sheet projections and some of the issues 
related to the exit. 
MS. EZER. 
Thanks, Seth.  As Seth mentioned, I will be discussing the balance 
sheet and income projections described in the LSAP options memo and associated 

exit issues.
  I plan to focus on the same two LSAP options Seth discussed, though the 
memo presented several options.  Turning to the top-left panel of exhibit 2, you can 

see the path of the portfolio under a baseline scenario in which MEP is completed and 

options 1 and 4 from the memo.  Under the latter two options, the portfolio grows 

significantly as a result of the asset purchases. 
Consistent with the exit principles, we 
assume that 
6 months prior to the first increase in the target federal funds rate, 
securities are allowed to ma
ture without reinvestment, and 6 
months after that first 

increase, sales of agency securities begin. These actions normalize the size of the 

portfolio through time.  The addition of a new LSAP program extends the period of 

time between the start of asset sales and when the portfolio normalizes in size. 
For 
example, under option 1 it takes 41 months for the portfolio size to normalize after 

the initiation of MBS sales.
  This is 6 months longer compared 
with 
the MEP 
scenario. 
In terms of Federal Reserve income, cumulative remittances to the Treasury over 
the projection period are lower than in a scenario with no additional LSAP.  
The 

lower remittances reflect higher inte
rest expense and the larger capital losses from 
MBS sales. 
Looking at the top-right panel, until 2016, remittances are higher under 
the LSAP scenarios, because of the higher interest income from the larger portfolio 

and minim
al additional interest expense
.  Thereafter, income is lower as a result of 
higher interest expense and larger capital losses. 
Under option 
1, annual remittances 
are projected to bottom out near zero.  By contrast, under option 
4, remittances fall to 

zero for more than 5 years, and a 
deferred asset is created. 
Of course, income and balance sheet projections can be sensitive to interest rate 
projections, and those projections are subject to uncertainty.  
One gauge of the 
               
          
       
   
              
       
    
  
           
              interest rate risk in the portfolio is presented in the middle
-left panel. Here, we 
present the projections of Federal Reserve remittances under an assumption that 

1 year after federal funds liftoff, the federal funds rate and 10
-year Treasury yield are 
100 basis points above the baseline levels, and these higher levels 
persist for the 
remainder of the projection period.  Under all of the LSAP options shown, the higher 

interest rate paths result in a period of no remittances to the Treasury and the creation 

of a deferred asset, as shown in the middle-right panel.  Under option 4, 
remittances 

to the Treasury would cease for a considerable number of years, and a substantial 

deferred asset would be created. 
The portfolio projections highlight two implications that an LSAP may have on 
the exit strategy.
 First, as shown in the bottom panel, the level of reserves would be 
higher at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate.
 Second, in order to 
remain consistent with the existing exit principles, MBS sales would need to take 

place over a shorter period than 5 
yea
rsŠthe period currently assumed in the 
projections.  
Absent a shorter MBS sales period, or other changes to the exit strategy, 

the size of the portfolio would not normalize within 2 to 3 years of the initiation of 

asset sales as anticipated by the exit strategy principles. 
Starting with the first point, under option 
1, reserve balances will be about 
$2.3 trillion at the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate
Šabout $1 
trillion 
larger than expected under the current policy
, and also $1 trillion
 larger than assumed 
in June 2011.  
While increasing the IOER rate will raise short
-term market rates by 
itself, reserve
-draining tools can help to ensure a closer connection between the rates, 

and greater use of these tools may be needed
, given the increased quantity of reserves.  
The memo entitled ﬁThe 
Effect of an 
Additional $1 Trillion LSAP on the E
xit 
Strategyﬂ discussed the status of each of the different draining tools.  However, it is 

too early to provide specific details of a drain
ing plan
, because such a plan will 
depend on how markets evolve and the lessons learned once these tools are used in 

large scale. 
Turning to the second point, the exit strategy principles themselves will not have 
to change as a result of a new LSAP. The e
xpectation
, however, 
that the size of the 
balance sheet would be normalized within 2 to 3 years of assets sales might not hold, 

depending on the size of the 
asset purchase
 program.  Under option 1, by reducing the 
period of asset sales to 
3½ years from the
 5 years assumed in making the projections, 
the portfolio size would normalize within the assumed 2 to 3 
years. 
The s
taff 
currently believes that the faster average pace of MBS sales would likely be 

manageable from a market
-functioning perspective.  
That said, reducing the sales 
period would concentrate capital losses and result in Federal Reserve remittances 

declining to zero for a few years and create a deferred asset. 
In contrast, assumptions 
associated with the exit strategy principles would need to b
e altered under a $2 trillion 
LSAP like that under option 4.  Agency sales alone would not be enough to normalize 

the size of the balance sheet within 
2 to 3 
years of the initiati
on of asset sales in this 
case. 
Moreover, sales of securities in the volume envisioned under option 4 over a 
three
-year perio
d may cause market disruptions. 
          
                       
                  
In any event, the Committee may wish to review its exit principles periodically, 
particularly if the Committee implemented a flow
-based LSAP program, where the 
ultimate size o
f purchases would be unknown.  Adjustments to the principles could 
include more heavily relying on asset sales as a tool to drain reserves, for example, by 

expanding it to include a moderate pace of Treasury security sales. Asset sales could 

also occur so
oner.  
On balance, although the current exit strategy principles remain 
valid, additional analysis will be useful to determine 
whether alternate strategies 
might prove more helpful.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Seth and I will be happy to 

answer any question
s. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Of course, this is just a summary of 
a lot of work that the staff has 
been doing on all aspects of asset purchases. You have received a 
number of memos.  Also, let me just mention that a little bit later this morning we will talk about 
the consensus forecast, which gives, in more detail, the staff projections of the effect
s of 
programs of different sizes on the economy.  
Let me now open the floor in case there are any 
questions 
for staff.  President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  I appreciate all of the 
work that went into this.  It has been quite helpful to me in thinking about what is going on.  Seth 

has made 
a good summary of the uncertainties and the range and assumptions that are needed to 

get the po
int estimates. 
I want to focus on two things. 
One has to do with the assumptions about market segmentation and 
pass
-through.  In 
some sense, the FRB
/US assumes
Šas you mentioned, SethŠ
that the 
pass
-through from the 
reduction of Treasuries to corporate and mortgage-
backed securities is one
-for
-one, which 
suggests, as you alluded to, that there is more segmentation across duration than there is across 

asset classes
, in the case of the models.  So one question I have would be, suppose that actually 
there was more segmentation across asset classes than across the term structure?  In other w
ords, 
if 
5-year 
Treasuries
 were a better substitute for 10-
year 
Treasuries
 than mortgage-
backed 
securities or corporate bonds are for 10
-year securities
Šwhich is the way it is kind of structured 
in the modelŠhow would that change your analysis of these e
ffects?  That is one question. 
                           
   
       
      
          
             
  
 And the second question is, you talked about the assumptions that are made and 
the 
uncertainties, and yet what we really got
, at the end of the day, w
ere 
some point estimates. 
So if 
I had to push you and I wanted to think about standard errors on these point estimates, how big 
do you think they are truly likely to be
?  Can we tell the difference, given the uncertainties 
among these different strategies
?  W
hat 
is 
your assessment of 
that? 
So those are the two 
questions I have. 
MR. CARPENTER.  Okay. 
The first question, what if there were more segmentation 
across asset types than across 
maturit
ies
? I think pretty clearly what you would see in that case 
is that we might have an effect on Treasury yields if we are buying 
Treasurie
s, and that would 
tend to push down 
Treasury 
yields and widen the spread relative to other asset types.  And to the 
extent that it™s other interest rates that have a direct effect on economic activity, you would get a 

smaller effect.
  So I think, in principle, that™s the way it would go. 
The hard part there
, I think, 
is there has clearly got to be a little bit of that going on.  And 
the previous memo about market functioning that we sent around said we might get to the point 

where you are buying so much that you are dislocating the 
Treasury 
curve from the rest of 
market interest rates. I think we are very sensitive to that possibility, and I think the staff 

conclusion so far is that we haven™t gotten to that point.  And I think some of the other studies of 

LSAPs and how they work also point to pretty substantial spillovers to other asset classesŠ
some 

Fed studies and some academic studies.
  So I think that™s a reasonable hypothesis to maintainŠ
I think 
it™s something that we will want to worry a lot about, esp
ecially if the purchases were so 
large that they were to somehow disrupt market functioning.  But my reading so far is that we are 

not there yet
, for some of those reasons. 
             
               
      
      
             
    
   Another reason isŠespecially if you go back to some of the previous LSAPsŠ
as the 
Desk has made clear what segment of the market we are buying
, there ha
ve been some pretty 
clear adjustments in interest rates at different points along the curve
.  This
 suggests 
that the 
maintained hypothesis that we have
, that the maturity matters a lot
, is coming through in some of 
the event studies.  W
hen the Desk helped the market understand exactly what the maturity 
distribution of purchases 
was 
going to be, we saw some movements of yields at the long end 
relative to the belly of the curve that suggest t
hat people see this sort of segmentation across 
maturities.  In addition, I think some of the reaction 
to the MEP caused us to feel 
a little bit better 
about that assumption.  The movement in the short rate relative to the long rate, once you control 
for e
xpectations, seemed 
to conform reasonably well with some of the inte
rest rate models that 
we have. 
So I think the short answer is you would get a widening of spreads, and to the extent that 
Treasuries are
n™t 
the thing that matter
s for economic activity, you would get less of an effect.  
On the other hand, if you were to do mortgage-
backed securities purchases, and the same 
hypothesis came up, then presumably you™d get a bigger effect just on the MBS rate, and 

presumably mortgages a
s well.
  And so the scenario you bring up might be an argument for 
having both asset classes
Šan argument
 that we didn™t cover in the memo.  I
f there is 
this 
segmentation across asset types, then buying both 
Treasuries
 and MBS may be a good thing to 
do, because then you will be able to affect both of those 
rates
, instead of relying on the purchases 
of 
Treasuries
 to also push down mortgage and MBS yields along with it. 
MR. PLOSSER.  To interrupt just a second on that point, though, that begs the question 
about 
buying MBS
Šlet™s say, 
even if it might help the mortgage market
.  You don™t have any 
evidence on whether that pass
-through 
to corporate and other asset classes is either differential or 
            
      
      
                 
the same or less than it would be with 
Treasuries
? Are you assuming 
that other asset classes 
would follow the same amount then, in that kind of story? 
MR. CARPENTER.  Right.  So I was trying to go into the counterfactual world where we 
are assuming this asset segmentation
.  And so there, 
there are 
lots of other hypotheses.  O
ur 
models sort ofŠ
and they are empirical models, where we get the results based on actual data
Š suggest that the purchases of MBS do have the same general effect on longer-
term interest rates 
by pulling out the longer-term assets and pushing things down.  I
f we had a different model, we 
would have to confront all of those same questions that you asked, including
, if there is a 
segmentation, what sort of 
pass
-through would there be?  But the models that we have, and the 
estimation that we have done, sugge
st that we are getting more or less the same effect on longer
-term rates of MBS and Treasuries
.  I was just saying, in the alternate version of the world, 
where 
there is a segmentation, 
it might be an argument for buying two different types of assets that 
we 
didn™t discuss in the memo. 
Your second question about standard errors is a really good one, and it is hard.  There are 
lots of different models that we have coming together, and I think Dave can probably speak 

really knowledgeably about the standard errors, especially from the FRB/US model.  But there is 

layering
, model upon model, 
to try to get these effects. 
I think we feel pretty good that we know 
for sure the sign of the first derivative, which is in what direction these things would happen.  

We pr
esented a lot of results, though, for different-
sized LSAPs in the memos, as Michelle 
pointed outŠ$750 
billion
, $1 trillion, 
$2 trillion. 
I think we can™t say with any confidence that 
we know the difference between a $750 billion LSAP and a $1 trillion LS
AP.  We are pretty sure 
we know that the 
$1 trillion
 one does more, but those are so close to each other that I don™t have 
       
              
      
                      
     
     
   
         much confidence in being able to differentiate.  
It™s t
hat sort of uncertainty 
I see, b
ut I don™t 
know if you want to talk about the 
macro effects. 
MR. PLOSSER.  I™m sorry.  Just to push it just a little bit.  So rather than the difference 
between 
$750 billion 
and 
$1 trillion, let™s just take one of them, the 
$1 trillion
 one.  And you 
estimate, what was it, 62 basis points on the unempl
oyment rate after two years?  Was that it? I 
can™t remember the exact number.  Whatever that number was, can you give me a standard 
error 
on that point estimate? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I™m going to come to that directly.  
First
, just to reiterate what 
Seth s
aid, your logic is correct.  To the extent that you think 
that the 
pass
-through 
from buying 
Treasuries 
into corporate 
bond yields
, stock market prices
, the exchange rate, 
and 
things like 
that
, are 
less than in the model simulations
, you are going to get smaller results. 
Second, I agree with Seth that the 
pass
-through 
effects 
that 
we have in there
Šas we have 
been saying right from the start back in 2008, early 2009Š
are
 highly uncertain.  And as time has 
gone on, I think the one source of uncertainty that has gone down is the 
concern
 about whether 
purchases 
would have any effect
.  At least we 
now 
think they ha
ve an effect. 
But having said 
that, 
there is 
still 
much uncertainty around these estimates. 
In terms of actually coming up with a confidence interval, I can™t do that, but I c
an say 
the following qualitative things that 
I think 
are helpful. 
First, take the model that Min We
i and 
Canlin 
Li 
developed that we are mainly using for pricing the effects on Treasuries
 and MBS.  
Now, that model kicks out a standard error.  I don™t know what it is, but it does not 
have 
tight 
error bands.  There is considerable width 
to the confidence intervals.  That said, we think the 
number is reasonable.  But could the number 
be somewhat smaller or somewhat bigger?  Yes. 
One point on why 
it could be bigger is, if you go back to the first LSAP, the event studies 
                                        
          
           suggested 
the LSAP
 might have lowered 
Treasury 
yields by 100 basis points.  
In the analysis that 
Min and 
Canlin
 are doing, it™s 50.  So that™s an example, 
where they are not necessarily taking 
the highest-
side estimates. 
There are other studies that suggest that we could be getting lower effects on financial 
markets than in the FRB/US analysis.  On the other hand, 
FRB
/US ignores some things, 
such as 
the 
potential 
pass
-through to house prices
; it has no effect 
in the simulations
.  And, there 
are 
confidence effects
 that Seth alluded to.  Even if you knew what the financial effects would be, 
there would still be a subs
tantial confidence interval for the economic effects
.  I don™t have them 
off the top of my head, but we have generated confidence bands for FRB/
US 
impulse responses 
over the years.  They are a lot like 
those in other models.  They are fairly significant 
around what 
the unemployment rate 
effect 
would be.  
The effect
 could be considerably closer to zero, or it 
could be bigger.  L
et™s say that
, for 
a given LSAP, the point estimate is a half a percentage point 
on the unemployment rate after three years
Šthat™s t
rue 
for the way we are scoring 
alternative 
B. Could it be a quarter?  Yes.  A quarter 
is certainly inside the 
70 percent 
confidence interval
.  Could it be three-quarters of a percentage point? Yes.  That would be inside the 70 
percent
.  So 
that™s just sa
ying what
, I think
, everyone agrees upon: there are v
ery wide confiden
ce intervals 
on these effects. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  While I was listening to Seth™s disclaimers at the beginning, it sort of 
sounds like an Allegra ad on television [l
aughter]
: These are the risks, et cetera.  And the papers 
actually were quite good.  The paper you particularly referenced had a lot of disclaimers in it.  

And what I am interested in seeing vetted more thoroughly is the degree to which this 

compounds the complexi
ty of a
n exit when we decide to exit. 
          
          
                        
    
     It seems to me one of the virtues of, 
particularly
, ﬁThe 
Effect of an 
Additional $1 T
rillion 
LSAP 
on the E
xit 
Strategy
ﬂ was the discussion of substantial uncertainty.  There are lots of 
quotes in there that are qualified. 
It seems to me that the proponents of 
an extended LSAP would 
take a view from a signaling channel perspective that one of its benefits is that 
it is effective 
precisely because it makes it more difficult to either raise short
-term interest rates or sh
rink the 
balance sheet for some time.
  And in a way, what I am concerned aboutŠand I am interested in 
learning more
Šis the degree to which we tie the hands of our successors, or if not tieŠ
maybe 
that is too strong a wordŠwe tangle their hands, and how much 
more difficult the exit strategy 
becomes. 
It strikes me that the stronger the recovery
Šthat is, the more rapidly we achieve 
equilibrium interest rates
Šthe harder it is going to be for us to exit.  And I would like to see that 
vetted a little bit more. 
I thought the papers touched on that, particularly the paper you referred 
to, but I think it would be helpful, Mr. Chairman, if we got a better sense of what complexities 
this imposes upon exit at the right time. Just a comment. 
MR. CARPENTER.  No, that™s 
really helpful. 
MR. FISHER.  I don™t know what your take is on this. 

MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely.  We clearly have a lot of details to write down.  So if 
the Committee wanted to exit 
next week
, or something like that, we would have lots and lots and 
lots an
d lots of details to write down, none of which are we prepared to give you right now, 
because the world presumably, between now and exit, is going to change.  And so it is going to 

take some time. 
That said, I just want to leave you with one thought.  When 
we were writing these 
memos, one of the first points that we wanted to have clear in our heads before writing themŠ
all 

of the staff who were working on this, including staff at the Desk who are experts on both 
      
  
                            
      
    
           
  
financial markets as well as 
the execution of things and the staff 
at the Board
Šwas
, does 
anybody think that if we were to do another LSAP as envisioned in these memos, that when the 
Committee wants to tighten monetary policy
, the staff would not be able to follow through on 
that
?  Because I wanted to make sure that everybody was able to look in their heart of hearts and 
say, ﬁWe think that the Committee will be able to tighten policy appropriately to hit its
 dual 
mandate,ﬂ and everybody said, ﬁYes, we think we are in that situation.ﬂ How we do it is not 

perfectly clear yet
, for a variety of reasons
.  But we would have had to write a very, very 
different memo
, I think, if we really thought there was some risk to the conduct of monetary 
policy in terms of our ability to execute the exit strategy. 
MR. FISHER.  You point out in the memo that there is a learning process here, 
in terms 
of the different tools that might be used.  But I still think we should press this in our discussion 

before proceeding. 
MR. CARPENTER.  Absolutely. 

MR. FISHE
R.  Yes, sir. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I 
want to follow up on one point b
ecause it also relates to what 
President Plosser was talking about.  I think, 
whether it is connected to fear that we won™t be able 

to exit or whether it is a signaling that the Committee is willing to be more accommodative 

persistently out in the future, those policy expectations 
can have a big effect 
on some of the 
results
.  Ofte
n, the way we score thingsŠand I think I threw out a half a percentage point a 
second agoŠ
doesn™t take 
into account this additional signaling effect
 about the future path of the 

funds rate t
hat 
you potentially can get.  T
here is some evidence from the even
t studies that you 
did get 
it with the first two LSAP programs
Šthat by announcing 
a program
, you are also 
sending the signal that you are going to be more willing to keep rates lower for longer. 
      
           
               
        
           
    MR. FISHER.  That™s what I was
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Right. 
At least as far as the model scores it, if that™s fully 
credible, if the expected funds rate path the market has really flattens out, in principle, you get a 
nontrivial kick from that. 
MR. CARPENTER. 
The only thing to highlight, though, is the difference 
between a 
willingness to keep the interest rate lower
 for longer versus an ability 
to raise them
.  And we 
don™t currently worry about the second partŠwe don™t worry about the ability to raise interest 

rates.  But what the Committee decides to do, obviously, is about the willingness to keep interest 

rates lower
. MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Does the FRB/US model allow you to 
isolate the kind of intermediate estimates
Šthat might be credit aggregates or asset price index 
levels
Šthat fit between lower interest rates and GDP growth, so that you could actually get a 
sense of the transmission mechanism working through the model? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
You can snip cer
tain transmission mechanisms and see what it 
does to the total effect 
if you
 just zero it out.  We have done experiments like that, and what it 
shows is, roughly speaking, changing 
Treasury 
yields, if it doesn™t go out into any other asset 
prices, doesn™t do anything in the model, to a first approximation.  
What matters is that it goes 

into private long-term interest rates, like MBS and corporates; second, that it goes into 
the 
stock 

market; and, third, that it goes into exchange rates.  So you can think of 
it as 
three channels
: cost 
of capital, wealth effects, and exchange rate.
  The model says each of those is worth 
roughly a 
third of the overall effect.  So if you didn™t believe one of the channels was operating, or you 
      
                                  
  thought it was operating only half 
as effectively as it usually does, you could then scale the 
numbers down with that rough math.  And that would be approximately correct.  
But in terms of 
what it implies for bank lending, or something like that, no, the model doesn™tŠ 
MR. LOCKHART. 
It doesn™t explicitly estimate the
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. It doesn™t have any explicit predictions about what happens to 
bank lending or anything like that. 
MR. LOCKHART.  So to simplify, for my purposes, the exercise assumes some kind of 
historic
al correlation between lower interest rates and economic activity. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Which may or may not prevail in this current situation. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Which may or may not prevail, with one very important 
caveat.  Because housing is at such an extraordinarily low percentage of GDP, in essence, 
that 

historical correlation has been marked down in these analyses.  Ordinarily housing is a big 

source of a kick.  In these scenarios, the direct channel on housing construction activity is worth 

hard
ly anything.  It™s a little bit, but it™s very small.  That could be right or wrong, but in the 
results that Seth was showing and 
that 
were in all the other analys
is we™ve sent you, 
there is,
 in 
that very important sense, 
an attenuation of the effectivenes
s of monetary policy, whether it™s 
conventional or unconventional right now. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to follow up on this issue 
about confidence intervals.  In 
figure
 1, there would be data uncertainty; there would be 
uncertainty about transmission channels; there would be uncertainty about models.  If you 

layered all of that together, you are going to get very wide confidence intervals.  But on 
              
          
    
   
          
              exhibit 
2, where we are
 looking at the SOMA holdings, there we can sort of mechanically map 
out, more or less, what is going to happen.  There is some uncertainty based on interest rates
, and 
so on, but 
I just want to be clear on this
: This is
 much more solid, I would say, than page 1, 
which is very uncertain and very speculative about 
what the effects might be. Is that a fair 
assessment? 
MS. EZER. 
Our portfolio projections depend importantly on the interest rate 
assumptions that were provided, so those confidence intervals will feed through into our 
projections when it comes to things like Federal Reserve income over time.
  When it comes to, 
say, the top-
left
 panel, the path of the portfolio over time, the confidence interval is probably a 
little bit smaller
, provided that the 
assumptions that we made about the timing of liftoff and the 
strategy used for exit remain constant.
  There the confidence band would be in your projections 
for prepayments on your MBS portfolio.  But since you are assuming that you are going to get 

rid o
f your holdings of agency securities over a set period of time, it is just going to change kind 
of the wiggles in how MBS declines over that period.  But we would still eliminate it over a 
five
-year period with confidence. 
MR. BULLARD.  Just one other comment, Mr. Chairman.  On exhibit 2, 
panel
 4, ﬁD
eferred 
Asset.
ﬂ  T
hat is kind of a nice term
, ﬁdeferred asset.
ﬂ As far as I know, the Committee 
has never used the deferred asset.  It strikes me as a possible political firefight to bring that into 

play.  
All 
of the scenarios here, other than 
option 1, if I™m reading this correctly, would bring the 
deferred asset into play
, with possible repercussions, I think, 
for the Federal Reserve. 
MR. CARPENTER. 
Just a small bit of clarification:  I
t has never been the case that we 
have had
, for the Federal Reserve 
System as a whole
, a deferred asset
.  It has 
been the case on 
several occasions that there has been a deferred asset for a given Reserve Bank. 
        
       
                     
     
        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think the defense in that case would be that 
the total, 
which was including the very high 
remittances
 early in the period, still would be higher than 
historical norms. 
MR. POTTER.  That™s correct. 
MR. BULLARD.  That might be a hard story to tell when the time comes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chair
man
, you have a two-hander? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
  Yes.  I think the confidence intervals on interest rates are 
going to be almost proportionate to the confidence intervals on the real economy variables, 

because you are not going to know what the trajectory o
f short
-term rates is going to be or the 
shape of the yield curve. And, in fact, you are probably even more uncertain about the shape of 

the yield curve because you have never gone from purchasing all of these assets to selling all of 

these assets.  So we
 don™t really know how the market is going to react to that. 
The second thing I just want to note very briefly is a lot of this also depends on what 
monetary framework you are actually going back to.  And the presumption of the staff memo is 

that we are going back to a 
corridor system.  But you might decide, as you go through this, that 

maybe IOER works pretty well. 
And 
you might actually want to go back to a floor system that 
would allow you quite a bit more discretion in terms of how your exit actually works.  And that 

would feed into a lot of these projections.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Again, I want to thank the staff for all of the work 
you 
did to help prepare us for this meeting, including the work on LSAPs, but also work on other 
tools like IOER.  So we appreciate it very much.  
Let me turn to item 
2 and cal
l on Simon Potter 
to discuss financial developments. 
                 
                             
    
                                                                             MR. POTTER.
2 Thank you
, Mr. Chairman.  Over the course of the 
intermeeting 
period, global financial markets were dominated by three areas of focus: 
the ECB™s 
new Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) pr
ogram, fluctuating expectations for 
further policy accommodation from the FOMC, and continuing concerns over global 

growth prospects.  By the end of the 
intermeeting
 period, market perceptions of the 
effectiveness of policy measures to at least attenuate t
ail risks facing the global 
economy contributed to improved risk sentiment in financial markets, as seen in 

higher advanced economy sovereign yields and stock markets. 
I will begin with developments in U.S. interest rates, which in the Treasury 
market were moderately higher over the 
intermeeting
 period.  The upper-
left panel 
shows the decomposition of changes in nominal yields for 5- and 10-
year securities 
during key portions of the intermeeting period.  
Nominal 
Treasury yields increased 
significantly early in the period, with the 10-year yield up by more than 35 basis 

points at one point.  Most of the 
initial increase in yields was driven by improved risk 
sentiment on expectations of a forceful ECB policy respons
e, as well as by stronger
-than
-expected U.S. economic data
.  The rise in yields partially reversed following the 
release of the August FOMC minutes and continued somewhat after the Jackson Hole 

symposium.  The move lower in the 5-
year real component was co
nsistent with 
growing expectations for policy easing.  
To date, there is little evidence of worries 
of the fiscal cliff affecting pricing in the Treasury or other markets. 
At the same time, inflation compensation
, as derived from inflation
-indexed 
securities
, rose at the 5
- and 10-
year tenors
.  Higher energy prices contributed to the 
increase in inflation breakevens, particularly at shorter maturities
.  However, spot and 
forward 5
-year breakeven inflation rates remain well within recent historical ranges, 
as seen in the upper-right panel. 
As shown in the middle-left panel, dealers continue to assign the highest 
probability of a first increase in the 
target
 rate to the second half of 2015.  However, 
the distribution has continued to shift from earlier liftoff
 dates and into 2015 and 
beyond.  The survey results are broadly consistent with market-
implied measures of 
liftoff, as market prices indicate significant odds that the target rate will not be 

incre
ased until the middle of 2015. 
Immediately following the F
OMC statement on August 1, interest rates increased
, as markets had been pricing in close to even odds of an extension of the forward 

guidance
.  The middle-right panel shows an event study based on the small sample of 

forward
-guidance surprises.  Reading from left to right, the blue dots represent the 
three events in our study: 
first, the decision to maintain the late
-2014 forward 
guidance at the 
most recent 
meeting; second, the extension of the forward guidance to 

late
 2014 at the January meeting; and third, the introduction of the original mid-2013 
language in August 2011.  
The 
x-
axis measures the surprise component of these 
decisions, which we measure in months and derive from the difference between the 

announced 
forward
-guidance date and the ex
pected month of liftoff calculated from 
2 The mate
rials used by Mr. Potter are appended to this transcript (appendix 2). 
      
               
  
    
       
      
                 
          
   our d
ealer surveys
.  The 
y-axis measures the change in the 10
-year Treasury yield 
after the FOMC announcement
.  Alternative methods of measuring the surprise in 
months yield broadly similar results
.  Averaging across 
these measures suggests a 
rule of thumb of roughly a 1 basis point change in the 10-
year Treasury yield for each 
month of 
forward
-guidance 
surprise
.  Of course, measuring announcement effects is 
complicated by the interaction between forward guidance and 
expectations for the 
balance sheet
, including exit, which this analysis does not consider.  In the three 
events examined
, there were no explicit changes to the balance sheet or exit 
principles. 
Turning to other domestic assets, MBS spreads to Treasuries ar
e narrower over 
the 
intermeeting
 period, as seen in your lower-
left panel
.  Investors attributed much of 
the fluctuation in MBS spreads over the period to shifting expectations for Federal 

Reserve purchases, especially in the last few days.  By contrast, t
wo other 
intermeeting developments may serve to tighten mortgage market conditions on the 

margin
.  First, the FHFA announced that it will raise guarantee fees on GSE loans by 
10 basis points starting in the fourth quarter of this year, a fee that lenders w
ill likely 
pass on to borrowers.  Second, the Treasury announced that the wind-down of the two 

GSEs™ portfolios will accelerate to a 15 percent yearly rate, from 10 percent at 

present
.  Much of the wind-down is expected to occur through paydowns, 
necessita
ting only a small portion of sales from the portfolio over the next year.  

Given this, investors do not expect the accelerated wind-downs to be disruptive to the 

MBS market, and spreads to Treasuries were little changed following the 

announcement. 
The final panel looks at how recent developments have affected 
U.S. 
risk assets
.  Overall, the stabilization in European financial markets and heightened expectations 

for domestic policy easing have supported both equity and debt markets.  
The 

S&P
 500 index rose over the intermeeting period by more than 4 percent and is 
currently at its highest level since the beginning of 2008.  
Near
-term uncertainty, as 
measured by the VIX, is near multiyear lows
.  High
-yield bond spreads have 
tightened to levels last observed in
 2011:Q3, and corporate bond issuance in July and 
August has been higher than 
over the same period last year. 
Your second exhibit turns to developments in Europe and global asset prices more 
broadly.  
The most important 
development 
in global financial markets was the 
steadily growing expectation that the ECB would announce an effective new program 

to purchase shorter-
dated peripheral sovereign debt
.  As seen in the top-
left panel, 
these expectations led to a significant narrowing of
 peripheral sovereign debt spreads 
to German yields, particularly at shorter maturities wi
thin the scope of the program. 
Many of the uncertainties regarding the new program were resolved by the ECB 
announcements last week, leading to a further narrowing of peripheral spreads, 

additional gains in European equities, and appreciation of the euro against the 
U.S. 
dollar and the Swiss franc.  
Indeed, euro
-area financial markets have exhibited a 
greater degree of stability over the 
intermeeting
 period, and investors do not appear to 
be seeking significant protection 
against 
large swings in asset prices
, as seen in the 
                                       
    
  
  
               upper-
right panel
, ﬁImplied Volatility on 
Euro
pean Equities and on the Euro-
Dollar 
Currency 
Pair
.ﬂ 
As Steve Kamin will note in his briefing, the OMT
 program has the potential to 
ease financial stresses but must be accompanied by fundamental reform measures at 

the national level
.  Changes in forward peripheral spreads to Germany appear 
consistent with this view
.  Your middle-left panel shows Spanish an
d Italian 
five
-year 
debt spreads 
relative to Germany on a 
five
-year
-forward basis
.  These forward 
five
-year spreads have come down much less than spot spreads on instruments that are 

within the maturity range
 of the ECB™s purchase program. 
In the near 
term, financial markets will face a number of uncertainties, including 
the ongoing EU and IMF review of Greek compliance with the terms of its aid 

program.  In addition, for those countries 
not already in a program, the ECB will not 
activate the OMT unless
 there is agreement on conditions for accessing fiscal support 
facilities
.  It is unclear whether Spain will take this step w
ithout renewed market 
pressure. 
Looking forward, both Spain and Italy need to ramp up debt issuance over the 
remainder of the year
, after issuing at a somewhat tepid pace in recent months
.  This 
can be seen in the middle-
right panel
.  Spanish and Italian banks have historically 
been a significant source of demand for their own sovereign™s debt.  
However, that 

source of demand has drop
ped
 off in recent months.  As shown in the bottom-
left 
panel, since the ECB™s last three
-year LTRO, Italian banks have added to their 

sovereign debt holdings at a greatly reduced pace
.  Spanish banks have actually 
brought down their holdings of sovereign debt since the first quarter, given their own 

funding difficulties.  On a more positive note, anecdotal reports suggest that asset 

managers are reducing their underweight positions on Spanish and Italian debt, and 

access to primary debt markets has improved 
for Spanish and Italian banks. 
The last panel of this exhibit focuses on global risk assets 
more 
broadly.  
The 
accommodative policy stance of many central banks has been supportive of equity 

markets in recent months, particularly in the 
United States
 and Europe.  
In contrast, 
emerging market equities have generally underperformed, reflecting investors™ views 

that th
ese regions may be experiencing a slowdown in economic activity.  China™s 
Shanghai Composite I
ndex remains at levels last seen in early 2009. 
Your final exhibit focuses on recent Desk operations and market expectations for 
additional policy actions as reported in the d
ealer 
survey.  
Over the intermeeting 
period, the Desk purchased $60 billion in longer-term Treasury securities and sold or 

allowed
 to mature without reinvestment $58.5 billion of shorter-
dated securities under 
the maturity extension program (MEP).  These operations continue to proceed 

smoothly.  In particular, the Treasury security purchase operations have recently met 

with better de
mand.  As shown in the upper-left panel, the previous trend toward 
lower coverage ratios and less favorable prices for the purchase
 operations reversed 

somewhat. 
       
              
             
  
                          
           As shown in the upper-right panel, the MEP transactions have been lengthening 
the average dura
tion of the SOMA™s Treasury holdings in line with the policy intent.  

This measure is expected to reach about 
eight 
years if the program continues through 
the end of the year, far longer than the historical range of two to three 
years.  This has 
pulled the average duration of the overall portfolio higher as well, given that the 

duration of the MBS portfolio has recently remained steady at around 
two 
years. 
The next two panels focus on the reinvestment of principal payments on the 
SOMA™s holdings of agency debt and MBS.  Over the intermeeting period, the Desk 

purchased $33 billion of MBS.  These reinvestment purchases have generally 

proceeded smoothly, with market trading volumes remaining steady and only some 

instances of specialness in the coupons being pur
chased. 
The middle-left panel shows the monthly pace of paydowns, which has 
averaged 
about $26 billion since October of last year.  Given continued low interest rates, we 

expect the paydowns to run at roughly $31 billion per month through the end of the 

year.  Such a pace would suggest that 
the 
MBS purchases resulting from the 
reinvestments of the agency paydowns would constitute about one-third of the gross 

issuance of TBA
-eligible securities. 
The middle-right panel shows the distribution for the 30-
year sector of principal 
paydowns to the MBS portfolio, as well as the coupons in which the Desk has 

reinvested.  The portfolio continues to shift into lower-coupon securities, reflecting 

the overall decline in 
rates and the decision to concentrate purchases in newly
 issued 
TBA securities that are more liquid and more directly linked to the primary rate
.  Since June, low interest rates have led to paydowns of holdings of lower-coupons 

MBS, including the 3.5 and 4 percent coupons.  
Newly issued securities also have 

longer duration than those paying down, so these purchases have extended the 

duration of the MBS portfolio. 
Your final two panels of this exhibit show results from the most recent 
dealer 
survey.  
We use
d a phone poll this Monday to update some of the answers, following 

the significant developments in Europe and the e
mployment 
report.  As seen in the 
lower
-left panel, dealers assign a 90 percent probability to any easing action being 
announced at this mee
ting
.  More specifically, dealers place very high odds of 
80 percent on a change to the rate guidance.  The median respondent also saw a 

65 percent chance of an announced increase in the size of the SOMA portfolio.  

Expectations for these policy actions fi
rmed somewhat following last Friday™s 
employment report.  The derived joint probability for an extension of the forward 

guidance and the announcement of additional asset purchases increased to 57 percent 

in this Monday™s phone survey, up from 46 percent in 
the 
dealer survey. 
The panel to the right shows the dealers™ projections for the size and distribution 
of additional asset purchases anticipated through the end of 2013, as derived from 

respondents™ expected path of the SOMA balance sheet.  Respondents ex
pect the size 
of the balance sheet to grow by around $600 billion by the end of 2013.  Median 

expectations are for an increase of $300 billion in Treasury and about $300 billion in 
             
                  
                 MBS holdings by the end of 2013.  While not asked specifically about the st
ructure of 
a potential asset purchase program, some respondents indicated in their written 

comments that they expect an open
-ended program conditioned on economic 
variables.  Mr. Chairman, this completes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Questions for Simon?  President 
Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Two questions for Mr. Potter.  The first has 
to do with 
the 
duration of our holdings of agency MBS.  The graph indicates the average 
duration of our current holdings is around two.  Now, would our average duration of purchases 

under what we™re going to talk about later today or tomorrow, would that be substantially larger? 

Do you have a sense of what that would be? 
MR. POTTER.  Yes.  Somewhere between four and six.  Is that right, N
ate
? MR. WUERFFEL. 
That™s correct
. MR. LACKER.  Four and six? 

MR. POTTER. 
Yes
. MR. LACKER.  Okay.  So the other question I haveŠ
I was at a conference a couple of 
weeks ago.  I believe I saw you there, Mr. Potter, andŠ 
MR. POTTER. 
Symposium
, yes
. MR. LACKER.  An economist there was arguing that the effect of our forward guidance 
occurred more via revisions in investors™ expectations about future economic conditions rather 

than a change in their views about our future reaction function, and 
becaus
e you folks have such 
rich interactions with the dealer community and you talk to them about 
this forward guidance, I 
wondered if you guys had a view as to the economist™s assertion. 
MR. POTTER. 
Those dealer economists also 
read about
 Jackson Hole.  Some of 
them 
were there
, so I think they viewed that with quite a lot of interest.  I
n the dealer survey
, some 
               
     
            
        
        
      
   people thought that the change in rate guidance might be not just a calendar type, but trying to 
distinguish it from just a pure expectation of where you expected the economy to be.  I don™t 

think it™s possible to get a very clear answer from these respondents, because I don™t think the 

FOMC
™s been completely clear on this either. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Simon, I think I heard you correctly.  So we™ve been purchasing about a 
third of the eligible TBAs, and you also mentioned that there™s a planned 
increase
 in the 
rate 
of 
GSE wind
-downs to 15 percent from the 10 percent level earlier.  I
s that likely to change? If we 
were to proc
eed with just 
$30 or $40 billion, as outlined in a
lternative 
B, would that change our 
percentage of the eligible TBA purchases, given the contraction that™s occurring among the 

agencies
? If my memory is correct, they had about $1.4 trillion.  It goes back 
to last March. 
I can™t remember the last time I looked at the numbers.  So that™s about $15 billion; 15 
percent 

translates to about $15 billion, I think, in the contraction.  I™m just curious if it 
affe
cts the 
percentage of eligible TBA that we™d be hold
ing if we were to proceed. 
MR. POTTER.  No, I don™t think so. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

MS. LOGAN. 
We™re currently purchasing about a third of gross issuance.  That number 
is going to go up to 60 to 75 percent, depending on which option the Committee chooses. 
MR. FISHER.  Right, s
o that is not affected by
Š MS. LOGAN
.  The reduction that the GSEs are doing is happening 
in more than just 
TBAs
; they™re reducing in other types of securities 
as well
.  So I would think that number is 
probably fairly small.  In terms of the total amount outstanding, we™re currently going to have 

about 18 percent of the MBS, and that would move to about 25 percent. 
       
    
   
      
             
         
        
    
   
 MR. FISHER.  Okay
, thank you.
  And just an observation, if you look at your 
panel
 5 and
, particularly
, the high-
yield 
spread 
on panel
 6, things obviously are going our way.  T
his is 
what we would like to see, as well as the equity price response.  What doesn™t seem to be going 
our wayŠand I only point it out as an offset, even though it™s a short time horizonŠ
is 
it seems 

that the 
breakeven 
inflation rates
Šwhether it™s the 
5-year
, 5-year forward
; the 
5-year
; the 
10-year, which is not on this chartŠbottomed in the spring of this year, and the slope is upward.  

We can talk
, perhaps
, later.  I don™t know if we™ve done an LSAP-
type program in a context 
of 
rising inflation expectations or 
not. I think there was at least a 
chart in the 
Teal
book that would 
indicate we haven™t done one yet under those circumstances. 
But I just point out, Mr. Chairman, that if you draw 
a line from the bottom of the 5-
year 
rate, it really bottomed out in the summer of 2011 and has been on the rise. I™m not saying it™s 

dangerous, and it may be something that we would like to encourage, 
or some at this table would 

like to encourage, but we do have rising inflation expectations.  And to say inflation expectations 

are contained
Šwe might think about how we want to phrase that as we get down to the policy 
statement of tomorrow. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I™m not sure I take the same inference.  The 5-
by-5 
is pretty 
flat and is lower than it was last year. 
MR. FISHER.  
And 
the 
5-
year? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  At
 the margin, and the 5-year is obviously being affected by 
the oil price movements. 
MR. FISHER.  And the 
10-year also is not on this chart, and then gold prices, of course, 
have increased significantly
, for those 
who 
care about that ancient relic. 
       
      
           
           
                
   
            
  
                                                     MR. POTTER. It is true that the deflation risk we can calculate is lower than it was in 
2010. MR. FISHER.  Right.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questi
ons for Simon? [No response] 
Okay.  Seeing 
none, we need to vote to ratify domestic open market operations since August.  
Without 

objection?  Okay.  Our next item is the economic and financial situation, and David Wilcox and 

his colleagues will make that
 presentation. 
MR. WILCOX.
3  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think there should be a single 
summary exhibit. 
You all may be relieved to know that my prepared text includes 
1,192 words, and I do not plan to ad lib an additional 2,000 words into my delivery.  
[Laughter] 
As you can see from the upper-
left panel of the forecast summary exhibit, the 
near
-term outlook for real GDP growth in last week™s edition of the Tealbook is 
broadly similar to the one that we sent you in July.  To be sure, the July gain in real 

PCE was better than we had expected.  However, consumer sentiment
Šshown in the 
lower
-left panel
Šhas remained downbeat, job gains have been modest, and the price 
of gasoline has moved back up, all of which caused us to largely discount the 

favorable spending news.  Similarly, July shipments of capital goods were stronger 

than we had expected, but forward-looking indicators, including the continued decline 

in the capital goods orders data, as well as the subdued responses to various surveys 

on capital spending plans and business conditions, are consistent with only subdued 

near
-term increases in business outlays.  If you squint hard at the upper-
left panel, 
you will detect that we shifted a little GDP growth from the second half of this year 

into the first half of next, reflecting our assessment that the drought will depress farm 

output in the second half of this year by more than we had predicted in July. 
The one component of aggregate demand that has seemed to have been on a 
somewhat stronger trajectory relative to our expectation in the July Tealbook was net 

exports.  Even so, last week™s forecast called for GDP growth to average just 

1.8 percent through the middle of next year, about in line with our prediction for the 

growth of potential over this period. 
Since the Tealbook closed, the main piece of economic news was last Friday™s 
employment report.  In a seeming exception to Dave Stockton™s famous description 

of the usual shelf-
life of t
he staff economic forecast, our jar of mayonnaise survived 
its first 48 hours in the Mojave Desert with only relatively minor signs of spoilage.  

[Laughter]
  The red line in the bottom-right panel summarizes our effort to combine 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wilcox are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
          
       
                                   
      
   
 the signals from the estab
lishment and household surveys (the latter of which is not 
shown on the chart because it is so noisy compared 
with the establishment results), 

and to control for weather effects and recession-
related seasonal adjustment 
distortions.  As you can see from the downward tilt toward the end of that line, the 

estimated underlying pace of private payroll employment growth has trended lower 

over the course of this year and now 
is 
at the low end of the range that it has occupied 
during the past 2½ years.  The unempl
oyment rate unexpectedly declined 
0.2 percentage point, but like many other analysts, we have been inclined to see more 

weakness than strength in the totality of the results from the household survey, given 

that the employment measure from that survey and 
the participation rate both 
declined.  Based on our projected path for real GDP over the next several quarters, we 

continue to expect the unemployment rate to average around 8¼ percent through the 

first half of next year.  I should also note that the workweek was lower than we had 

expected, and average hourly earnings were flat
, rather than increasing slightly as we 
had expected.  In combination, these results suggest a modestly weaker trajectory for 

compensation and
, therefore,
 household spending than we had factored into the 
Tealbook. 
Two other key pieces of information released since the Tealbook were also 
weaker than expected.  In particular, vehicle assembly plans now point to a slower 

pace of motor vehicle production in the third and fourth quarters th
an we had 

projected in the Tealbook, whileŠ
as Steve will discuss shortly
Šthe latest foreign 
trade data were slightly to the soft side of our expectations in terms of the
ir implications for GDP growth. 
In all, these bits of information would cause us to shave about ¼ percentage point 
off our forecast for the pace of real GDP growth during the second half of this year, 

leaving our forecasted average growth rate for this quarter and next at an anemic 

1¼ percent. 
Turning to the medium term, we upgraded our outlook slightly relative to our July 
projection.  As Steve will discuss, the improvement, such as it is, partly reflects a 

somewhat less worrisome situation in Europe than we had previously believed.  As 

we described in the Tealbook, even after factoring in the disappointment that we think 

would ensue from an announcement of no change in the stance of monetary policy at 

the conclusion of this meeting, we judge that stock prices would remain on a slightly 

higher trajectory and the dollar would be slightly weaker than we assumed in the 

previous projection.  These small positive influences are only partly offset by the 

increase in oil prices, part of which may itself reflect the improvement in sentiment 

related to the crisis in Europe. 
The small upward revision 
to real GDP over the medium term led us to shave a 
little off of our projected path for the unemployment rate, which is shown in the top-

right panel of the exhibit.  Even by the end of next year, however, we expect no 

significant reduction in the unemploy
ment rate. As real GDP accelerates more into 
2014, the unemployment rate declines about ½ percentage point, ending that year at 

about 7½ 
percent. 
         
    
    
     
         
   
   
     
         
     
       
    
  
  Aside from the crisis in Europe, the other main concern that continues to loom 
over the domestic outlook is the fiscal cliff.  On this front, there have been no major 

developments recently, and we continue to expect none, 
at least through the 

November elections.  At this stage, I can only assure you that our decision to stand 

pat on our fiscal policy assumptions reflects no lack of concern or uncertainty on our 

part:  The fiscal cliff continues to figure prominently in our thinking as a serious 

threa
t to the still
-anemic recovery. 
Turning to the inflation outlook, the incoming data on core PCE price inflationŠ 
the 
middle
-right panel
Šhave been close to our expectations.  We continue to project 
that core inflation will hold steady at about 1½ percent through the end of 2014, 

reflecting anchored inflation expectations, a persistent margin of labor and product 

market sl
ack, and modest gains in imported goods prices. 
In response to the upward move in spot prices for crude oil since the July 
Tealbook, we have marked up our near-
term projection for headline PCE inflation
Š the middle
-left panel.  We have, however, made only small revisions to our near-
term 
food price forecast.  Although we now expect the quantity effects of the drought to be 

worse than we had forecast in July, the futures prices that we used in preparing our 

July food price projection had apparently already in
corporated almost all of the price 

effects.  Despite the upward pressure from food prices that we think will begin to 

show through around the end of this year, we expect headline inflation to step down 

slightly in the first part of next year, as the antici
pated reduction in crude oil prices 

implied by futures markets pushes down retail energy prices.  Steve will now 

continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.  In 1972, when Chinese Prime Minister Zhou Enl
ai was asked what 
he thought was the historic impact of the 
French 
Revolution, he famously answered: 
ﬁIt™s too soon to tell.ﬂ 
[Laughter] 
By those standards, assessing the implications of 
the European Central Bank™s plans to intervene in peripheral debt markets would 

seem hopelessly premature.  And yet, as Simon has described, anticipations of 

aggressive ECB action have substantially calmed European financial markets, slightly 

brightening an admittedly still
-cloudy outlook. 
As described in its announcement last week, the ECB plans to purchase sovereign 
debt on the secondary market, provided that the beneficiary governments enter into an 

arrangement with the region™s financial backstop facilities and agree to policy 

conditionality.  Although the ECB will be announcing neither a target ceiling for 

yields on peripheral debt nor the amounts it intends to purchase, it has signaled a 

more aggressive and sustained program than its earlier forays into bond markets. 
Beyond simply comforting investors that the ECB is riding to the rescue, these 
plans could ease financial stre
sses in a number of ways.  First, by lowering yields, the 

bond purchases would reduce public debt service burdens and improve fiscal 

sustainability.  Second, and as a related matter, by taking sovereign bonds out of the 

hands of private investors, ECB purchases may create room in those investors™ 

portfolios for new issues, thereby improving the governments™ access to financing.  
          
  
           
                 
   
   
         
                     
  
    Finally, the package of ECB purchases
, plus access to the regional financial backstop 
facilities
, is widely anticipated to involve less stringent conditionality, and thus less 
stigma, than the full
-blown IMF and EU rescue packages received by Greece, Ireland, 
and Portugal.  In consequence, it is more likely, though far from certain, that Spain 

and/or Italy may request financial assistance before market conditions have become 

so adverse that further financial turmoil is inevitable. 
With markets figuring in brighter prospects for official support, financial stresses 
over the next several months are likely to be less pronounced than we assumed in the 

July Tealbook, and we are anticipating that, barring further adverse shocks, European 

markets could soon begin the long, slow process of normalization.  However, we are 

still very far from being out of the woods.  In the near term, European l
eaders still 
need to work out the conditionality to be required of governments benefi
ting from the 
financial rescue facilities and ECB intervention, and that could be contentious.  

Additionally, IMF and EU officials are currently assessing the status of Gr
eece™s 
struggling adjustment programŠalthough Greece™s official creditors are expected to 

approve a much
-needed disbursement by October and postpone more difficult 
decisions until later, this is not assured, and a messy Greek exit from the euro area at 

this time could be quite dangerous. 
Taking a longer view, the ECB™s new program is not, to 
coin a phrase, a panacea. 
It can only give Europe breathing space to implement the fundamental reforms that 

will ultimately restore confidence.  If the Europeans do not make progress on the 

measures needed to achieve fiscal and financial stability
Šbudget consolidation, 
growth
-promoting structural reforms, and region-
wide banking initiatives
Šthe 
ECB™s ability to contain financial tensions will be sorely tested.  Accordin
gly, market 
confidence likely will not be fully restored until the peripheral economies prove they 

can cut their budgets, improve growth prospects, and strengthen their banksŠ
and all 

that could take a number of years. 
In consequence, economic activity in Europe is also likely to remain subdued for 
some time to come.  To be sure, the easing of financial stresses, combined with some 

data that have been less bleak than expected, have led us to project a somewhat 

shallower recession than we wrote down in the July Tealbook.  Even so, in our 

current projection, euro-area GDP continues to contract through the middle of next 

year and recovers only very weakly thereafter. 
The outlook for our other trading partners, while hardly as bleak as that for 
Europe, is nonetheless subdued.  Excluding the euro area, aggregate foreign growth 

dropped from roughly 4 percent in the first quarter to 
less than
 3 percent in the 
second, below its trend pace.  Moreover, since your last meeting, indicators such as 

PMIs and exports have ge
ner
ally come in on the soft side. 
These developments are worrisome, but considering the factors responsible for 
the slowdown, our best guess is that 
economic 
growth will bottom out in the coming 
quarters rather than deteriorate further.  The pace of 
deterioration in Europe, which 
accounts for much of the United Kingdom
™s stagnation this year, as well as the 
             
                               
              
                    slowdown in Asia™s exports, is projected to become only a little more pronounced in 

the second half of this year.  The recent weakness in U.S. growth has also weighed on 

our trading partners, but the U.S. economy should start picking up a few quarters 

down the road.  And much of Asia™s slowdown reflects the fading of the bounceback 

from Thailand™s floods and Japan™s tsunami last year.  All told, we 
anticipate that 
foreign growth outside the euro area will stay subdued at 3 percent over the remainder 

of this year.  It then picks up to 3¾ percent by 2014, as the euro area starts to recover, 

the U.S. economy picks up steam, and monetary policies around 
the world remain 

quite accommodative. 
Another factor weighing on foreign growth, especially in Asia, has been China™s 
slowdown from near double-digit rates in the past two years.  Chinese growth 

registered 7½ percent in the second quarter of this year.  With recent weak exports 

and PMIs leading us to revise down our forecast, we see growth remaining at that 

relatively subdued pace during the remainder of this year, before picking up to about 

8 percent thereafter. Under these circumstances, we continue to s
crutinize the data 
for indications of a hard landing, but we do not see any compelling signs that one is in 

the offing: 
 Retail sales growth has remained reasonably solid, housing prices have 

flattened out, and the government retains the monetary and fiscal scope to counter a 

decline in demand. 
The effect on oil prices of resurgent political tensions over Iran poses another 
threat to the global economy.  Crude oil prices have now retraced more than half of 

their decline from earlier this year, and our curre
nt projected trajectory of oil prices 
averages roughly 10 percent higher than in the July Tealbook.  A rise in oil prices of 

this magnitude should not substantially affect the foreign outlook.  By our rough 

estimates, it could reduce 
economic 
growth in the advanced economies by 
0.1 percentage point over the next year or so, while the effect on aggregate emerging 

markets growth is roughly a wash
, as gains by oil exporters offset losses by importers.  

By the same token, our inflation outlook is a bit higher i
n the near term but little 
changed further out.  However, no resolution of the problem of Iran™s nuclear 

program is in sight, and we are attuned to the risk of much steeper rises in oil prices. 
All told, considering the momentous developments taking place 
in the global 
economyŠMario Draghi™s plan to save the euro, China™s struggle to achieve a soft 

landing, and 
fluctu
ations in commodity marketsŠthe outlook for U.S. trade is, well, 
not so momentous.  In the first half of this year, notwithstanding the global slowdown 

and the rising dollar, net exports managed to eke out a 
small 
positive contribution to 
U.S. GDP growth.  We received trade data for July yesterday; both exports and 

imports fell, but the trade balance was little changed.  Accordingly, we retain o
ur 
view that for the next couple of quarters, the combination of slowing foreign growth, 

a still
-elevated dollar, and the effects of the drought on agricultural production leads 

to some moderation in export growth, and the external sector imposes a modest 
drag 
on the economy.  After that, net exports gradually shift back toward neutral, as the 

global economy picks up and European stresses subside, so that a reversal of flight-

to-safety flows allows the dollar to start depreciating.  Thanks to Mr. Draghi, th
is 
projection is based on a somewhat lower path of the dollar than in the July Tealbook, 
         
  
      
                     
   
                   
                                                         and thus a bit faster export growth and less drag from net exports.  Andreas will 

continue our presentation. 
MR. LEHNERT.
4 I™ll be discussing material from our recent 
QS report 
on financial stability 
and from an earlier memo on the effect of low interest rates.  In our 
report, the most prominent shocks we identified were an intensification of the 

European sovereign crisis and a U.S. recession, perhaps brought on by a s
uboptimal 
resolution of the ﬁfiscal cliff.ﬂ  The major vulnerabilities we highlighted were, first, 

the market™s perception that some large banks remain weak, despite substantial 

increases in capital and liquidity, which raises the likelihood of funding runs and 

increases the cost of raising capital; second, the unstable funding model of brokerŒ 

dealers
; and, third, the persistent risk of runs on money market funds. 
We have also placed increasing emphasis on vulnerabilities stemming from the 
low interest rate 
environment, and that™s what I™ll focus on today.  After all, long-
term Treasury yields haven™t been below 2.5 percent for a sustained period since 

1954, a time when the financial system was quite different. 
A low short-
term interest rate policy, given st
rained household and business 
fundamentals, is designed to improve macro performance.  The benefits arise, in part, 

from increases in asset prices and
, thus, the value of collateral held by businesses and 
households.  These increases should, in turn, enhan
ce financial stability. 
But a low 
rate environment could lead investors trying to boost yields to borrow too much, take 

on too much risk, or bid up asset prices enough to stretch valuations.  Relatedly, 

important parts of the financial system might become
 vulne
rable to a rapid rise in 
rates. 
To assess these risks, we surveyed a wide range of asset markets and financial 
institutions looking for signs of excessive valuations, greater leverage, 
or increased 

risk
-taking.  To summarize, we found little evidence that the low rate environment 
has fostered additional vulnerabilities to date: 
 Valuations for broad asset classes are 
not stretched
, and we identified only a few isolated pockets of increased 
risk
-taking. 
As shown by the top panel on your first exhibit, 
estimated term premiums 
for 
10-year Treasury yields are quite low, due in part to safe-haven demand for 

Treasuries resulting from strains in Europe.  Term 
premiums
Šand thus Treasury 
yields
Šcould increase quickly if, for example, concerns about the U.S. fis
cal situation were to intensify. 
Your next three panels cover valuations in three major U.S. asset classes: 
equities, residential real estate
, and corporate bonds.  Overall, valuations across these 
asset classes show little sign of pressure.  As shown in the middle left, stocks are not 

trading at unusually high multiples; indeed, forward price-
earnings ratios are 
generally well within their ranges over the past 20 years.  Our measure of residential 

real estate valuation, shown to the right, is near an all-
time low.  Risk premiums
 in 
4 The materials used by Mr. Lehnert are appended to this transcript (appendix 4). 
       
           
                   
              
  
        
       the high-
yield corporate bond market
Šas measured by the implied forward spread far 
out in the future (the black line in the bottom-
left panel)
Šare near their average of 
the past 20 years, notwithstanding the extraordinary highs 
experience
d during the 
financial crisis. 
However, valuations of assets in narrower and less-liquid markets have shown 
signs of pressure. Issuance of so
-called leveraged loans has been robust this year.  
Moreover, there is a trend toward lighter use of loa
n covenants and increased 
leverage.  As shown to the right, average ratios of debt to earningsŠknown as a debt 

multiple
Šamong this class increased further this year, although it remains below its 
pre
-crisis levels. 
Your next exhibit considers evidence on l
everage and 
risk
-taking
.  In the 
nonfinancial sector, as shown by the pink and blue regions in the top panel, household 

and business leverage has continued the decline begun in the recession.  Government 

borrowing, by contrast, has picked up, leaving the ratio of debt held by the public to 

GDP at its highest level since W
orld W
ar II. 
As shown in the middle two panels, there are signs that, potentially, commercial 
banks are taking increased interest rate risk.  Banks have increased their holdings of 

long-
mat
urity securities. As a result, their portfolios may be more sensitive to a 
sudden rise in interest rates than they were a year ago, depending on their interest rate 

hedges.  The low interest rate environment, combined with an unlimited FDIC 

guarantee on transactions accounts, has attracted a surge of deposits to banks.  The 

ability to issue deposits at below
-market rates should benefit banks were rates to rise; 
however, we don™t have historical experience to judge the sensitivity of these new 

deposits to a rise in rates.  That said, as discussed in the Tealbook, results from a 

recent informal survey of banks suggested they did not think it was likely that 

deposits would decline rapidly when the added insurance expires.  We™re currently 

working with economists and supervisors from throughout the Federal Reserve 

System on an analysis of interest rate risk at banks and plan to include the results in 

our December report. 
Life insurance companies are vulnerable to extended periods of low interest rates, 
in part b
ecause they have a significant body of liabilities with guaranteed returns that 

exceed current yields on safe assets.  As a consequence, insurers may be feeling 

particular pressure to reach for yield by extending their exposure to duration and 

credit risk. 
Indeed, as shown in the bottom left, the average maturity of insurers™ 
bond portfolios has risen in recent years, as firms accept greater duration risk.  

However, the shift isn™t particularly dramatic, and we are working with colleagues 

here and at the F
ederal Reserve Bank of Chicago to understand the risks faced by, and 
posed by, these institutions. 
The panel to the right shows the rapid rise in assets of real estate investment 
trusts
ŠREITs
Šthat specialize in holding agency-
guaranteed mortgage
-backed 
sec
urities.  While these institutions are something of a niche player, their business 

model of funding agency MBS holdings with repo, while vulnerable to sharp rate 
            
    
                 
      
            
     
        
  
     
   
  
   
                                                   rises, has proved quite profitable in recent years, producing double-
digit returns for 
shareho
lders.  This growth is one of the clearest indications we have of the 
willingness of some investors to take on additional interest rate risk in order to earn 

higher current returns.  This willingness may be enhanced by the apparent safety of 

investing in G
SE-guaranteed securities. In terms of their systemic threat, at their 
current scale, the sudden distress of mortgage REITs would likely be painful but 

manageable for the broader financial system. 
I™ll conclude with a less quantifiable form of risk produced by the low 
interest 
rate 
environment, related to a sense that a great deal of money is sitting on the sidelines.  

Consider two examples:  First, respondents to the SCOOS report that their clients 

have significant unused borrowing capacity; and second, pr
ivate equity firms focused 
on leveraged buyouts have elevated levels of committed but uninvested capital.  
All 

of this and more amounts to ﬁdry powderﬂ that could be deployed quickly.  Thus, 

while our ongoing monitoring efforts have so far found little evi
dence that the low 
interest rate environment has led to excessive increases in leverage, asset valuation
, or 
risk
-taking, investors do have the means to rapidly shift their portfolios.  Ed Nelson 
will continue our presentation. 
MR. NELSON.
5 I will be referring to the packet 
labeled ﬁMaterial for Briefing 
on the Summary of Economic Projections.ﬂ 
As shown in the top panel of exhibit 1, under your individual assessments of 
appropriate monetary policy, you see real GDP expanding only moderately t
his year
, but you expect the pace of the recovery to pick up next year and that economic 

growth in 2014 and 2015 will be somewhat above its longer-run value.  

Correspondingly, you expect the unemployment rate, shown in the second panel, to 

stay near recent readings for the rest of the year
, before gradually declining over the 
subsequent three years.  All of you expect that the unemployment rate at the end of 

2015 will be appreciably below its present rate; nevertheless, almost all of you expect 

it to be above what you judge to be its longer-run normal level.  Turning to the 

bottom two panels, you generally expect total PCE inflation of around 1¾ percent 

over the four quarters of 2012.  For 2013 through 2015, you generally see core and 

overall inflation stayi
ng close to or slightly below your 2 percent inflation objective. 
Exhibit 2 tabulates the ranges and the central tendencies of your projections, 
along with comparisons to the June SEP and the current staff forecast.  Compared 

with your June projections, you now anticipate a slightly stronger recovery and a 

somewhat larger decline in the unemployment rate over the projection period.  Your 

inflation outlook is little changed.  The Tealbook forecastŠwhich embeds the 

assumption of no additional accommodationŠputs economic growth in 2013 and 

2014 at the lower end of your central tendency, and the unemployment rate above it; 

the 2015 forecasts, however, are within the central tendency.  The Tealbook forecast 

for inflation runs consistently below your central tendencies for 2013 to 2015. 
5 The materials used b
y Mr. Nelson are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
                   
             
     
     
       
   
      
     
               
        
          
  Exhibit 3 provides an overview of your assessments of the appropriate path for 
the federal funds rate.  As shown in the top panel, most of you think that it will not be 

appropriate to begin raising the funds rate until 2014 or later.  About two-
thirds of 
you now see firming only beginning in 2015 or 2016, compared with about one-third 

of you in June.  Four of youŠtwo fewer than in JuneŠ
now believe that economic 

conditions will warrant increasing the federal funds rate before 2014.  Two of you 

favoring a funds rate increase before 2014 cited the need to tighten policy relatively 

soon in order to prevent inflation from exceeding the Committee™s 2 
percent 

objective, and two pointed to the need to forestall financial imbalances.  Many of 

those who would not raise the funds rate until 2014 or later cited sizable output or 

unemployment gaps alongside an inflation profile unlikely to exceed 2 percent over 

the medium run. 
The bottom two panels of the exhibit provide your assessments of the app
ropriate 
target for the federal funds rate at the end of each year of the forecast period and over 

the longer run.  For the 6 participants who 
see the funds rate leaving the effective 

lower bound in 2014 
or earlier
, the median value for 
the funds rate at 
the end of 2014 
is 
1.75 percent.  The 12 participants who expect that the funds rate will not leave the 

lower bound until 2015 judge that the appropriate funds rate at the end of that year 

will be 1.6 percent or less, while the 1 
participant who sees the st
art of firming in 
2016 sees the funds rate at 75 basis points at the end of that year (not shown). 
Fourteen of you now judge that ﬁappropriate monetary policyﬂ calls for a more 
accommodative path for the federal funds rate than in your June SEP, involving 
either 
a lower target for the funds rate at the end of the initial year of firming or a shift out 

in the first year of firming.  Moreover, 11 of you indicated that appropriate policy 

calls for additional asset purchases
, at this meeting or before long. 
Exhibit 4 depicts the economic conditions that you anticipate for the year in 
which you expect the first funds rate increase. Your projected unemployment rates 

range from about 5¾ to 8 percent, with a median of 6½ percent, while your inflation 

projections 
are in a narrow range of roughly 1¾ to 2¼ percent, with a median rate of 
2 percent.  Generally, participants who expect the first funds rate increase in
 2012 or 2013 (shown by the 
blue triangle and 
white diamonds) see a higher level of 
unemployment at the time of 
the first funds rate increase
 than do those reporting later 
firming
 dates (shown by the gray circles, dark blue squares, and 
the 
gray triangle
). The final exhibit reviews your assessments of the uncertainty and risks 
surrounding your economic projections.  As shown in the top two panels in the 

column on the left, almost all of you continue to indicate that you judge the current 

level of uncertainty about GDP growth and unemployment to be higher than the 

average level over the past 20 years.  The co
rresponding panels to the right indicate 
that you continue to view the risks to GDP growth as weighted toward the downside 

and, accordingly, the risks to unemployment as weighted to the upside.  Many of you 

attributed your continued emphasis on downside growth risks to concerns about 

Europe and U.S. fiscal policy; other factors cited included uncertainty about the level 

and growth rate of potential output and the possibility of a hard landing in China.  
      
  
  
    
     
    
                                Turning to the bottom two panels, 8 of you assess the uncertainty attending your 

projections for total PCE inflation as higher, and another 10 of you see the 

uncertainty as broadly similar to the average level of uncertainty over the past 

two
 decades.  Most of you continue to see the risks to inflation, shown 
to the right, as 
broadly balanced.  Thank you.  That concludes the staff presentations. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much for your presentation.  The floor is 
open for questions.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Wilcox, the lower right-
hand panel 
displays a model estimate, and I 
was wondering what it™s an estimate of. 
MR. WILCOX. It™s a statistical exercise that tries to combine several different sources of 
information.  First and most broadly, it combines the payroll survey estimate of job gain with an 
adjusted measure from the household survey, 
where the adjustments
Š MR. LACKER.  Have been comparable. 

MR. WILCOX.  Štry to take the household measure and do about a dozen or 
15 adjustments that put it on
, as conceptually 
as possible, 
an apples
-to-apples basis with the 
establishment survey. 
The second category of information that it builds in is that we had one of our seasonal 
adjustment experts, Charlie Gilbert, take a close look at this series, specifically with a question in 

mind of trying to disc
ern effects on seasonal factors that stem from the timing of the sharp 
downdraft in employment in 2008 
and
 2009, and to advise us on the extent to which those timing 
effects may have bled into seasonal factors
, causing published estimates of seasonally adjusted 
job growth around the turn of the year to be systematically higher than they should actually be. 
The third type of information that™s built in is a regression
-based analysis of weather 
effects.  It seems like a dim memory at this point, but we had, a
s you will recall, an 
extraordinarily warm winter this year, and there was some speculation that that may have shifted 

the timing of employment.  Those weather
-related effects are pretty small, but they™re included 
           
    
                    
       
       
     here
, as well
, for the sake of completeness.  And then around all of that, what we do is just apply 
a simple 
Kalman 
filter to the resulting series in an effort to extract for you where we think all this 
statistical evidence would point in terms of what™s the best available estimate of job gain
, taking 
account of all that information that™s available to us. So it™s
, at some level
, nothing more than a 
statistical exercise to try to extract signal from noise.  On the other hand, it packs in a 
tremendous amount of information. 
MR. LACKER.  Those all sound like very useful and constructive statistical initiatives.  I 
just wondered what the target you were aiming at trying to estimate is. I mean, is it the trend or 

the current value? 
MR. WILCOX. It™s essentially a smooth
ed trend that takes account of both the 
information in the establishment survey and the household survey.  I mean, I could reiterate: 
It takes account of that
; it tries to adjust for weather and 
seasonal
Š MR. LACKER.  You™re aiming at a true measure of the cu
rrent gain
, or a true measure of 
the trend? 
MR. WILCOX.  True measure of the current gain, smoothing through 
a variety of 
sources of noise. 
MR. LACKER.  A smooth measure of the current gain.  I™m less confused now. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You™re confused at a 
higher level. President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I actually drove back from our western 
symposium this year with two geriatric dogs and other things, but I want to comment on the fact 

that driving across the s
tate of Nebraska, what
 struck me was the drought and the corn crops and 
just how dead the entire s
tate of Nebraska looked
, at least from Interstate 80. 
       
                                 You made some reference to the drought and the corn crop, and I remember reading 
somewhere
ŠI couldn™t find it in my searchingŠabout your estimated effects of the drought on 
GDP this quarter and next.  And I™d like to hear you talk a little more about what you think those 

effects were
; the ramifications of those effects, of how they bleed, in some sense, through in your 

forecast t
o your employment forecast, for example, through an Okun™s l
aw measure because 
GDP is lower
; how much impact you thought it had on the gap in the near term; and how that 
dissipates through your forecast.  Can you just walk me through those linkagesŠt
his is clearly a 
classic supply shock of 
a dr
oughtŠand how much then it feeds into other things that matter that 
we look at a lot for monetary policy? 
MR. WILCOX.  So I™ll take a first crack at it and invite my other colleagues to jump in 
with additional i
nformation.  We thought in July we had built in some quantity-
related effects
Š about $10 billion is my recollectionŠon farm output.  This time, based on USDA assessments of 

field conditionsŠ
people may be doing something a little more systematic, out walking
 in the 
fields with their clipboard and so forth to look at corn yields
; corn is one of the crops that is most 
affected
Šwe think that it™s about a $30 billion hit to real farm output this time, so substantially 
bigger than what we had built into the July projection. 
We think that that™s likely to show up mostly in a decumulation of inventories in the third 
and fourth quarters.  The way that inventory arithmetic works, the hit to GDP growth is going to 

be concentrated in the third quarter.  We™ve got the same rate of inventory decumulation built 

into the fourth quarter, but because it™s the same rate of decumulation in both quarters, the 
effect 
on GDP growth 
we™ve penciled in 
is zero in the fourth quarter.  
We also think there will be a 
small additional negative effect on agricultural exports as well, so that™s where in terms of the 

GDP accounting
Š        
       
   
                       
   
  
                    
MR. PLOSSER.  And that led to how much of a decrease in your estimate of 
GDP growth for the third quarter? 
MR. WILCOX.  About 0.8 
percent
age point o
n GDP growth
. MR. PLOSSER. 
Yes, 0.8 
percent
age point.  That™s what I thought 
I remembered. 
MR. WILCOX.  We thinkŠwe hopeŠthat™s going to be a transitory supply shock and 
that next year
, our planning assumption has been, crop yields are going to come back to normal.  
Now, there™s sort of a philosophical question about when that actually occurs.  If we were 
operating 
in annual data, it would be perfectly clear that it would happen in 2013.  
However
, the 
way that the BEA does it, and we™ve been in very close contact with them, is 
to smooth that 
through the four quarters of the calendar year, so that snap back to normal crop yields, 
basically 

at this point, of course, by assumption, occurs in the firs
t quarter. 
So we™re mimicking 
the 
BEA™s algorithm in packing in the return to a normal level of GDP in the first quarter of 2013.  

That™s not based on any pretense that anybody actually knows that that™s the way the corn plants 

are going to grow in 2013.  
That™s just the 
BEA 
methodology.  I wouldn™t have anything better to 
suggest to them if I were in their shoes. 
Now, farm proprietors™ income actually sees a much smaller effect because prices are up 
and there™s crop insurance, and so the implications for 
nominal farm income are much less 
severe than they are for real output. 
We think that there™s likely to be very little effect on 
employment because we™ve made the assumption that employers are going to smooth through 

this transitory effect.  I wouldn™t be surprised, of course, if there was some effect on things like 

farm equipment manufacturers and that sort of thing, but I think that™s going to be lost in the 

noise in terms of our ability to actually 
estimate it. 
       
                               
   
   MR. PLOSSER.  So this wouldn™t show up in 
any sense on your estimates of the 
magnitude of your output gap over the next two quarters? 
Would you raise that? 
MR. WILCOX.  M
echanically, I suspect our output gap will be a little wider over the 
second half of this year, and then it will just come back in the first quarter of 2013.  Is that right, 
Bill? 
MR. 
WASCHER
.  Yes, that™s right.  Because we tend to set potential growth on an 
annual basis, we didn™t make an explicit adjustment to the gap measures you see in the Tealbook 

for the effects of the 
drou
ght
.  I would say that in terms of when we look at Okun™s l
aw relationships and thinking about the path of the unemployment rate, 
we did take out the effect of 

the drought from potential in that equation.  So we didn™t want the drought to affect the 

unempl
oyment rate forecast. 

MR. PLOSSER.  Ye
s, that™s kind of what I was trying to get at.  Okay.  Thank you very 
much. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  One minor place it might show up, because we didn™t do the 
adjustment, would be in the Tealbook 
B rules thing. It™s pretty small, but the 
rules
 would 
respond to that. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Did I just understand correctly that you removed the effect of the 
drought on the gap, the unemployment rate gap? 
MR. WILCOX.  In our Okun™s l
aw analysis, in setting the unemployment rate. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It will bounce right back. 

MR. WILCOX.  I™m sorry? 
                           
               
    VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  The effects are just going to go away in two quarters. 
MR. WILCOX. It is a transitory effect.  The fu
nds rate is constrained at zero.  So it 
doesn™t have any implication for the funds rate.  And in terms of calibrating the response of the 

unemployment rate to the GDP gap, we sterilized the GDP gap from transitory dro
ught
-related 
effects on GDP. 
MR. LACKER
.  Okay.  So let me just ask the question for which 
this is most germane
Š do inflation dynamics depend on this adjustment? 
MR. WILCOX. 
I think we™re talking about splitting a micron here, butŠ 
MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, but I™m just very curious about the principle here. 
MR. WILCOX.  The methodology is intended precisely to seal off the implications for 
core inflation.  I should say, of course, 
the first
-order implication for inflation is through food 
prices. 
MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, right, righ
t. MR. WILCOX.  That has been allowed to feed through. 

MR. LACKER.  Right.  But in terms of the gap™s effect on inflation, you want to sterilize 
it from the effect that the dr
ought is going to have on real output and employment in a 
year 
or 
two. 
MR. WILCOX
.  Correct, y
es. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question for Andreas.  
On exhibit 2, you have 
this chart that looks at nonfinancial sector credit to GDP.  
I keep staring at it, and I am still trying 
to figure out what implications I™m supposed to draw from it.  The secular uptrend from 1956, at 
          
      
              
       
                   
best
, flattens out for a while
.  So the first question is what implication do you think we were 
supposed to draw from this
?  And, second, if you looked at a char
t of 
nonfin
ancial sector assets 
to GDP, would that also show 
mostly a secular 
uptrend?  And then, how do you put those two 
together? 
MR. LEHNERT.  I think the
re are
 key macro questions that are impli
cated 
by your 
question, which I™m not going to touch, but 
just from a financial stability perspective, at the very 
highest level
, in some sense, financial stability concerns in a low-
rate environment arise when 
you see people and businesses borrowing more.  This picture was just supposed to 
be an easy 
way 
to portray the fact that we™re not seeing households and businesses borrowing more. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Right.  We could 
also interpret it as, gee, credit to GDP 
is still really, really high
, and
, therefore, that means bad things.  That is what I was sort of 
getting 
at. 
So you don™t take a negative signal away at all from the total level of credit to GDP is still 
high? 
MR. LEHNERT.  Ye
s, okay.  I treated that as a separate question.  So then there™s a 
question, are we approaching some kind of 
fiscal moment
, some sort of S
argent
Wallace 
moment, where the global carrying capacity for U.S. sovereign obligations is being reached? 

That™s something that we highlighted in our report as a potential risk.  
If there™s 
a material 
worsening in the fiscal outlook, 
or if 
there™s some really ugly resolution to the debt ceiling 

negotiations in January and so forth, all those things could have negative implications for future 

stability. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But the total level here, if you add household, business, 
and government together, that™s not a good sign. 
MR. LEHNERT.  If you look across countr
ies
, you would see a lot of different 
levels. 
           
          
   
  
      
    
   
           
    
     
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
They™re 
all over the place. 
MR. LEHNERT
.  Exactly.  So I don™t know why Denmark is one and Japan i
s a different 
one, but we can just judge the 
United States
 by its own history. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  First, I wanted to thank Andreas for a very good summary
, very helpful 
graphics
, and so on.  We™re in the middle of doing our 
SABR
 analysis for banks, and one of the 
positive attributes we have noticed is that we seem to be seeing a brighter picture for the average 

bank.  For example, the ones that we rate one or two probably are performing 
the best that we™ve 
seen in terms of the percentage of potential 
downgrades since December of 2006.  So I think 
that™s one positive aspect that wasn™t included.  I™m not being critical, but when you look at your 

second panel of long-
term securities held by comm
ercial banks and so on, there seems to be a 
healthier tenor, and we™re not done with the analysis yet, but I just wanted to point that out. 
With regard to seasonality, I wanted to ask Dave Wilcox about the August employment 
numbers; I think I™m correct in 
saying that that is a number that gets revised more frequently 

than others.  I think 17 of the last 22 years, i
t™s been revised, and if I remember correctly, last 
year it went from zero to 44,000 to 104,000, and I assume we™re taking account of the fact th
at 
that is often a highly unreliable number.  Am I correct? 
MR. WILCOX.  We™re taking account of the fact that it is the best possible information, 
and we don™t confuse it with truth, absolutely.  [Laughter] 
MR. FISHER.  So we assume it gets revised more o
ften than not? 
MR. WILCOX. 
Yes. 
           
          
   
              
             
  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
The BLS has a 
confidence intervalŠ
the 90 percent 
confidence 
interval is 
plus or minus 100,000.  So that gives you an idea. 
MR. WILCOX.  It™s a sample-
based estimate. It is based on a very large 
sample of 
employers. It™s a universal sample of large employers and a statistically drawn probability 
sample of medium an
d smaller employers, but there are a host of issues associated with 
constructing that number, including the fact that not everybody th
at ultimately will report
, 
reports in the first wave of responses and that seasonal adjustment, as my remarks described 

earlier, involves 
a great deal of science but some art as well.
  So I don™t have any specific reason 
for doubting or casting aspersions on the August number, but you™re absolutely correct that 

month in and month out, that™s a number that is subject to two-sided revision. 
MR. FISHER.  And then lastly, just listening to Steve Kamin, this is perplexing about oil 
and gas 
prices
, and particular
ly prices at the pump.  There may be some seasonality in terms of 
the 
switchover 
that
 occurs, but given the weaker economy, which I think almost all of our 
forecasts have envisioned, and given the production that™s taking place stateside, even 

accounting f
or the storm that took place in the Gulf, it just seems odd that we might expect oil 
prices to increase rather than hold level or decrease.
  And f
or what it™s worth, the ﬁoiliesﬂ that I 
speak to
Šfrom the independents to Tillerson at Exxon and so onŠ
their expectation is that this 
has been a bit of a bulge, and that it™s more likely to settle down and actually decrease somewhat.  

For what it™s 
worth
Šand I always emphasize that because Mr. Tarullo insists that I do so when I 
talk about my anecdotal evidence
ŠI just wanted to pass that on. 
MR. KAMIN
.  Thank you. 
Just to be clear, our baseline forecast for crude oil prices in 
the markets is, indeed, to decline over time from the current level. 
MR. FISHER.  It wasn™t clear the way you presented it.  So I wanted 
to add that. 
      
          
                     
    
  
   
    
   MR. KAMIN
.  Yes.  So just to clarify, what I was alluding to was future upside risks that 
could take place if geopolitical problems in the Middle East became more pronounced than they 
are now. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wanted to come back to the financial 
stability handout, exhibit 2, 
chart
 1, which is ﬁN
onfin
ancial 
Sector 
Credit
-to-GDP Ratio.
ﬂ In 
answer to the earlier question, you said 
that the cross
-country evidence on this was all over the 
map, and that does not gibe with what I understood the cross-country evidence to be, which was 

that this line is basically trending up across the developed economies.  S
o it looks very similar 
actua
lly. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Sorry. I meant the cross-country evidence on the level.  I thought that 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley was asking, is 2.5 a magic number? I mean, this number is much bigger 
in some countries and much smaller in other countries. 
MR. BULLARD.  Oka
y, but the picture would look the same. 
MR. LEHNERT. 
Yes. 
MR. BULLARD. 
It has always been trending up, I guess.  The developed world has 
always been trending up, 
is that right? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
The tricky part about this is if you have a secular trend 
of more intermediation, then this is going to be an upward-trending number, and so the degree of 

intermediation in a financial system really is important in terms of what 
number you 
get. 
               
         
              
    
              MR. BULLARD.  When people showed this picture to me over the year
s, I always said, 
well, this was 
financial market deepening
, and 
good things are happening in the 
intermediation 
sector
.  It didn™t pan out so well later. 
MR. LEHNERT.  Well, and presumably by analogy, 
then
, the fact that it™s 
now falling 
for the household and business sectors 
isŠ MR. BULLARD.  Y
es.  Okay, thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I just 
wanted to make a comment on the 
financial stability report. I continue to find a lot of value in this, and I think particularly as we 

look at these trends 
in a low interest rate environment, I would take no exception to the 
conclusion that right now imbalances are not obvious.  But just thinking back to how we thought 

about land values in the 1980s, in the late 1990s and early 2000s, as we watched banks begin to 

concentrate in commercial real estate and even some of the subprime exposures, the point at 

whi
ch to know when to take signal from some of those things is very difficult, notwithstanding 
supervisors and others 
looking at them.
  So I think as you continue to monitor this, as we get into 
December and beyond
, looking at where these trends are going 
wil
l be 
very important. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Any other questions for our colleagues? 
[No 
response]  Okay.  Seeing none, on the agenda, we have an opportunity for participants who want 

to raise questions or issues related to financial stability
.  And Vice Chairman
, if you™d like to 
start off
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen and I were in B
asel 
over 
the weekend, and I have to say that there was a 
pretty strong sense of unanimity that what the 

ECB did was essentially the best that t
hey could accomplish, given the various constraints under 
                              
   
                 
  
 which 
they were 
operating.  The fact that the purchases could be unlimited means that the 
program has the potential for actually being an effective backstop, and the fact that the ECB will 
be pari p
assu 
with other bondholders is important because it really will reduce the pressures on 
private holders.  
So in effect, 
there may be private holders, if they view this as credible, who will 
actually want to invest in these sovereign instruments for a carry trade because the yield 
curves 

in these countries, 
of course
, are very, very steep. 
There™s also a bit of carrot now to incent proper actions by the government.  So if you do 
the right thing, we will intervene and we will hold down your debt service cost.  And I don™t 

think th
ere was that carrot before
, so I think that™s pretty significant.  I think that the ECB has 

essent
ially put on the table something that could take the risk of an interest rate-debt service-
fiscal deficit spiral a bit off the table as long as the countries do the right thing.
  And in addition, 
if these purchases do, in fact, materialize, I think this does push you in the direction toward 

further fiscal union.  After all, the ECB is backstopped by 
the entire 
euro zone, so such purchases 
will increase the joint and several nature of the union.
  And finally, I thought the other thing that 
was noteworthy abo
ut the ECB action was that it was a 22 to 
1 vote, with only 
Weidmann
 of the 
Bundesbank dissenting.  Given the fact that the German political leadership, 
at least for now
, seems to be supporting the ECB actions, this means that the Bundesbank™s opposition i
s somewhat marginalized at this point. 
So that™s the good news. 
Despite this, I don™t think we should kid ourselves.  I think the situation remains very 
tenuous despite the ECB™s supports.  I™d be, probably, slightly darker than Steve™s comments on 

this.
  Several issues worth highlighting: 
First, the ECB program would only activate if the 
countries actually negotiate an MOU with the 
euro group, and already we™re hearing signs 
that 
Spain seems to be reluctant or slow in terms of pursuing it.  In fact, the Spanish may decide that 
                       
         
       
            the backstop might be e
ffect
ive even if they don™t seek an MOU.  That seems like a highly risky 
strategy, but it is something that they might decide to do.
  Second, the program obviously will 
only continue if they stay on the progra
m. And, third, it™s going to take a while for this all to be 
implemented because the MOU has to be negotiated with the e
uro group
, and all of the finance 
ministers have to agree, and several parliaments actually have to approve the MOU.  So this idea 
that this is going to be happening very, very quicklyŠ
I think the market is probably a little bit 
ahead of itself in terms of how quick
ly this will come into play. 
Other issues
Šthe 
ECB program will not necessarily crowd in investors, because it™s not 
clear how long this is going to last.  So you might buy things, but you still have quite a bit of 

risk.  
You still have a very bad feedback 
loop from the austerity programs to the economy, to 
fiscal performance
, and
 the state of the banking system.  This doesn™t take any of that off the 
table, and there™s still no road map as to where we™re actually going in terms of the ultimate 

destination
:  What does greater fiscal union in Europe look like? 
So this is a very important 
thing that the ECB has done.  I think they did the best that they could possibly do, and the good 

thing is they put the problem back in the lap of the governments, 
where it b
elongs.  They have 
done what they can do now, and now it™s up to the governments to decide, both in the core and in 

the periphery, if 
they™re going to go along. 
The basic model
, though, of this whole situation hasn™t changed.  Countries have to show 
they™r
e on a sustainable path to regain market access.  The core countries are unwilling to be 
explicit about the level of support because of 
fears that this will undermine the effort.  The 
constitutional court decision in Germany today, which was actually mostly positive, affirmed 

that the German commitment is limited to 
•190 billionŠthat™s it, and so that™s sort of 
significant. 
            
     
          
              
  
   
     
 I think the unwillingness of the German Constitutional C
ourt to be explicit does create 
uncertainty that makes progress more difficult.
  So we do still have a long way to go, and we 
don™t have big, solid backstops to absorb shocks or support confiden
ce.  The ESM
ŒEFSF resources are
 still very much too small to credibly backstop Spain and Italy, and the ECB support 
may be too uncertain as t
o its sustainability.  So it™s progress, but there a
re still a lot of questions 
on the table. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you for the financial stability report.  Like President George, 
I do appreciate the monitoring that you™re doing in this area.  I just had two quick questions.  

They both relate to money market funds.  We™ve had an SEC proposal that wasn™t proposed, and 

I was wondering about your perspective looking at Europe, 
where there™s more than
 $1 trillion of 
money market funds 
and 
they have a mix of floating and fixed NAVs.  I don™t know how much 
time you spent looking at the European money market funds, but I™d be interested in your 

perspective on the industry™s concern with the floating NAV, which se
ems to have been 
successful in stopping forward movement.  And then the second question is, given that they have 

both floating and fixed NAVs in Europe, and the deposit rate went down to zero, is there 

anything to infer about interest on excess reserves fr
om the European money market fund 
experience with the deposit rate going to zero
? MR. LEHNERT. 
Are
 those questions you™d like me to answer? 
[Laughter] 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If not here, at another time. 

MR. LEHNERT.  Very, very briefly, and I certainly don™t approach your expertise in this 
area, we™ve long maintained that the redemption of par, what you call the fixed NAV, is useful in 

certain circumstances.  There are certain elements of the U.S. tax cod
e and other things that 
             
    
     
        
  
   
          
     
     
                                                                 make it useful
.  But basically
, at the end of the day, it™s just a safe place to put your money
, and 
if 
it floats up and down a bit, it™s not the end of the world.  And, of course, the European 
experience highlights that, although p
resumably their tax treatment might be slightly different. 

Then what™s happened to European money markets since the deposit rate went to zero? It
™s maybe still a little early to tell what the long
-run effects are, but the initial wave of reports is that 
there hasn™t been an implosion of the money markets. 
MR. POTTER.  One fund closed.  The Bank of AmericaŒMerrill Lynch fund closed. 

MS. LIANG
.  I guess I would just add that even at current rates, the proportion of U.S. 
funds that are waiving fees is really
 quite high, so the implications of further reductions in 
money fund rates could have effects.  S
ome ballpark estimates
Šthey are not precise
Šis 
that 
about 70 percent of U.S. funds are waiving their fees at this pointŠthat™s a pretty big number. 
CHAIRMAN BE
RNANKE.  Okay.  Why don™t we take a break for lunch?  When we 
come back, I™ll talk briefly about the experimental consensus forecast, and then we™ll go to the 

economic go
-round.  Why don™t we reconvene at 1 o™clock?
 [Lunch recess] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
6 Why
 don™t we 
re-commence?  Please feel free to finish 
your fruit or your cookie. I™ll provide the entertainment here.  [Laughter] 
I™d like to talk for just 
a few minutes about 
the 
latest iteration of the experimental consensus forecast.  You have a 
handout 
with that title. It proceeded in the same way as in previous iterations
:  The staff sent out 
a preliminary Tealbook forecast about a week in advance and 
received your comments. We also 

had the benefit 
this 
time of having the SEP.  So using all that, 
we came up with the forecast 
that™s shown in table 1 on page 1, and which is diagrammed in exhibit 1 on page 4. 
6 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
                  
           
      
    
  
      Like the Tealbook, this forecast or projection is conditioned on no change in policy.  That 
is, it™s 
conditioned on the August policies of continuing the MEP and late 2014 guidance.  
Generally speak
ing, the data are quite similar to 
the 
JulyŒAugust consensus, which is shown 
immediately below.  One exception is the 2013 real GDP forecast on the very first line, 
2.2 percent, which is a little bit weaker.  That was not inconsistent with the comments that came 

on the first draft
; most people either saw the near term as being a bit weaker or about the same
.  But I want to come back to that number in a moment.  The unemployment and inflation numbers 

are pretty similar, and if you care to look at the figure, you™ll see that the trajectories are very 

similar obviously, particularly relative to the standard errors. 
Like last time
, we also looked at the consensus forecast under alternative policy 
assumptions, and that™s given in table 3 on page 3.  Under each variable, the first line, the status 

quo is, again, the same as the consensus forecast in t
able 1.  That™s the forecast assuming the 
August policies continue.  The subsequent lines include, first, a chan
ge in the guidance to 
mid-2015, so simply 
a mechanical moving out of the interest rate path to mid-2015, and then 
subsequent 
additions of 
a $750 billion or $1 trillion LSAP program.  So that gives the 
alternative
s.  The differences are consistent with the 
FRB
/US analysis
; I™ll come back to that 
point as well.
  And 
exhibit
 2 shows the paths for the federal funds rate, the unemployment 
rate, 
and inflation under optimal control, under the no-
policy
-change consensus forecast in red, and 
then the alternative policies provided in t
able 3. 
Now, this time an issue came up
, which was less of a concern last time, but 
it raises an 
important question that I think the subcommittee is going to have to look at, which is that, of 

course, the SEP is conditional on each person™s view of optimal monetary policy.  And in this 

case, if you turn to table 2, which shows median forecasts in the September SEP, you™ll see the 
        
           
     
    
  
     
    
      SEP is broken into two categories
: all participants and participants who assume further easing. 
A major
ity of people submitted a forecast in which they assumed that the guidance would be 
advanced to 2015 and that we would undertake additional asset purchases. 
So the SEP submissions actually assume that change in policy.  So then the question is, 
how do you get from those SEP projections back to the no-policy-
change baseline?
  And what 
the staff proposed, and what they did, 
was basically they took these policy differentials that are 
in t
able 3
, and they subtracted from the SEP results to get the baseline.  An
d to the extent that 
those differentials are not accurate or are different from what people expect, then that will, of 

course, create some noise in the baseline forecast. 
So I raise this for a couple of reasons.  The first is that we need to think aboutŠ
and we 
talked about this last time
Šwhether the consensus forecast we would want to release would be 
the pre-
meeting status quo policy forecast
ŠI think President Lockhart suggested that last time
Š or the postmeeting inclusive
-of-the-action forecast, or both.  We could consider both
; I think we 
need to discuss that.  If we do both, then we will have to figure out how to make sure people are 

comfortable with both the before and the after, if you see what I™m saying. 
For this meeting, I think it will not 
be 
very m
uch of a problem.  What I had proposed to 
do is, as was given to you earlier on, in 
item
 5 after the policy decision tomorrow, I will ask you 

whether you are comfortable with the consensus forecast inclusive of the policy action.  And if 

we do take policy 
action, then this whole issue will be irrelevant because we™ll be looking at the 
policies assuming 
the further easing
Šat least for those participants who submitted that. 
But I 
just want to flag this point and note that we are planning a discussion in October of this whole 

project, and certainly one of the issues we™ll want to discuss is whether or not we want to look at 

ex ante, ex post
, or both forecasts, and how we would best extract that information.  So, again, 
                   
               
         
    tomorrow after the policy decision, I™ll ask you if you are comfortable with the consensus 
forecast, including whatever policy decisions we m
ake; are 
comfortable, with reservations; or 
have a 
very 
different view.  And 
I™ll 
ask you
, if you have a different view, 
to briefly state 
what 
that 
difference is.
  Any questions or comments? Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
You have this issue that the SEP has some people 
who 
have no change in policy; others have changes in policy.  That™s going to still be an outstanding 

issue going forward.  Do you have any thoughts on how we wouldŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that™s what I™m raising
Šwe have to figure out how to 
deal with that
.  One possibility would be to specifyŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  A, B
, and C? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, ye
sŠI suppose.  If we™re going to do the ex ante, 
before
-meeting projection, then everybody would be asked to make a projection conditional on 
the policy prior to the meeting, and the forecast could be used to say, 
ﬁWe thought this was 
unsatisfactory.  That™s why we took the action we did today.
ﬂ  Alternatively, we could ask for a 

forecast conditional on one or more policy actions.  But that™s an issue that 
this particular 
exercise has made clear, and I™m just flagging it for discussion by the subcommittee. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It™s interesting to see the difference that people submit in 
terms of the policy, because you actually find out what people think 
about how 
efficacious the 
policy is
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, of course.  
That™s right.  That™s certainly one of the 
benefits of doing that.  But everything that we are considering here also has the cost of 

multiplying the number of projections and forecasts we™re asking people to do, and that™s 

something we need to take into account.  
President Lacker. 
       
              
         
           
          
MR. LACKER.  You mentioned parts of the consensus forecast process.  We™re asked to 
provide a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, and I™d urge the staff and all of us to give 
some thought to what that ought to mean.  As I read the instructions, I thought of f
our different 
interpretations of that.  You take as a given that what we™re trying to do in writing down a 

forecast is 
to write
 down the mean of a joint distribution of the economy and policy.  Well, if you 
ask us to submit a forecast conditional on a certain policy path, are you asking us to replace our 

reaction function with one that™s fixed at that path unchangingly, 
and averaging over that? 
What 
do all 
of 
the shocks have to be? 
What™s the most likely outcome that delivers that as the policy 
reaction
Šwhat
 economy is weak enough to justify that policy?  That™s a different question.  Or, 
do we take 
our reaction function and add-
factor it so that it delivers that policy 
as a mean? 
There™s a bunch of different ways you can think of doing that, but we ought to be precise about 

it. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course
Šwe™ll have to be precise.  These are 
complexities. 
One possibility would be to have everybody, again, assume appropriate monetary 
policy and 
deliver that joint distribution 
that you™re describing; and then, 
try to see if th
ere™s a 
center of gravity 
of that, which looks like the consensus; describe that consensus; and then 
describe those wh
o differ and qualitatively how they differ.  So that would be one approach.  
Another approach could be, for example, to ask people to use a specific reaction function or to 

specify their own reaction function.  
President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. 
Yes
Šthank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I like the idea
, in principle, 
of having a consensus forecast based on status quo policy and then a consensus forecast based on 

the policy action.  I think, though, that 
in practice
, the latter is going to be very challenging
, because you could easily imagine that the Committee could come up with a choice of a policy 
            
  
     
                 
    
action that they had not considered ex ante.  And then it becomes very difficult to know how the 
timing would work and to 
get the logistics to work. 
CHAIRMAN BERNA
NKE.  No, absolutely.  And again, I think Governor Yellen™s 
subcommittee will solve these problems for us [
laughter] and bring that to us in October.  
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Let me just reiterate on this. I do think that the market expectation o
f the Committee™s policy as of a certain date, which encompasses all aspects of monetary policy, is 

a fixed point that we could rally around.  Everyone c
an give their prognostication based on that.  
That would give us just one exercise to do.  Usually the 
market ex
pectation is not a long way off.  
It might be somewhat off, but it™s not a long way off, and it would simplify the exercise in my 

mind and would keep it clear
er what we™re 
doing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s, of course, what the British and some others do. 

MR. BULLARD.  Ye
s. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Does that address President Lacker™s concerns?  I wouldn™t have thought 
so. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Not exactly.  Only if it™s approximately 
right
. MR. EVANS. 
Yes
Šright. 
CHAIRMAN BERN
ANKE.  Anybody else?  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  Narayana made the point I was going to make. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other comments or questions? 
Again, we will be 
discussing this at the next meeting.
  President Evans. 
             
    
                    
   
   
        
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask a question 
that™s a little bit different
? I
t was triggered by 
some comments that President Fisher made earlier in asking questions, where he alluded to the 
fact that some people around the table would be, however you put it, more accepting of a high
er 
inflation rat
e than others, or whatever.  And in exhibit 2 on page 5, this question comes to my 

mind, which is, 
there is an optimal control path that is shown that has inflation rising to
ŠI think 
it™s 2.3 percent, 
if it™s co
nsistent with previous Tealbook-
style analyse
s. I personally don™t see 
anything in this path that™s inconsistent with our long
er-run strategic approach that we adopted in 
January, and I just wonder if that™s the sense of the Committee or if there™s an important 

divergence of opinion there, which seems to be one of the points that President Fisher might 

have been raising. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think we are clear that our objective
s are
Šthink of a 
quadratic objective function.  They™re symmetrical.  The
re is an 
increasing marginal cost 
of being away from each objective. 
We have a balanced approach, but people w
ill have different 
models of the economy, and they™ll have different weights in their objective functions.  So this 
is 
obviously not a purely value-fee projection.  
President Bullar
d. MR. BULLARD. Is 
exhibit 2 something that would be distributed as part of the 
consensus 
forecast
? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, nothing has been decided, but I would
n™t 
imagine 
we would want to do all of those things. 
MR. BULLARD.  So this is just an internal document, 
like the ones we always use. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. EVANS.  I wasn™t asking a question about communications.  I was asking more a 
question about how we interpret our long
er-run strategic document, 
because at various times
, we 
          
          
                
    
  make diffe
rent comments about these types of outcomes, and it strikes me that there™s less 
agreement on that particular observation than sometimes is given by the words that we use. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I™ve said in press conferences that it™s a symmetric 
objective a
nd we have a balanced approach, and so on.  
Anyone else? 
[No response] 
All right. 
Now we come to the main event. Let™s start ou
r economic go-round with President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Intermeeting data
, I think, 
have done little to 
alter the economic picture.  We
™re in a period of sluggish economic growth, clearly.  
Our Fifth 
District survey measures, which fell sharply in July, 
have 
bounced back to neutral readings now, 
and the tenor of our anecdotal reports has been middling of late, consistent with reports we™
ve 
been hearing since the spring.  While activity is weak, we
™re not seeing any signs in our D
istrict 
of a dramatic slowdown around the cornerŠ
or a dramatic pickup
, for that matter. 
I thought it was appropriate, Mr. Chairman, that at our last meeting you took a longer-
term perspective by focusing on economic growth over the entire recovery.  As you noted, real 

GDP growth has averaged around 2 percent since the recovery began.  I think 2.2 percent is the 

pre
cise number.  We keep seeing swings in growth every couple of quarters around that average.  
So it mak
es sense to focus on the longer-run path around which we™re fluctuating, rather than 
just the last quarter or two.
  At our last meeting, Mr. Chairman, you talked about why growth 
was so low, and you discussed the spider charts put together by Board economists Greg Howard, 

Robert Martin, and Beth Anne Wilson.  I believe they refer to them as butterfly charts, but I™m 

not taking a stand on insects here.  
The 
main purpose of their paper was to show that advanced 

economies recover as rapidly from banking and financial crises as they do from other recessions, 

and I thought they did a pretty convincing job of that.  
Their charts also show that the current 

recovery
 in U.S. GDP tracks quite closely the typical advanced economy recovery from banking 
        
                                        and financial crises
, as well as the typical advanced economy recovery from housing slumps.  
The message I take away from their work is that we shouldn™t have expected to do much better 
than what we™ve experienced, and I think that™
s consistent with the message from some other 
research along the same lines.
  Now, the authors don™t focus on the notion of a gap, however.  
And for many people right now, the motivation for furt
her stimulus is that the relevant gap is 
quite large. 
I was quite pleased to see the memo from Bruce Fallick and Jeremy R
udd on this subject.  
It™s 
a helpful, well-organized description of how the staff thinks about and estimates economic 
slack
Šlays it out
 quite clearly.  And I think this memo should help clarify our mutual 
understanding going forward. 
But I
™d like to make a suggestion or two for further clarifying our 
discussions.  My suggestion is that we distinguish carefully between two distinct concep
tual 

notions of slack.  One concept is defined by the number to which the unemployment rate would 

converge in the future in the absence of unanticipated shocks and under appropriate monetary 

policy.  This is essentially what 
we™ve referred to as the 
ﬁlonger-run normal rate of 

unemployment.ﬂ I think that™s what we called it in our consensus statement in January.  T
hat™s a 
fine term for it.
  When people refer to sustainable employment, this is the concept I think of
:  what the economy is going to converge to 
several years from now, after the current shocks we
™ve 
experienced have dissipated and
, under appropriate policy, we get back to some trend with no 
shocksŠ
the mean forecast out there.
  Now, this number probably doesn™t vary much over time 
because
, by defi
nition
, the effect of current shocks has faded out by the time the economy 
converges to this number.  In fact, this number might be close to constant over time, or it may 

vary only with some slow-moving and predictable things, 
such as
 the demographic compo
sition 
of the labor force and the like.  So I think when you look at a construct like the NAIRU, the non-
              
      
                              
 accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, it
™s constructed with this notion in mind.  I™
ll come 
back to 
the 
NAIRU in a minute. 
The second concept of 
economic slack
, which I think we should distinguish from this 
first one
, is based on the reference level of the unemployment rate 
with which it is most 
appropriate to compare the current unemployment rate for the purposes of assessing current 
monetary pol
icy.
  Equivalently, one can think of this just as well in terms of the reference level 
for output 
with
 which it™s most appropriate to compare current output for monetary policy 
purposes.  
This is sometimes referred to as the 
ﬁnatural rate,
ﬂ although some writers refer to this 
as the 
ﬁefficient rate
ﬂ and reserve 
ﬁnatural rate
ﬂ for something distinct.  But 
ﬁnatural rateﬂ 
tends 
to be the term that 
we™ve used around the table here and 
that 
others 
have used
, and it™
s what the 
staff memo uses.  So 
I™
m going to stick with that term for this reference rate. 
In some very simple models, these two concepts are identical.  But in general, they™re not 
the same.  Indeed, in our standard, modern, mainstream models, almost all of the shocks hitting 

the model should affect the natur
al rate, even if the longer
-run normal rate doesn™t vary much.  
Now, not all of the shocks that hit the economy should affect the natural rate.  That™
s very clear 
in these models as well, and I™
ll talk more a little bit later about 
the difference and
 what kinds 
of 
shocks fall in that category.  By the way, I™d mention that modern models are all extensions of 

the 
Solow 
growth model that the Chairman referred to at our last meeting. That model is 
deterministic, nonmonetary.  These mod
els are extended to include a role for monetary factors 

and to include the role of uncertainty and unpredictable shocks to the economy.  I think the staff 

memo would have been clear
er if it had distinguished between these two notions of slack, 
because the 
estimates they present in this memo
Šsome are aimed at this longer
-run notion, and 
some pretty clearly are aimed at this short
-run reference notion.  
For example, the NAIRU 
            
       
             
      
          
  
      estimates they present ar
e designed to estimate the long
er-run normal rate of unemployment, 
because 
they 
deliberately exclude high
-frequency factors, but our models tell us that™
s clearly the 
wrong benchmark for policy in a world in which the economy is hit by a range of shocks.  
So my 
suggestion would be that staff 
members
, when they present 
to 
us a gap or a natural rate concept, 
be clear about what they™re trying to present.  I™ll note hereŠ
and I
™ll come back to this in a 
second
Šthe discussion we had about adjusting the natural rate for the drought
; that
™s a high
-frequency 
adjustment.  But the logic for making that adjustment is really identical to the logic for 
this reference rate that responds to current shocks. I think it would also aid clarity if we, in our 

discussions, were mindful of this distinction between these two.  The gap between the current 

unemployment rate and the long-run normal unemployment rate is exceptionally high by 

historical standards, and that gap clearly represents a tremendous amount of human suffering.  

And I can understandŠeveryone should understandŠwhy that would add urgency to the search 

for remedies to that.
  But modern macroeconomics is pretty clear about the gap that™
s relevant 
for the conduct of monetary policy, and it™s conceptually different from the gap defined by the 

distance 
between whe
re we are today and 
where we
™re going to be several years from now. 
So how do you estimate policy-
relevant gaps? Well, you need a model because you
™re 
talking about a counterfactual; 
you
™re talking about something that doesn™t happenŠ
it™s a latent, 
unobserved variable.  You need a model to be able to extract something like that from the data, 

and different models, obviously, 
give you different estimates. 
The staff memo presents estimates 
derived from EDO, the Board™s New Keynesian dynamic stochastic gener
al equilibrium
 model.  
And it delivers 
an estimate of the current gap 
of 
a little under 3 percent, defined this second way, 
the natural rate way. 
That compares 
with 
the NAIRU
-based estimate that the Tealbook provides 
        
      
                 
  
         
     
       
     
         of about 4½ 
percent, so you can see 
that you can get a significant difference there
.  This 
illustrates the extent to which the model you bring to bear makes a difference. 
So how big is the relevant gap?  Well, I™ve said beforeŠand I think others around the 
table have said before
Šthat we don™t think it™
s large, and we
™ve tried to describe economic 
factors that, in theoretical models
, would affect the natural rate and so would
n™t
 add to the gap.  
So they™d reduce your estimate of the gap.  
Now, rather than repeat myself
ŠI know that hasn™t 
stopped 
me in the past
ŠI thought I™d take the opposite tack and talk about what™s in the gap.  
The economy in a model that™s taken to the data is envisioned as driven by shocks and other 
developments.  Those shocks 
all affect the data you see, but not all of th
em affect the natural 
rate.  So the things that affect the economy, but don™t 
figure 
into this natural rate, are the things 
that affect the gap. 
What could those things be?  Well, this depends, obviously, on the model 
you use to interpret the data, the mode
l you use to extract an estimate of the natural rate, and so 
determine the gap. 
Let™s take a look at
 EDO, the Board™s DSGE model.  Its 
estimate of the gap 
is based on the natural rate, as I said, and it™s near 3 percent.  What would it take for the gap to 

be that large in that model?  Now, I should caution here
:  What I
™m going to say is based on my 
understanding of the model conceptually, theoretically.  I haven™t looked at the empirical 

decomposition, but based on my understanding of what™s going on in t
hat model
Šthis is true for 
a lot of other models as wellŠ
you
™d have to believe 
that 
one of two sorts of things 
is going on 
for the gap to be large. 
First, you could believe that firms have not fully adjusted their prices in 
response to the downward shift in demand that occurred four years ago.  These models are based 

on the notion of prices being sticky temporarilyŠ
that people set prices and
, for a time
, they™
re 
not incented to
ward, 
or they
™re prevented from
, adjusting their prices to reflect developments 
that they
™re seeing at their doorstep.
  So this price stickiness keeps prices from adjusting.  A 
fall 
                                             
     in demand shows up in quantities rather than prices at first, and then later, as prices adjust, the 
adjustment shows up in prices rather than quantities.  So that™
s the general mechanism.
  To 
attribute it all to that, you
™d have to believe that there™s 
an incredible amount of price stickiness 
in this economy.  I don™t find that plausible, and I don™t think it lines up with other evidence we 

have on the degr
ee of price stickiness in the economy. 
The second class of things you could believe, in order to believe that the gap is large, is 
that the economy has been hit by a string of large shocks that have not affected the model™s 

natural rate but have affected t
he economy.  And this is what the model attributes the large gap 
to.  What would those shocks be? Well, in EDO, there 
are
 only two kinds of shocks that would 
affect the gap.  One is a string of upward shocks to the degree of monopolistic power that firms 

have in setting prices. Firms are monopolistic competitors.  They have a little bit of pricing 

power, not total, and the amount of pricing power they have is determined by the degree of 

substitutability between goods.  For some reason, goods are less of a substitute for each other 

now, so firms have more pricing power, and t
hat™s why prices haven™t adjusted
, quantities have, 
and the gap is high.  Alternatively, you could believe that a string of analogous shocks in the 

labor market ha
s occurred, so that workers have more bargaining power in setting wages and 
are 

able to extract a 
kind of monopoly power from the firms they work for.  Now, I don™t have direct 

observations on any of these.  You infer these from the model and the data.  You 
take the model 

as given, you infer these kinds of things.  But those don™t really match up, in my mind, to the 

kinds of anecdotal stories you hear from people.  You just don™t hear about firms having a lot 

more pricing power than they did four years ago, and it certainly doesn™t seem consistent to think 

of workers as having a lot more leverage now, either.  So I find both of these implausible.  
Now, 

as I said, this is based on my understanding of EDO
; my understanding of how the theoretical 
              
    
    
    
              
     
  
       
  
       model is built
Šthat is well documented.  In that EDO model, in the memo results, they didn™t do 
the decomposition.  They didn™t show us how much of the gap is due to sticky prices left over 

from 
2008 shocks, how much is due to monopoly power shocks, how much is due to wa
ge pricing shocks.  I said they don™t seem plausible, but the right way forward for us, in talking 

about these things, is to put some estimates on the table and do the decomposition.  W
e have a 
working group under 
way that works with a set of these models. 
There are 
other DSGE 
modelsŠPhiladelphia, Chicago.  What™s the other one? 
PARTICIPANTS.  New York. 

MR. LACKER. 
New York.  I forgot New York.  And there 
are
 others around the 
System.  I know 
that 
Atlanta operates a pretty elaborate model as well.
  So e
ach of these taken to 
the data would give you a different estimate of the gap, and they™d give you a different 

decomposition of what the gap was about.  We™d be able to look at those, if we had them in front 

of us, and say, ﬁWell, attributing the gap to this is persuasive to me.  It matches up with what I 

think is out there,ﬂ or, ﬁThis reason for the gap to be large isn™t persuasive to me.ﬂ  And we could 

have a discussion that goes beyond, ﬁI think the gap is big.
ﬂ ﬁNo, I think the gap is small.
ﬂ  ﬁNo, 
I think the gap is big.
ﬂ ﬁNo, I think the gap is small.ﬂ I think we could make progress by putting 
the cards on the table, by putting some more-
explicit analysis on the table. 
So that™s my suggestion for improving our discussion of the gap going forward.  As I 
said, the estimates of the 3 percent gap in EDO seem implausible to me compared 
with 
factors 
that I
™ve talked about that are likely to affect the natural rate rather than the gap
Šthings like 
the 
labor market
, skill problems, 
the 
housing overhang, and policy uncertainty, which 
aren™t 
captured by the models.
  We could have a debate then about what is in the model or not.  T
his is 
what goes into my thinkingŠthat we shouldn™t expect much from monetary policy now.  
                   
                     
 Moreover, we might be pretty close to where the policy-
relevant natural rate is right now.
  Thank 
you
ŠI took some extra time here.  I appreciate it.  Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE C
HAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I don™t really understand why the DSGE model should 
be particularly relevant to the current set of circumstances, given that this is a financial shock, a 

huge financial shock, and my understanding is that DGSE models are very rudimentary, 
if 
they 

hav
e anything
, in terms of the financial sector.
  To go to the DSGE models 
as a source of 
determining the natural rate versus the NAIRU and 
the size of the gap seems a little bit 
ﬁoff the 
reservation
ﬂ relative to the source of the shock.  So I™m just curious what your reaction is. 
MR. LACKER.  Sure.  Let me say two things to that.  
The f
irst is that progress has been 
made in putting the rudiments of a financial sector in these models.  The New York model is a 

leader on that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  B
ut we™
re still in elementary school. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  The second thing I™d point out, though, is that if we™re going to 
think about the data we see, draw conclusions, and act on it, we™
re using either an explicit model 
or an implicit model.  There
™s no avoiding that.  Otherwise, what we™re doing is gibberish.  
An explicit model has the advantage of exposing all sides of the reasoning process to scrutiny by 

others.  You can say, 
and it
™s perfectly legitimate to think, 
ﬁAll right
Šyes, this factor that I t
hink 
is important is not in this model,
ﬂ and I just did that with EDO.  I just said, 
ﬁLook, it doesn™t 
have a very articulate labor sector
ﬂŠbut we can debate that, and we can look at the magnitudes 
and talk about that.  
So I think it
™s a vehicle for analysis and discussion that crystallizes our 
thinking, that pins things down, but I don™t think it™s constructive to say, ﬁX isn™t in the model.  I 
       
              
    
    
                have a free pass to say whatever I want.ﬂ I just don™t think that™s constructive.  I know that™s not 
what you were advocating. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you, President Lacker.  You™
re a 
perfect straight man for me because 
I™m going to be rather brief 
[laughter] 
to preserve 
time for 
the main event. 
Reports from my 
District contacts were very little changed from August. 
Economic expansion remains positive but very modest.  Just a coup
le of comments from 

contacts.  First, housing-sector contacts and several of my banking directors repor
ted that 
residential real estate activity in general is clearly improving.  Prices have firmed in many areas, 

sales volume has increased, and permitting is rising.  Purchase mortgage applications have 

increased recently, and refinance activity remains positive. I have also seen data suggesting that 

the recent increase in purchases is bei
ng driven primarily by mortgage-financed homebuyers 
rather than cash investors.  Second, a director from a large management consulting firm offered 

the view that a number o
f his firms, very large corporate clients, have resigned themselves to a 
2 percent growth world, and that major actions these businesses might take to accelerate their 

growth are largely on hold.  We heard a similar theme from several contacts.
  And, third, 
inflation and rising business costs are not much of a concern among our contacts.  My director 

from the country™s largest home-
improvement retailer reported that suppliers are not asking for 
price 
increases in this environment. 
Let me shift to my 
Bank™s assessment of the national economy and outlook.  It has 
become pretty difficult, in my view, to reject the view that the economy has been on a roughly 

2 percent growth trend for most of the recovery.  Maybe I™m a little slow, but the recognition has 

gelled
 in my thinking, 
just in the last few weeks
, that this is the prevailing reality.  Based on 
                        
          
     
         recent estimates, this may even overstate the immediate reality.
  My outlook for GDP growth 
continues to show only modest improvement on this trend over the forecast horizon.  In 
particular, beyond this year and next, I remain less optimistic about the pace of 
GDP growth than 
the Tealbook.  With respect to employment, my baseline outlook has been a continuation of the 

trend of roughly 150,000 per month that has prevailed over the past two years.  This pace would 

be sufficient at current participation rates to make continuing but modest progress on the 

unemployment rate. However, last week™s job report makes it pretty clear that employment 

growth has fallen short of the 150,000 trend over the past four months.  Even though four months 

amount to a small sliver of time, I am concerned about the lack of any sustained progress on the 

unemployment rate since the beginning of the year.  It is getting harder to rule out the p
ossibility 

that returning to the 
scenario of 
150,000 jobs a month is at risk.  
My perception is that the well
-known uncertainty factors, including those associated with various downside risks, are 

contributing to some of the recent softness in the data.  I have no argument with the SEP bias that 

GDP growth risks are weighted to the downside, but I don™t rule out that these uncertainty drags 
could dissipate and that there is some upside potential.  For instance, some of the incoming 

information around housin
g and 
Europe has been mildly encouraging, and it
™s plausible that if 
the major sources of uncertaintyŠnotably, the fiscal cliff and European situationŠ
are resolved 

favorably, or more or less favorably, in a few months, the outlook actually could be brighter.  So 

it strikes me that this environment is not as clear
-cut as the situations that we faced on the cusp 
of LSAP1 and LSAP2. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Mr. Wilcox, did you want to add to the 
conversation? 
          
   
        
      
      
                      MR. WILCOX.  
Yes. I don™t have a detailed response to President Lacker™s comments, 
but I thought I might just offer a few observations.  Sometimes I
™m in sympathy with many of 
the points that President Lacker makes.  I think it™s impor
tant, though, to state that we take it as 
our remit to advise the Committee to the limit of our ability to measure the economy, to estimate 
and understand the economy, to observe economic processes.  We think it™
s critically important 
not to do more than that, and we™re profoundly aware of the extent of our ignorance and the 

ignorance of the macroeconomic profession at large, regarding key questions about how the 

macroeconomy works. 
I™
m reminded of a comment that Larry Summers once made in quite a 
differen
t situation
, in which he said, ﬁYou know, economics is an interesting field.  I doubt that 
when astrophysicists get together
, they debate the fundamental validity of the laws of gravity.  
And yet what we as economists do is, we have profound uncertainty about questions that are as 

fundamental as the laws of gravity.
ﬂ  We on the staff do make every effort to distinguish short-

run influences that we can identify.  For example, we have adjusted our reference level of the 

unemployment rate in light of influence
s that we can identify and estimate
, stemming from 
emergency unemployment benefits and from the quality of functioning of the labor market.  We 

have adjusted our measure of the gap between the actual unemployment rate and the reference
, 
or natural, 
rate of
 unemployment for those kinds of things.  But beyond that, we confront the real 
world in which data are imperfect, theory is deficient, policymaker and staff bandwidth is 

limited, and there are a lot of profound and fundamental debates to be resolved. 
With regard to EDO, it is a state
-of-the-
art DSGE model coming directly out of the 
intellectual tradition that President Lacker refers to. It
™s part, but only part, of the intellectual 

base that we consult in the course of putting together our analysis that we provide to the 

Committee.
  Now, whether the empirical properties of that model are plausible or implausible is 
                
                              
              
a little difficult for me to say.  They are what they are, and they
™re derived by an effort to work 
directly in that intellectual tradition.  W
e have pursued a diversified, 
multimodel strategy
, which 
we think provides our analysis with a greater robustness than would be the case if we had a 
single 
model or a single-
intellectual
-tradition strategy. 
So I
™m in sympathy with many of the 
points that President Lacker raises, but I think we need to recognize that the macroeconomic 

profession has a long way to go before we can deliver the kind of clarity and certainty that it 

seems to me is implicit in much of your remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President 
Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate Dave Wilcox™s comments 
there, and I™
ll have a few comments on the slack memo at the end here. 
Let me talk for a minute 
about the Eighth District economy, which continues to expand at a modest pace.  The drought in 

the 
District has been especially severe and is having an important effe
ct on agriculturally 
based 
businesses.  I generally agree with the Tealbook analysis of the 
effe
ct of the drought on the 
macroeconomy over the next couple of quarte
rs. 
District labor markets are improving slowly. 
The 
District unemployment rate, based on 16 D
istrict MSAs, has continued to decline this year 
and is, according to the most recent data, about 7.5 percent, noticeably below the national 

unemployment rate.
  Employment growth in the District has been slow, just a touch better than 
the national data, according to the most recent observations.  District real estate markets have 

improved during 2012.  Data on home sales for District MSAs, for instance, are up by 
a healthy 
margin compared 
with
 2011.  Specifically, year-
to-date home sales are up almost 13 percent in 
Louisville, 7 percent in Little Rock, 10 percent in Memphis, and 16 percent in St. Louis.  

Similarly, building permits for single
-family homes year to 
date in 2012 versus 2011 were up 
42 percent in Louisville, 14 percent in Little Rock, 46 percent in Memphis, and 23 percent in 
               
             
          
   
    
  
    St.
 Louis.  So I think that the housing part of the equation is moving off the bottom in 2012, and I 
find that encouraging. 
Natio
nally, I view the macroeconomy as being in a sluggish 
economic 
growth mode, but 
for a variety of reasons, I do not think the current constellation of data readings is one that should 
trigger outsized monetary policy action.  I view the U.S. economy as being on a path not too 

different from the one suggested in the work of Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rog
off as cited by 
President Lacker.
 They noted that post-
financial
-crisis or 
post-bubble economies tend to grow 
relatively slowly for a long time.  Our economy cl
early suffered through 
a collapse of a housing 
bubble, along with an associated financial crisis, so it is not really that surprising that the 

economy is following a path similar to the one experienced by other countries 
that 
have been in a 
similar situati
on.  In particular, the notion of a rapid return to the pre-
crisis
, bubble-influenced 
real GDP growth trend seems quite unrealistic accor
ding to the international cross-country 
evidence.  This, to me, is the leading hypothesis for our current situation.  I am concerned about 

the global slowdown and that, fed in large part by ongoing recession in Europe, this is affecting 

and will continue to affect U.S. multinational corporations.  These effects are quite apparent in 

my discussions with business contacts in 
medium and large firms in the 
District and across the 
nation.  Many are reporting troubling or worrisome movements in revenue and volume data 

during recent months.  While this bears watching, I do not think it is yet at the point where I 

foresee an especially severe impact on the U.S.  Some of this is certainly to be expected when the 

pan-European economy, which is actually somewhat larger than the U.S. economy, is in 
recession. 
I see U.S. inflation as subdued but generally close to target, unlike the summ
er and fall of 
2010, when nearly all measures of inflation were low and on a downward trajectory.  Again, this 
             
                 
   
   
             
  
     bears watching, but in my view, a threat of continued disinflation and possibly eventual deflation 
has not materialized, at least so far. 
Inflat
ion expectations are, by our own description, stable.  
Five
-year TIPS
-based expected inflation was about 208 basis points yesterday.  This, again, is 
not the situation of 2010, at least so far.  In addition, the five-year TIPS real yield of about 

minus 145 basis points is considerably lower than in 2010, suggesting that monetary policy may 

be much easier today than it was at that juncture.  In addition, I do not see financial stress as 

being particularly high at the current moment.  The St. Louis Financial Stress Index is showing 
a relatively tame reading. Of course, many factors could increase financial stress, but as of now
, those events have not occurred and, in fact, may not occur. 
I think it makes sense to wait and see what Europe can deliver during th
e fall.  As I
™ve 
told all of you before, I™
ve become 
more pessimistic on the medium
-term European prospects 
during the summer, as I have come to doubt that Europe has the type of either informal or formal 

institutional arrangements to deal with a crisis of
 this magnitude.  
Still, I think the jury remains 
out on that issue, so it would make sense for us to wait and see what the Europeans do, 
and see 

what happens.  
Certainly, recent declines in Spanish and Italian yields across the yield curve for 

government debt in both countries have been impressive 
and
 substantial, even if the medium-
and longer-term outlook for Europe is questionable.  
I am concerned that the ECB is not really 
easing aggressively in order to mitigate the 
euro
-area recession. Indeed, the ECB is preoccupied 
with selective debt purchases on a basis that requires some conditionality, which means that they 

have to wait for the country to react to their offer.  This throws off the timing of the relationship 

between the 
normal business cycle 
and 
monetary policy.
  So that™s keeping the ECB from acting, 
which makes me worried that the U.S. action could exacerbate the recession there by 

strengthening the 
euro.  And indeed, the e
uro has been stronger in recent weeks.
  You might say 
      
             
              
          
  
   
 we worry only about the U.S. economy, which I think is very true and very relevant, but this 
could end up feeding back to the U.S. in a detrimental way if we make the European situation 

worse. 
Longer
-term interest rates in the U.S. are already very low.  Ten
-year 
Treasury tr
ading in 
a recent session was around 170 basis points.  That™
s extremely low by rec
ent historical metrics. 
Longer
-term inflation expectations are in excess of 250 basis points, depending on which 
measure you use.  That implies negative real yields over a 
10-year horizon.  That™s an extremely 
long horizon to have a negative real yield.  I think the U
nited States 
can benefit from the lower 
yields that we have in place right now.  We can benefit from the flight to safety that has driven 

capital out of Europe, 
much as the U
nited States
 did during the 1997Œ98 
Asian currency crisis. 
Also, equity markets are at recent highs
Šfour
-year highs, 
if I™m not mistaken.  This seems to 
indicate among investors a certain confidence in the future of U.S. economic performance 

despite an ongoing worldwide slowdown, and I think the jury is still out a little bit on whether 

the U
nited States
 can be the strength in the storm here or whether we™re going to get pulled into 
the global slowdown ourselves.  Obviously, there are detrime
ntal effects from the rest of the 
world, but there are also offsetting 
flight
-to-safety effects in the U
nited States
.  So I think we 
could afford to see how that plays out for a few months here going forward. 
Labor markets in the U.S. are improving, although in a halting and uneven way.  It is 
sometimes noted that the national unemployment rate has not improved during 2012.  I might 

remind the Committee that this was also true in 2011.  We had 9.1 percent unemployment in 

January of 2011.  As of August 2011, 
we were also at 9.1 percent.
  However, today™s 
unemployment one year after that is 8.1 percent, 1 full percentage point lower.  That™s about as 

good as we can do in this game, about as good as we can do in one year™s time.  The U.S. 
              
    
       
       
          unemployment rate has 
rarely, if ever, dropped this much in one year during the past 25 years.  
This improvement, 
of course
, occurred unevenly, but it did occur nevertheless and from a 
starting point last year at this time in September that looked considerably darker than today
™s outlook.  
Some might say we did
n™t
 take action last year, but we took action through the m
aturity 
extension p
rogram.  That program is still in place and still on the table. 
In summary, as always, there are many ongoing developments that bear watching, but I 
think that the current readings on key aspects of the economy do not argue for outsized monetary 
policy action at this particular juncture.  I™m not saying I would never support it, but I don™t think 

that this moment is probably the right time. 
A few comments on the slack memo.  I do appreciate the memo, and I think it did a great 
job of outlining the approach to the slack issue that has been taken by the staff for, 
I belie
ve, 
many years at the Fed.  I thought it was accurate and outlined the issues very well.  The memo, 

to me, suggests that the ﬁ
get
-serious DSGE approachﬂ shows exactly how complicated this 
concept really is when you try to get down to it.  W
henever 
you
™re 
trying to fix something, it
™s good to know what you™re trying to fix.  And the great thing about the New Keynesian model is, 

you know what you™re trying to fix.  You™
re trying to fix the fact that there are sticky prices out 
there, and you can improve welf
are in that model in a certain way by certain types of monetary 
policy actions.  But different assumptions that you might make inside the model are quite subtle, 

and they can imply different welfare outcomesŠ
that is, different amounts of utility that actua
lly 
get delivered to households.  I think 
that 
there
™s no substitute going forward, that the Committee 
just has to take a stand on these complicated issues and we have to roll up our sleeves and say, 

ﬁWhat is it that we think we need
 to do?
ﬂ and ﬁW
hat is it that we want to fix?ﬂ
  The problem is, 
because of the subtleties inside these models, what we learned from the models is that you can 
          
        
                       
       inadvertently be doing more harm than good, depending on what™s actually going on in the real 
world and depending on whi
ch assumptions are really the ones that make the most sense. 
I think 
there
™s a very clear core idea, and you don™t have to read the whole literature to get at the core 
idea.  The co
re idea is that the flexible price level of output is a volatile object. 
Even in an 
economy that had no frictions whatsoever, there would be all kinds of shocks, and that level of 

output, which would be a Pare
to-optimal thing, would be moving around all of the time.  T
he 
actual level of output that we observe is probably not that level of output, and therefore there 

may be scope for a policy action.  But in any event, that volatile flexible price level of output is 

not going to be a smooth trend the way we traditionally have thought about it in macroeconomic 

circles since the 19
50s and 1960s.  Most of what we try to do when we think about potential 
output and measures of slack is to get a smooth trend.  I don™t think that that™s supported by the 

modern macroeconomic literature. 
The memo also makes it clear that there
™s tremendous 
uncertainty about estimates of 
slack, even if you™
re willing to swallow other assumptions about 
the 
statistical models or the 
economic models.  
As I
™ve emphasized in the past, even if all you want to do is forecast, and you 
don™t care about all of the the
oretical issues, the relationships between the slack measures and the 
actual inflation outcomes are questionable themselves and are weak and
, I think, 
have gotten 
weaker over time. 
I™ve talked about slack many times here, but I do think that, 
going forwar
d, it would behoove the Committee to put a clear model on the table.  W
e can argue about whether 
those assumptions 
are
 the right ones, whether 
we like them, 
and whether we think we can bring 
other evidence to bear on the particular assumptions.  And 
we can 
get it clear
er in our own heads 
how we think we™re helping matters with our policy. 
                                    
           I also thought it was very interesting in the memo
ŠI™ve often wondered about the term 
ﬁNAIRU.ﬂ  The memo makes it clear that the ﬁAﬂ no longer belongs in 
ﬁNAIRU,
ﬂ and in fact
, the ﬁNﬂ doesn™t belong in ﬁ
NAIRU
ﬂ either
Šso just ﬁ
IRU.
ﬂ It™s just 
ﬁIRU
ﬂ at the end.  T
he ﬁAﬂ 
stands for ﬁ
accelerati
ngﬂ 
and staff 
members 
make it clear that they™ve had to take that part out 
because it wasn™t working very well over maybe quite a long time period.  So I thought that that 
was interesting.  Maybe we should quit using the term, since the acceleration part isn™t in there 

anymore.
  Thanks a lot.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The past nine months remind me a bit 
of Samuel Beckett™s play 
Waiting for Godot. 
Rather than waiting for 
Godot
, we are waiting for 
the labor market recovery.  And like 
Godot, the recovery in the labor market continues to elude 

us.  
In the Beckett play, the character
s seriously consider suicide as their best solution to the 
seemingly endless wait.  I do hope 
that 
tomorrow we arrive at a better solution.  [Laughter] 
Unfortunately, last month™s labor market report was quite consistent with my submission 
for the e
xperimental consensus forecast.  I had a more pessimistic outlook for the next 18 months 
than the consensus forecast, and it assumed that we would not see robust employment growth or 

a significant change in the unemployment rate by the end of the yearŠ
or, for th
at matter, the end 
of next year
Šwithout further accommodation.  The modest employment growth did not surprise 
me, although I may not have sufficiently considered the possibility of the further declines in 
the 

labor force participation rate that were a striking feature of last Friday™s employment report, 

reducing the unemployment rate but for the wrong reason.  
One of the distinctive features of this 

recession and recovery has been the percentage of the unemployed who remain unemployed for 

greater than
 26 weeks.  Unlike the deep recession in 1982, in which there was a quick recovery 
        
                          
          and, as a result, a re
latively small increase in long
-duration unemployment, this recession has 
had a weak recovery, resulting in more long-duration unemployment.  Work being done by the 
staff in Boston that decomposes the 
Beveridge 
curve by duration of unemployment finds that the 
shift in the curve is primarily generated by workers who suffer long-duration unemployment.  

Faster growth in the economy would likely mitigate some of this problem. 
While some have attributed the slow recovery to a deleveraging process, I would put less 
weight on that argument.  Consumption and business investment have not been the laggards in 

this recovery.  Rather, government spending and housing account for much of the unusual 

weakness.  In fact, if you exclude housing and government spending from GDP for this recovery, 

it looks much like the previous two recoveries.  The unusually weak government spending is, in 

part, a result of the state and lo
cal governments pulling back in response to greatly diminished 
revenues, a direct consequence of the depth of the recession and the weakness of the recovery.  

Many were prepared for a revenue shortfall, with funds accumulated in their rainy day funds, but 

this recession quickly put most rainy day funds underwater.  Housing is usually a driver of most 

recoveries but has been absent for much of this recovery.  However, since the onset of the 

housing bust, the population has grown, per capita income has grown, 
interest rates are low, and 

prices are more affordable, resulting in tentative signs of a housing recovery.  This is a propitious 

time for considering additional stimulus to housing. 
If homebuyers feel that house prices are on 
the rise
Šas many indicators
 suggest 
and
 the Tealbook forecastsŠ
and that mortgage rates will 
remain this low only temporarily, we may start to get new homebuyers to commit before rates 

and prices rise. 
It is important to note the significant downside risks we are still facing.  While there have 
been some positive announcements about financial support out of Europe, the underlying 
                        
              
      
   solutions still require political support.  Domestically, while most are aw
are of the dangers of a 
fiscal cliff, the positive solutions still require political action.
  Should either of these risks 
materialize, we will need to consider a further array of tools: 
 possibly expanding QE even 
further, using asset purchases to target long rates
, or providing more commitment in our 
guidance.  An important addition to these tools might also be an expanded set of discount 

window actions.  The staff memo on this provides a good road map to possible ways forward.  

They include a variant of 
the Bank of England program, a mortgage program that would provide 
low-cost funding for banks to finance mortgage loansŠparticularly to those parts of the 

mortgage market that have been slow to recover, and programs that might require T
reasury 
support to reduce the credit risk entailed on certain types of lendin
g.  While some of these tools 
are likely to be most useful during a crisis where lending markets are disrupted, some could be 

implemented even in the current rate environment. I would encourage the staff to continue to 

search for creative ways that we can support those areas of the economy that are still troubled.  

As further progress is made, it may be worth discussing, either as an additional tool if the 

recovery continues to be quite slow or as a contingency plan should some of the tail risks 

materialize.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  During the intermeeting period, the 
economic data have confirmed that the ec
onomy remains stuck in low gear. Like the Tealbook, I 

expect only modest 
GDP growth in the second half of this year.  
Clearly, the economic recovery 
hasn™t been able to gain traction in the face of a variety of head
winds.  These include household-
sector d
eleveraging, tight credit for many potential borrowers, fiscal retrenchment, and global 
uncertainties.  Given these headwinds, absent further monetary policy accommodation, I would 
          
  
          
         
    
     expect sluggish growth and no meaningful progress toward our employment mandate until 2014.  
Indeed, when judged on a policy-consistent basis, my outlook is somewhat more pessimistic than 

the Tealbook forecast and consensus forecast, with slower 
GDP growth and a higher path for the 
unemployment rate. 
In gauging the medium-
term ou
tlook for the economy and the stance of monetary policy, 
I find the 
Kalman
-filter model that I developed with Thomas Laubach to be a useful tool.  A
fter 
this morning™s discussion, I™
m a little nervous about going into the 
Kalman 
filter, but I
™m assured 
that Thomas is ready with a white board to answer any technical questions regarding our model.  

But this model seeks to distinguish between transitory and highly persistent supply and demand 

influences on economic activity.  In response to President Bullard™s 
earlier comments, I would 
stress that in our model, we do not impose any restriction that potential output growth is smooth.  

We let the data speak to that.
  The highly persistent influences on demand can be summarized by 
what we call the natural rate of 
interest.  In the model, a highly persistent reduction in demand 
lowers the natural rate of interest.  And I think importantly for thinking about the stance of 

monetary policy and a number of issues around that, our balance sheet policies should boost the 

natural rate of interest, all else 
being 
equal, in this empirical model. 
So, influenced by Board 
staff research that highlights the information content of gross domestic income along with gross 

domestic product, I™ve estimated a modified version of the LaubachŒ
Williams model using both 

GDI and GDP.
  The current estimate of the natural rate of interest from this model is about 
minus 75 basis points.  The current real funds rate, therefore, is only about 1 percentage point 

below this estimate of the natural rate.  This implies that the current extent of monetary 

accommodation, including our balance sheet policies, has only modestly exceeded the severe 

headwinds that we™re facing in our economy. 
         
          
        
                             Given my forecast
s for subdued 
economic 
growth and very little pr
ogress on the 
employment mandate over the next few years, my SEP projection assumes considerable 
additional monetary policy stimulus.  In particular, I assume a new program of open-
ended 
purchases of 
Treasuries and MBS.  They expand the Fed™s balance sheet
 by about $1 trillion over 
the next year or so. 
And with this stimulus, I expect a faster recovery, with real GDP growth of 
2½ percent next year and 
3¼ percent in 2014, with the unemployment rate edging down to 
7.9 percent at the end of next year and 7.3 percent 
at the end of 2014.  
I see the risk
s to this 
outlook as skewed to the downside.  Another bout of brinkmanship around the fiscal cliff seems 

likely, if not inevitable.  The problems plaguing Europe also remain daunting, with considerable 

risk to our economy if the financial crisis intensifies. 
Here I would just echo the comments made 
earlier by Vice Chairman
 Dudley.  I share those views and was somewhat more pessimistic than 
perhaps the Tealbook™s description of recent events in Europe.  The bold program that the ECB 

has announced will certainly buy some short-run relief, but the underlying problems remain
:  a 
lack of political federalism, an unsustainable fiscal outlook, and disparities in economic 

competitive
ness across Europe.  So, in summary, the ECB™s actions may serve as a useful bridge 
loan.  
I hope it is not a bridge loan to nowhere. 
The fiscal cliff and the crisis in Europe are not just risks to the outlook; 
by increasing 
uncertainty
, they 
also 
seem alr
eady to be adding to the factors slowing our recovery.  It seems 
everyone I talk to stresses that uncertainty is holding back hiring and investment.  Indeed, 

uncertainty appears to have virtually paralyzed some businesses, prompting them to postpone 

capita
l spending and delay payroll expansions.  So a key question for monetary policy is whether 

this rise in uncertainty should be viewed primarily as a shock to demand, which lowers both 

output and inflation if not counteracted by additional monetary policy stimulus, or as a shock to 
            
    
       
                
           
   
supply, such as the drought, which lowers output but boosts inflation.  R
ecent theoretical and 
empirical research has addressed this question.  As I described back in December, empirical 
research by my staff at the San Francisco Fe
d finds that over the past 30 years, 
higher uncertainty 

operates like a negative aggregate demand shock that reduces both economic activity and 

inflation.  Following uncertainty shocks of the types that we currently face, expenditures on 

consumer durables, investment, short-
term interest rates, and inflation all fall
, while 
unemployment rises
, in this analysis.  
Now, I
™m sure President Lacker will be very happy to hear 
what I
™m about to say, and that is that we also looked at this issue in a fully micro
-fou
nded 
DSGE model.  This finding that uncertainty acts primarily as a demand shock is confirmed by 

the research using such DSGE models, both by my staff and by academic researchers. 
An increase in uncertainty causes households to save more for precautionary reasons.  This a
ffects 
both supply and demand in the models.  However, in these models, the demand effects are by far 

the dominant ones.  This is because the negative effects of an uncertainty shock on consumption 

are amplified when prices are slow to adj
ust, causing businesses to cut production further.  
This 
implies that uncertainty shocks lead to a negative output gap, a fall in inflation, and this is 

consistent with the empirical evidence I mentioned a moment ago.  All told, both theory and data 

sugges
t that the uncertainty shocks that I believe are holding back
 our economy today really 
should be seen more as adverse shocks to demand, which monetary policy should aim to offset. 
Turning to inflation, the medium-term outlook has not changed.  I continue t
o expect 
overall PCE inflation to remain below 2 percent for the next few years, and I view the risks 
to the 
inflation forecast as balanced. 
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Pianalto. 
           
   
                           MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Like Presi
dent Lockhart, I
™m going to 
keep my remarks on economic conditions particularly brief today because I believe that we have 
more agreement on the outlook than we have on the policy implications of the outlook, which 

means 
that 
I™m not going to be as brief in my comments on policy 
tomorrow. 
My 
District 
business contacts remain concerned about the risks to the outlook, yet they are generally 

reporting only small changes in activity levels in their own businesses.  A few of my business 

contacts point to either a coming slowdown or a coming acceleration in their sales.  Their 

comments are consistent with the holding pattern around today™s 2 percent growth rate.  
In my 
current outlook, I expect the recovery to remain in this holding pattern for the rest of this y
ear 
and then generally pick up to a GDP growth rate of a little more than 2½ percent in 2013 and a 

little more than 3 percent in 2014.  In order to achieve these projected growth rates, I assume that 

we provide further policy accommodation by extending the period of very low rates into 2015. 
Among the data released since our last meeting, the August employment report stands 
out.  It was particularly disappointing in that the BLS confirmed that the economy had made very 

little progress in labor markets over 
the summer. While the month
-to-month swings in the 
household survey make the progress on the unemployment rate difficult to interpret, the decline 

in the employment
-to-population ratio to essentially its post
-recession trough makes it clear that 
there has
 been little sustained progress in labor markets.  Nonetheless, as GDP growth picks up 
over the next two years, I am expecting that we will make gradual progress on unemployment.  

As mentioned in the memo on economic slack, the Cleveland staff has taken a close look at the 

flows into and out of unemployment to examine the natural rate of unemployment.  This research 

finds that the trends of flows into and out of unemployment, often referred to as labor market 

churning, have been f
all
ing for several years.  This decline in labor market churning implies that 
             
                   
  the current path to full employment will likely be slower than in past cycles. 
Some 
commentators treat the slow progress on reducing unemployment as evidence that the natural 
rate 
is far higher.  However, in the Cleveland Fed model, a faster pace of GDP growth does 

lower the unemployment rate more quickly.  While this result is supportive of monetary policy 

accommodation, it doesn™t answer the question of the effectiveness of our no
ntraditional 

monetary policy tools. 
Turning to inflation, I have made only small changes to my outlook for inflation.  I agree 
with the Board staff that we
™re likely to see more disinflation in core PCE rates, but my forecast 
doesn™t get quite as far away 
from the 2 percent rate as the Tealbook anticipates. 
The risks to my economic outlook remain primarily to the downside for GDP growth.  
Although market participants seem to be taking a more optimistic view that Europeans will solve 
their problems, a 
crisis
 in Europe remains a large risk to 
the recovery in the U
nited S
tates
.  In addition, the fiscal cliff poses a significant risk of 
a dramatic slowing of the U.S. economy.  
These risks to growth imply that unemployment could end up higher than anticipated.  On 

inflation, I continue to see the risks tilted toward the downside, given th
e significant downside 

risk
s to economic activity and 
the
 low levels of 
some measures of 
inflation expectations.  In my 
view, these risks to growth, unemployment, and inflation make the outlook more uncertain than 

normal.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Following our July meeting, the key question 
was whether the incoming data would finally begin to show substantial and sustainable 

improvement in labor markets.  It™s pretty clear that the answer to that question is no.  Without a 

doubt, 2012 will go into the books as another year of unsatisfactory economic performance.  This 
                    
         
         
           
  
 is the third year in a row 
of growth around 2 percent.  This pace of growth leaves 
resource slack 
quite large. 
At the same time
, the inflation outlook is not threatening, and numerous theoretical 
and empirical analyses show that there are ways to provide additional accommodation th
at will 
improve this economic situation. 
In terms of recent developments, the problems that we™
ve characterized as downside risks 
earlier in the year have materialized into actual headwinds.  They are gathering in strength. 
My 
business contacts noted that 
their current operations are being adversely affected by increasing
ly negative forces in the U.S. and around the world.  Similar to some comments that President 

Lockhart made, apparently CEOs are sharing their gloomy outlooks with their fellow CEO 

interlo
cutors, and this has the potential to reinforce downward expectations and spiral into even 
softer spending and hiring.  
For example, one of my regular contacts repeated comments he had 
heard from the CEO of a major U.S. conglomerate, 
who was a former Fed Bank chair 

somewhere.  According to my contact, this CEO instructed all of his business units to plan for 

the possibility that the U.S. will experience a lost decade
, like Japan.  I think that™s disturbing.  
With regard to Europe, many of my contacts thought the odds of truly awful outcomes had 

declined, and that™s a positive comment.  The recent ECB announcements regarding outright 

monetary transactions give the fiscal authorities somewhat more time to maneuver, but the 

additional bond buying will be condit
ioned on fiscal consolidation that likely will be difficult to 
achieve and bad for growth in those countries.  And without stronger growth, the periphery 

countries are going to face repeated crisis events over the next several years. As one financial 

contact we spoke to put it, 
ﬁAll the Europeans have done is transform an acute problem into a 
chronic one.
ﬂ  The other elephant in the room is the U.S. fiscal cliff.  On the upside, my contacts 
say 
that 
surely the parties in Washington will find a way to limit 
the damage after the election
.           
                       
        But on the downside, many currently see uncertainty over the cliff weighing on activity, and no 
one can rule out the possibility of a messy outcome that would result in very significant fiscal 

drag hitting us around the turn of the year. 
One bit of positive news is that I™m hearing commentary that indicates monetary 
accommodation is helping.  Several financial contacts say that today™s low rates are leading them 

to increase investment, and that should facilitate futu
re activ
ity. 
For instance, we heard 
comments on how funding for distressed properties has increased and capital is being redeployed 

to the residential sector. Indeed, there™s been a 
lot of talk about residential construction 

improving, as several have noted.  Furthermore, refinancing continues to help firms strengthen 

their balance sheets, putting them in a position to increase investment or pass on funds to 

someone else more likely to spend them, as you pointed out at our last meeting, Mr. Chairman.  
I should 
note that while lo
w rates are pushing some to undertake more investment, our financial 
contacts do not say that 
they are seeing excessive risk
-taking or anything approximating 
financial 
froth
.  And in the past, they™ve not been shy about pointing that out when they have seen that. 
As I said earlier, condition
ed on our current policies, the outlook for 
economic 
growth is 
unacceptable.  It™s unacceptable in part because recent data reinforce the obvious point that high 

inflation is not a concern, certainly not relative to our long-run objective and certainly not within 

our balanced approach strategy.  And it™
s unacceptable because mainstream monetary analysis 
clearly indicates that there are means of providing more accommodation that can improve these 

outcomes
.  The Board staff analyses clearly demonstrate this.  The LSAP memos had simulations 
that pointed that out, FRB/
US™
s optimal control simulations and 
the nominal-income-
level
-targeting simulations point that out, too.  Mike Woodford™s careful analysis in h
is Jacks
on Hole 
paper showed the same. 
       
    
        
           
    
    
   
               
  
        While I™m at this point, let me make a couple of comments about DSGE models, which 
were discussed earlier today. It is certainly the case that we are presented with results from four 
models that are currently being l
ooked at: 
the 
EDO model out of the Board, our Chicago model, 
Philadelphia™s model, and New York™s model.  A 
question that President Lacker was asking was
, in the context of these models, how big 
is 
slack, 
and 
how is it measured
?  At some level within 
the 
context of these models, this is a bit of a red herring.  For instance, if you look at the 

projections, all of the inflation forecasts coming out of these models are under our 2 
percent goal, 

and that™s true through 2015.  So, 
even
 in a model that™s lookin
g at whatever measure it is that™s 
holding back inflation, 
there is no
 inflationary pressureŠand some of the models have much less 
inflationary pressure than others.  The second point is that the theory in these models is really 

about marginal costs.  That
™s the fundamental variable.  The firms in these models are faced with 
the following question: W
hen I get to change my price and I™ve seen things change, what™s my 
margin
al cost structure that tells me how much I should increase my price, given that I won
™t be 
able to do it next time for sure? What have 
I face
d, w
hat am I expecting others to face, and 
things like that? 
Slack i
s often viewed in these models as a useful proxy at best.  I
f there™s a lot 
of slack, then your marginal costs won™t be rising
; they™ll be low, and things like that.  But the 
fundamental is really about marginal costs.
  And so, when you think about that, these models are 
really looking at the inflation data and everything around those data and saying, ﬁWe just don™t 

see inflationary pressures.ﬂ I can™t tell you exactly what the resource slack is that is embodied in 

that, but we don™t see inflationary pressures, and that™s coming out of all four of the models that 

we™re presented with quarterly. 
Another point that President Lacker ra
ised is, if sticky prices are really what™s 
fundamental here, why haven™t they adjusted already
?  And you hear that a lot.  In these models, 
                     
   
  
     
    
         
      
     a lot of asynchronous price adjustment for whatever reason is 
given
, and John Taylor has 
contributed importantly to exactly that point going way back over the last 20 or more years.  
But 
even allowing for the fact that maybe there would have been adjustments already, I think it™s 
reasonable to assume that we™ve been hit with a sequence of negative aggregate demand shocks 

along the lines 
that I 
believe 
President Williams™
s comments were pointing at.  At least we™ve 
certainly been surprised the last three summers in a row that output has been lower than we were 

projecting, s
o something different is at work.
  And then it™s 
also the case that 
inflationary 
expectations matter in these pricing equations and models.  This is a little more delicate and 

subtle.  Apparently inflation expectations are stable in all of these models, but there 
are
 subtle 
modeling choices at work in each of them about what the stochastic process is for marginal cost 

pressures and how they™re updated and what inflation expectations are.  This gets at a point of 

dissatisfaction
Šwhen I talk with various people in the Federal Reserve, they might say, ﬁI do
n™t 
like looking at the FRB/
US projections because I see all 
of 
this monetary accommodation 
coming, and I don™t see inflation coming, a
nd why is that?
ﬂ  I talk to people, and they worry a lot 
about inflation.  
We aren™t able to model that
Šapparently not sa
tisfactorily, 
because they all 
come back to the same place, which is
, expectations are well anchored or the stochastic process 
is 
mean
 reverting at some level, and so we just don™t see things getting out of hand.  I want to 
point out 
that this is not 
a FRB
/US question per se, but it™s a statement about how much we 
really 
know within the context of well-articulated macro models.  It™s way beyond just FRB/
US. 
All of our DSGE models have that same feature. 
So the bottom line, Mr. Chairman, 
is that this is the
 third summer in a row that economic 
growth has failed to achieve escape velocity, and the economy™s liftoff has fizzled on the 
          
                 
               launching pad.  It seems clear that the outlook crosses the threshold that justifies more action.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Thank you.
  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When we were in Jackson Hole, 
we got to hear you, Mr. Chairman, talk about the tools we have available.  You described our 

asset purchase tools and our communication tools, and so I™d like to give you some feedback 

from the 
Ninth District about how we™re doing on the communication front.  I get the same kinds 
of questions, I would sayŠusually from different people, but they sometimes come from the 

same person
.  The first comment is
, as the FOMC 
considers its date to keep rates low through 
late 2014, people are concerned, 
why is 
it that 
the Fed 
is 
committed to keep
ing 
rates low for two 
years
?  How could the Fed commit like this without thinking about the fact that the world could 
change in some fashion
?  And the second 
comment is
, by saying that interest rates are going to 
be low for that long or 
are expected
 to be low for that long, the Fed is signaling that conditions 
will be weak, and that
, in and of itself, is suppressing demand.  Now, of course, I say to them, 
ﬁNo, you misunderstood what the FOMC is intending to say to you.  It is meaning to 

communicate that the economic conditions threshold for raising rates is now higher than you 

might have thought.  The recovery has to be further along than you might have thought.ﬂ  A
t this 
stage, my questioner says, 
ﬁWell, that makes sense, but why didn™t you guys just say that?ﬂ  A
t that point, I usually turn the conversation to something about fracking 
[laughter] because that 
seems to work.  To me, this kind of dialogue suggests 
that 
we need to communicate more clearly 
about our reaction function.  And communication about our reaction function is sometimes 

motivated in terms of accountability and transparency, and these are, I think, good motivations.  
      
       
    
                           
       But as my brief summary of my 
Ninth District colloquies indicates, communication about 
our react
ion function is also an 
essential
 ingredient to the effectiveness of policy. 
Now, the changes that have been made in B(5) relative to what was in the previous 
FOMC statement in July
ŠB(5) 
now represents even more of a commitment because actually the 
conditioning clauses have been removed, although 
many readers were not paying close attention 
to those conditional clauses anyway.  I think the lead-in sentence to B(5) is much better, but I 

have to say, most people don™t read the words that carefully in the FOMC statement.  Their 

takeaway is the year.  That™s the main thing they™re hearing. 
So before we communicate 
our reaction function, we have to start thinking about how we 
formulate one, and as I™
ve m
entioned before, I think that a good reaction function should have at 
least two inputs
: some measure of inflationary pressures and some measure 
of labor 
market 
underutilization.  These inputs would capture how well we™re doing in terms of our two 

mandates
, and our policy stance, I would think, should evolve as these inputs change.  
I see this 
as the basis for the approach that President Plosser, President Williams
, and I are following in 
our alternative policy statements.  The K
PW statements emphasize only those changes of the 
data that are viewed as leading to changes in measures of inflationary pressures and labor market 

underutilization.  
And then the KPW statement
s translate those changes in inflationary pressure
s and labor market underutilization into 
the rationale for the 
Commit
tee
™s policy decisions.  
At this 
point, I™ll digress briefly to say that I think we™ve completed our cycle of going through the 

parallel FOMC statements, and President Plosser, I believe, will bring forward the KPW 

approach to t
he 
subcommittee on communications for further consideration.  So I™m sure the 
subcommittee members are glad to hear that.
  That said, just like the FOMC statement itself, the 
               
                    KPW memos are very oriented around changes in monetary accommodation and how they 
relate 
to changes in conditions. 
Ultimately
, though, 
a Committee reaction function has to translate the level of 
inflationary pressures and the level of resource utilization into a decision about the level of 
monetary accommodation.  A 
key challenge we
™ve
 struggled 
with is that it™s much easier for us 
to reach accord about the changes in these variables than it is for us to reach accord
, at least 
qualitatively, about the levels of inflationary pressures and the levels of resource utilization.  A
s we saw fr
om submissions of the consensus forecast, there are very different views around the 
table on that.  Some might see this heterogeneity as precluding the possibility of developing a 

Committee reaction function, but I think this is where the consensus forecas
t process is a very 
useful way forward.  It provides a way for us to come together behind a 
Committee view about 
the medium-term inflation outlook and about the economy™s performance relative to the 

employment mandate, conditional on our current policy stance now and as anticipated.  
Then we 

can usefully formulate the Committee™s reaction function as a mapping from that consensus vi
ew into policy choices.  ﬁMedium-
term inflation is too high relative to target
ﬂ:  That would say you 
should contemplate reducing accommodation.  ﬁThe unemployment rate is too high over the 

medium run relative to 
mandate
-consistent levels
ﬂ:  Then the Committee should contemplate 
adding accommodation. 
Mr. Chairman, the Committee™s consensus view about the economy seems clear, and it™
s been described in many recent FOMC statement
s. The Committee expects inflation to be at or 
below target over the medium run and unemployment to continue to be elevated fo
r some time 
relative to mandate
-consistent levels.  That consensus viewŠ
inflation 
running too low; 
                 
        
                         unemployment, too highŠimplies a need for additional accommodation, accommodation that 
would lower unemployment while keeping inflation near target. 
I open
ed by discussing a public desire, 
at least in the Ninth District
, for greater clarit
y about our reaction function.  In the next go-round, 
I™ll describe how
, by fulfilling that desire
, we 
can also provide additional accommodation.  And I™ll return to the question being posed to me 

implicitly by my Ninth District interlocutors
:  Under what conditions 
will
 the FOMC begin to 
raise the fed funds rate? I will argue that our communications often suggest the FOMC is 

unwilling to tolerate low unemployment, even if that low unemployment rate is not translating 

into medium-
term inflationary pressure
s.  And I think p
aragraph 5
 of 
alternative B offers us an 
opportunity to clarify our attitude toward low unemploymentŠthat we™re not against low 

unemployment 
if it doesn™t lead to medium
-term inflationary pressures. Maybe that clarification 
could provide stimulus that™s appropriate in light of the Committee™s consensus outlook.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
The 10
th District economy continues to 
expand at a moderate pace. Our retail, restaurant
, and auto contacts reported higher sales and 
expect gains in coming months, particularly those in the auto sector.  
Energy activity expanded 

further as gains in oil drilling outpaced declines in natural gas drilling.  Housing marke
t conditions continued to improve, and construction activity increased for both residential and 

nonresidential sectors.  
Manufacturing activity in the 
District expanded at a slightly faster pace in 
August.  The number of contacts in our manufacturing surve
y who 
were expecting higher levels 
of production and shipments in six months moved notably higher, and expectations of 

employment gains remained in positive territory. 
One component of our survey that has softened 
      
    
       
                           over the past several months is the expec
ted level of new export orders.  The number of contacts 

reporting higher levels has been declining but still outweighs those expecting an outright decline.  

So far this year
, total 
District exp
orts remain above their level a year ago, though exports to 
Eur
ope have been decreas
ing. 
In terms of the D
istrict labor market
, initial claims for 
unemployment insurance have declined notably over the past few months, and layoff 

announcements have been modest.  Still, employers remain quite cautious about expanding their 

payrolls.  
In terms of ag
ricultural
 conditions, U.S. net farm incomes are 
projected to reach their 
second
-highest level in history despite the worst dr
ought in three decades. Farm incomes are 
being supported by higher crop prices and crop insurance payments, 
which are offsetting 

declines in production and livestock profits.  In addition, the persistent, strong demand from the 

ethanol and export sectors continues to strain low crop inventories and could 
place upward 

pressure on prices heading into 2013 as reflected in futures markets. 
Turning to the national outlook, the recovery has been progressing mostly in line with my 
expectations.  Overall, I take a similar view as the 
Tealbook in that incoming dat
a since the last 
meeting ha
ve not materially affected my outlook for 
economic 
growth.
  For the second half of 
this year, I anticipate 
that 
firms will remain reluctant to undertake large expansion projects or 
aggressively add to payrolls because of the near-term risk.  In particular, I noted in the most 

recent NFIB survey that small businesses cite taxes and the regulatory landscape as their most 

pressing problems, with poor sales third on the list.  These issues are reaffirmed when I talk with 

my business contacts, 
and suggest that monetary policy may find it particularly challenging to 

offset headwinds of this nature.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Plosser. 
                    
                         MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Incoming information since our last 
meeting suggests that economic conditions in the 
Third
 District have continued to improve 
modestly.  Although labor markets and manufacturing remain subdued, the housing sector and 
retail
 sales have strengthened notably.  Housing markets in the D
istrict are 
showing their 
strongest signs of recovery since the recession began.  House prices are up significantly in the 

second quarter in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.  Housing permits driv
en mostly by multifamily
-sector housing have been on an upward trend, and residential builders and real estate agents both 

reported increased activity in August.  
The commercial real estate market is also showing 

continued signs of strength.  Tightening in the office market in C
enter 
City
, Philadelphia, 
is 
placing upward pressure o
n rents.  
Retail sales in the region have grown somewhat faster over 
the intermeeting
 period, and auto sales have continued to increase at a good pace. 
Turning to the nation, based on incoming information, my forecast for the second half of 
this year is not terribly enlightening. It™s modest
, and I think it will continue to be over the 

coming six months.  
How
ever, my medium-term and longer-term forecasts have not changed 
very much and, indeed, point to a continuing modest recovery.  Given the large size and nature 

of the shocks that hit the economy, a slow recovery, 
as we™ve heard
, is actually the most likely 
outcome.  It™s not necessarily evidence that our monetary policy stance is inappropriate.  Indeed, 

many of the rules reported in Tealbook 
B suggest 
that policy is about right.  Political and fiscal 
uncertainties at home and abroad still cloud the outlook and are holding back business 

investment.
  Overwhelmingly, 
the anecdotal evidence suggests that business leaders
™ reluctance 
to invest and hire i
s driven by uncertainty, not excessively tight financial conditions.  Households 
continue to deleverage, and that™s holding back spending as saving remains high.  My concern is 

that 
none of the
se headwinds will likely be ameliorated or substantially affected in the near term 
                
    
                             with further monetary easing or the 
further 
easing 
of 
financial conditions.  That doesn™t seem to 
be a constraint. 
I know I™m not alone in having wished for a stronger employment report last Friday.  
The 
payroll increase in August and the downward revisions to June and July were disappointing.  
Despite the strong actions that the Fed has taken, the unemployment rate remains above 

8 percent.
 This has generated a discussion about whether the continuing high levels of 
unemployment are structural or cyclical in nature. I actually don™t find this conversation very 

useful, particularly for policy.  Rather, 
I believe 
it™s better to think about whether the high level 
of unemployment can be addressed by further easing of financial conditions, whic
h is what 
monetary policy would entail.  
It seems to me that before we conclude that unemployment calls 
for more monetary policy accommodation, we must understand more about the nature of the 

shock that™s caused high unemployment and its unwelcome persiste
nce.  This is consistent with 
President Lacker™s observations.  It™s not about whether unemployment is 
cyclical, structural, 
permanent
, or temporary, necessarily.  It™s about understanding the nature of the shock that™s 
causing the problem that we observe. 
There™s still a lot we don™t understand about the labor market and its ongoing struggles.  
Academic and public debate expresses a wide range of views, and we should be humble about 

our state of knowledge.  We™ve discussed, for example, the difficulty of t
ransferring skills from 
one sector to another.  Those who lost their jobs in construction will have a hard time going to 

other industries.  But this type of unemployment cannot be solved by monetary policy.  

However,
 it™s not the only source of mismatch.  
Skill mismatch can occur within sectors, not just 
across sectors. 
Jai
movich and S
iu point to what™s called job polarizatio
n.  Job opportunities in 
middle
-skill occupations, which tend to be focused on routine tasks, 
are disappearing because of 
                
                  
          changes in 
technology and other things, while low-
skill
 and high-skill job opportunities are in 
fact increasing.
  The employment share of routine occupationsŠthis middle group, which 
includes jobs 
such as machine operators, meat
-processing plant workers, and 
office a
nd administrative supportŠ
has been decreasing since the mid
-1980s.  At the same time, the 
employment share of nonroutine cognitive occupationsŠincluding surgeons, lawyers, and, 
of 
course, economistsŠand that of nonroutine manual operationsŠ
whether it be janitors, 

gardeners, bartenders, 
or 
home health care
Šhave been rising. 
In other words, there appears to 
be a polarization in the job market to
ward the low and the high, 
or the tails of the distribution
, and away from the middle.  During the three jobless recoveries since 1991, the level of 

employment in these routine occupations has never recovered to pre-
recession levels.  The 
absolute level appears to fall and fall permanently.  The fact 
that 
this job loss seems to occur 
sharply during rece
ssions makes it appear to be cyclical, but it does not recover.  This is a 
phenomenon that cannot be addressed by monetary policy.  
For t
hose who point to low w
age 
growth as evidence against mismatch
, it™s interesting to note that real wages in the tail of 
the 
distribution actually seem to be rising modestly, unlike in the middle of the distribution.  Again, 

we do not have definite answers to what™s happening in the labor market, but we need to 

consider that evidence exists that the problems may not be amen
able to monetary policy 
or easing of financial conditions. 
The FOMC has applied a high level of monetary stimulus during this recession and 
recovery.  The fed funds rate has been effectively zero for four years, and we 
have said we 
expect 
it to remain 
there 
at least through late 2014.  We have implemented two rounds of asset 
purchases, followed by the maturity extension program.  Yet unemployment remains high.  

Given this evidence, one could draw two possible conclusions.  One is that monetary policy is 
         
    
    
                   
  
         
   
   
   the right tool, but we just haven™t implemented a large enough program.  Given the sluggish 
employment response to date and the large amount of stimulus that has been supplied
, it seems 

as though 
it™s increasingly plausible that further monetary accommodation
 is not going to be 
effective in quickening the pace of recovery to 
a higher 
level
 of employment
, much as we wish it 
could. 
One still might argue that because high unemployment is very costly and we are 
uncertain about the effect of more monetary policy accommodation, we should try it.  What do 

we have to lose?  Well, in my view, 
we have a lot to lose. The large
r the balance sheet becomes
, the higher 
are 
the risks to the economy that we will not be able to exit in a way that preserves 
price stability, maximum employment
, or 
our own credibility.  Ever-more-
aggressive action 
increases the r
isk of poor outcomes in the not-too-distant future or maybe the distant future.  
To avoid this, we are going to have to be relying on tools that are not guaranteed to work.  Inflation 

expectations, while stable, are stable 
until they™re not.  Should inflation begin to rise quickly, we 

may have to contract our balance sheet at a very fast pace or perhaps raise IOER very rapidly. 

Will that be disruptive to markets? We won™t 
know until we face that situation.  If our policy is 

not very effective at influencing unemployment rates, then inflation could begin to rise well 

before unemployment has shown much of a decline.  Will we have the fortitude to take the 

necessary actions to reduce accommodation
, and if so, how well will we be able to communicate 
our rationale?  Would we disrupt markets? Would we reverse the progress on unemployment? I 

have grave concerns that we are sowing the seeds of a very complicated exit for little or
 no benefit to the unemployment rate today.  
We say these exit risks are manageable, and I™d like to 

believe that they are, but we really don™t know that.  Given the unprecedented nature of the 

actions we™ve taken, how manageable these risks are is really 
unknowable at this time.  
We are 
       
      
                 
         
    
     
     
   
       and will be in uncharted waters.  That™s one reason I strongly urge us to be prudent.  To my 
mind
, at this point, costs of further action greatly exceed expected benefits.  Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank 
you.  President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  Mr. Chairman, just as 
President Lacker was 
a straight man for President 
Lockhart, in a 
way
, President Plosser has been a straight man for me
.  L
ike President Pianalto
, I will interlocutate 
[laughter] 
more tomorrow than I plan to do today. 
President Williams made a very important point. 
He talked about how uncertainty has 
paralyzed most businesses and how uncertainty acts as an aggregate demand shock.  I agree with 

that analysis. I hear that from my contacts.  The ques
tion is, is monetary policy effective in 
offsetting this form of uncertainty?  President George mentioned the National Federation of 

Independent Business.  She cited some data.  What she did not cite was that 93 
percent of that 

sample makes clear that they
 do not wish to borrow, 
either because of uncertainty or because 
they have access to capital that
™s abundant and cheap.  In my own surveys 
as preparation for this 
meeting, I asked a simple question
: If the actions we were to take at this upcoming meeting 
were 
to reduce your cost of capital by 25 basis points or more, what would it do in terms of your 

investment plans? I deliberately sampled larger companies because that™s 
where cap
-ex come
s from.  Employment comes from small
 and medium-sized businesses.  
We assume that, just by 

sheer wei
ght of numbers, significant cap-
ex come
s from large corporations.  And I would say 
that 
9 out of 10 said it would not change 
thei
r investment plans, even if we took action that led to 
a reduction 
of 
1 percent or more in the
ir cost of capital.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 
                       
     
                           
    
        VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  First, I want to make a comment on President Fisher™s 
last remark.  My understanding is that capital spending has never been particularly i
nterest rate 
sensitive.  It™s really driven by demand and capacity utilization, things of that nature.  So I 
wouldn™t expect that to be a really strong channel by which monetary 
policy stimulates the 
economy. 
MR. FISHER.  Can I just make a point to that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
.  Sure. 
MR. FISHER.  At least in the drafts 
of our statement, we were 
saying that 
business fixed 
investment was weak.  The question is, are we affecting business fixed investment?  And, more 

important than 
that, are we affecting employment? 
My point is that in the responses I™
m getting 
to anecdotal 
inquiryŠ
not systematically organized, although the systematic surveys that we see, 
through the NFIB and others, show 
that it is questionable whether or not we are ac
tually 
affec
ting employment.  The question is, 
are we affecting employment 
over the short term or the 
long term?  We have a wealth effect.  The Chairman has made that a very strong argument, 

including 
at the last meeting. 
If you™re advising 
a corporation about what to do with the savings 
that they can achieve through cheaper capital
, they can invest it in greater plant or equipment 
expansion, they can buy back their stock, or they can increase their dividends.  And I would 

argue that the former would have 
a more immediate impact on employment creation than the 
latter. 
Excuse me. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
My point was that I don™t think very many people in the 
room would debate the point that capital spending is not going to be very influenced by small 

changes
 in interest rates.  So I don™t think that™
s something that we have a big disagreement 
about around the table. 
                    
             
    
          
           
    
    As far as the outlook is concerned, since the last meeting, I think there™
s been very little 
change with respect to the U.S. data.  Some data are 
a bit better
Šthe retail sales data, the motor 
vehicle sales data.  Some are 
worse
Šlike the ISM, which fell below 50, and the components of 
the ISM were particularly weak. 
Inventory strength actually held up the ISM, which is a little 
concerning.  T
he cap
ital goods orders have clearly been weak.  I™ve noticed that, if you look at 
the nondefense capital goods orders ex air, the rate of orders now has 
fallen below the rate of 
shipments, and this is actually not a positive indicator for what™s going to happen 
to capital 
spending going forward. In terms of payrolls, I was prepared to come into the meeting, if we had 

a strong payroll employment report, to argue how noisy the data 
are
 and how we can™t take a
ny signal from 
that
. But the reality is, if you really
 look at the trendŠand understand that there™
s a 
lot of noise in the 
series
Šthe last two months, 118,000 per month
; so far this year
, 139,000 per 
month
; in 2011, 153,000 per month.  Now, there™s noise month to month, but if you look at the 

longer-
term tren
ds, 
what you see is basically either a flat trend or maybe a gradually slowing 
trend.  So that™s what I would take away from the payroll data. 
There are 
also two other negative developments that I think are really worth highlighting.  
First, I think the external environment continues to worsen.  We™ve talked a lot about Europe, but 

we haven™t really talked very much about China.  ChinaŠif you look at the 
official GDP growth 
numbersŠ
is still okay; 7.6 percent, I think, 
was 
the number for the last quarter.  But if you look 
at the actual indicators coming out of China
Šlike 
trade
, for exampleŠ
it would not at all 
surprise me if it turned out that the Chinese sl
owdown was much more substantial than what the 

official indicators 
show.  
We™re also going to be seeing a further shock to real income over the 
near term from higher oil, gasoline, and grain prices.  T
he grain price effect is going to be 
particularly probl
ematic for the EMEs
, where f
ood is a much larger share of the consumption 
          
  
      
          
        
        
     
    
 basket.
  Also, as many other people have noted, the risks in early 2013 are tilted to the downside 
given what
™s going to happen on the fiscal front.  I don™t think any of us knows 
with any 
certainty what
™s going to happen, but the uncertainty between now and then is negative for the 
outlook.  And I think most of us 
believe 
that we
™re probably going to end up with some greater 
degree of fiscal restraint in early 2013 than what we have 
right now. 
So to me, the economic outlook calls for us to do more.  Now, I agree that the tools we 
have are not that powerful.  But rather than concluding from this that we shouldn™t use them, I 
conclude that we should use them more forcefully.  I think 
a failure to act forcefully at this 
meeting would be very damaging to confidence; 
it would imply that we
™re out of ammunition or 
almost out of ammunition
; and it 
also 
might signal that we were cowed by the political 
environment, which I think would be very u
nfortunate.
  When I consider the risks to action 
versus inaction in an uncertain world, I also view the outcome very much as quite 
asymmetric, 
with the bias clearly on the side of action.  
Consider two alternatives
:  We do more, and the 
economy is stronger 
than expected
; versus, 
we do very little
, and the economy disappoints.  
Which creates the greatest disappointment? Surely the latter. 
I would be very happy if we did 
another round of LSAPs, extended the guidance, et cetera, and the economy turned out to 

surprise us and did better than expected.  In that case, we could cut off the LSAP program early, 

and the balance sheet wouldn™t have grown very much.  In contrast, if we do nothing and the 

economy disappoints, I think we will rue that as a lost opportuni
ty. I also think the timing is 
right.  The ECB did something very forceful at their last meeting, and following on right behind 

them might actually provide a firmer underpinning or momentum to confidence and market 

sentiment. 
       
         
             
           Now, what
™s the lesson of the past few years? Well, I think the lesson of the past few 
years is 
that 
we™ve been consistently disappointed on the 
economic 
growth side of the equation.  
There are two explanations for this.  One is that the headwinds were greater than what we 
thought, but there™
s another explanation as well
Šthat maybe monetary policy is not as 
accommodative as we thought.  And this goes back to President Williams™s 
comments. 
I™
m pretty convinced that monetary policy stimulus effects probably become attenuated over time, 
because part of the way that monetary policy works is by affecting the timing of spending 

decisions.  We don™t really have an experience where we
™ve had a period like this in which 

monetary policy has supposedly been very loose for many years in a row.  A
nd I expect what 
we™re seeing is that the monetary policy impulse to the growth side is actually lessening over 
time.
  Regardless of whether you say it™s consistent disappointment because of headwinds or 
consistent disappointment because monetary policy is not as 
stimul
ative
, as we thought, I think 
either way
, they both imply that we should do more.  
We™ve essentially foreshadowed forceful 
action in the August FOMC statement, the minutes to that meeting, and the Chairman™s Jackson 

Hole speech, so I think it™s time to follow up on what we™ve foreshadowed with action at this 

meeting.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anybody for coffee?  Coffee is available.  Why don™t we 
take 20 minutes and return at 3:10? 
[Coffee break] 
CHA
IRMAN BERNANKE
.  This i
s a prompt group.  I like this. 
MR. 
LACKER
.  Thanks to Debbie.  Thanks to the Deputy S
ecretary. 
MS. DANKER.  Happy to help. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  All right.  Governor Yellen. 
      
    
      
           
                     
     
  
    
MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The two employment reports we have 
received since our last meeting confirm that the economy is growing too slowly to generate any 
meaningful progress in improving labor market conditions.  They™re consistent with an economy 
that is expanding at or near its potential.  And although I was heart
ened by July™s strong reading 
on consumer spending, I agree with the staff™s reluctance to make too much out of one month of 

better data.
  Taking a broader perspective, incoming data provide no evidence of any 
fundamental change in the outlook for the better.  I agree with the conclusion, too, of the staff 

memo for this meeting that the preponderance of evidence points to a large margin of labor 

market slack. 
If payroll gains are sustained at their recent paceŠaround 125,000 per month in 
July and AugustŠ
there
™s a good chance that we will look back on a lost decade.  The SEP 
forecast I submitted this round shows unemployment hovering above 7 percent at the end of 

2014, even with substantial additional policy accommodation.  Moreover, continued progress at 

the pace we have seen recently is a big ﬁif.ﬂ 
Readings from some forward
-looking indicators, 
such as the expectations component of consumer sentiment and new orders for nondefense 

capital goods ex aircraft, do not bode well for household and business spending in the months 

ahead. 
Amid the search for explanations of the painfully slow recovery, there™
s been a lively 
debate about the role of economic uncertainty.  Now, there are many different sources of 

economic uncertainty, but many of you have highlighted uncertainty about economic policy, 

especially about European policy responses and about the outlook for U.S. fiscal policies.  

You
™ve noted that this policy uncertainty has been restraining household and business spending.  
And several of you have hypothesized that this might account for the weak spending and hiring 

we saw last spring. 
If uncertainty about economic policy as opposed to uncertainty about the 
                      
     
                    broader economic outlook, accounts for why employers were deferring hiring and investment 
decisions, then a lifting of that uncertainty might arguably provide a significant boost to 

spending.  Under a favorable scenario, for example, we could see some resolution of fiscal policy 

uncertainty in the months after the election.  My own view is that policy un
certainty has been 
exerting some negative influence on aggregate demand.  Some systematic evidence of its 

influence comes from empirical work by Nick Bloom at Stanford.  Bloom and his coauthors have 

developed a high-frequency measure of economic policy uncertainty, and they™
ve related this 
measure to key economic variables, such as payroll employment growth.  They show that 

increases in economic policy uncertainty foreshadow declines in output, employment, and 

investment, and that high levels of policy uncertainty in recent years, such as uncertainty about 

future tax policies and the debt ceiling, have hampered the recovery. 
But economic policy uncertainty is only one of many factors relevant to the economic 
outlook.  And the evidence, as I read it, strongly suggests that an uptick in policy uncertainty 

cannot account for last spring™s slowdown.  Bloom™s index of economic p
olicy 
uncertainty 
spiked up in the summer of 2011, but by March it had fallen back two-thirds of the way toward 

pre
-recession levels. 
It remained at low levels in April and May, at the very time when the 
economic recovery was sputtering.  On the premise that economic policy uncertainty affects 

economic activity through consumer and business sentiment, it™s also worth noting that several 

ind
exes of consumer sentiment and business optimism peaked in April or May.  
So an increase in 
economic policy uncertainty does not seem capable of explaining the spring slowdown.  This 

suggests to me that spending is unlikely to surge, even if policy uncerta
inty were to diminish in 
the months ahead.  Unfortunately, our current economic malaise has substantially deeper roots 

than just uncertainty about the future direction of economic policy, and these headwinds are 
           
       
    
        unlikely to soon subside. Uncertainty, broadly defined, does, however, influence my thinking 
about monetary policy.  Uncertainty provides a reason why we should act forcefully now to 

strengthen the recovery, rather than trying to keep our powder dry.  Given the downside risks to 

the current outlook, and the constraints on our ability to provide stimulus while the funds rate is 

at the lower bound, the best we can do at this point is to ensure that the economy is as resilient as 

possible in case we are faced with fiscal gridlock, a European debacle, o
r other negative shocks. 
Another argument for strong action relates to h
yste
resis.  We face the worrisome risk that 
the longer the economy operates with such high levels of slack, the more likely it is that the 

downturn will have a lasting negative impact on employment and potential output.  I™
ve seen no 
strong evidence for h
yste
resis effects yet, but our current situation is unprecedented, at least in 
recent U.S. history.  
In the early 1980s, the unemployment rate fell almost 
4 percentage points 
over the 2¾ years following its late 1982 peak, to 7 percent.  By contrast, since its most recent 

peak in October 2009, the unemployment rate has fallen less than 2 percentage points.  

Moreover, h
yste
resis effects may become evident not only in the unemployment rate, but also in 
labor force participation.  As the Tealbook box shows, the participation rate remains far below 

the staff™s estimate of its demographic trend rate, and persistently poor job-finding prospects may 

well leave a permanent imprint on the particip
ation rate.
  Taking this argument one step further, I 
would argue that just as there can be permanent costs of allowing unemployment to remain high 

for an extensive time, there can also be permanent gains in output and employment in a high-

pressure labor market.
  We saw some evidence of this in the late 1990s, when h
yste
resis seemed 
to be working in reverse by pulling population segments into the labor force that for a long time 

had been excluded.  Chronic labor shortages induced firms to invest more heavily in training, 
         
        
       
                        
and it fostered upward mobility as firms moved employees up through internal job ladders more 
rapidly. 
Hyste
resis provides a rationale for 
a more expansionary monetary policy.  The argument 
runs as follows.  Our usual loss function is symmetric around 
the 
NAIRU.  It thus assigns equal 

costs to given size deviations of unemployment above and below 
the 
NAIRU.  But with 
hyste
resis
, the penalty for a deviation of unemployment above 
the 
NAIRU should be greater than 
that for an identical deviation of unemployment below 
the 
NAIRU.
  The implications of such an 
asymmetric weighting of unemployment gaps for optimal monetary policy in the present 

circumstances are substantial.  Bob Tetlow, a staff member in the 
Board™s 
Division of Research 
and Statistics, has been exploring optimal control simulations where the loss function depends on 

the squared deviations of a transformation of the unemployment rate from the NAIRU, rather 

than on the squared deviations of the unemployment rate itself from the 
NAIRU. 
This is a 
tractable technique for, in effect, assuming an asymmetric loss function.  In Tetlow™s 

simulations, the only policy tool available is the path of the federal funds rate.  His results 

showed that even a moderately lower weight on unemployment undershoots below the NAIRU, 

relative to overshoots, could postpone the timing of liftoff substantially. 
Based on all of these considerations, in tomorrow™s policy go-round or maybe this 
afternoon™s, I will argue that strong policy action is called fo
r at this meeting. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I was going to make comments about my 
forecast compared 
with
 the consensus, but I™m not entirely sure which one of the consensus 
forecasts to compare it 
with. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You pick. 
[Laughter] 
          
              
                      
        
       MS. DUKE. I
™ll just say that I think it
™s not inconsistent, but there are four assumptions 
that are a little bit different in my forecast than in the Tealbook and
, maybe
, in the forecasts of 
some of you.  Th
e first one 
is that there is an underlying strength in the fundamentals of the 
economyŠ
such as balance sheet strength, debt service capacity, and credit supply
Šand that this 
strength is being masked by low levels of business and consumer confidence as well 
as concern 
about risks posed by Europe and the fiscal cliff, but that whenever loan demand picks up, 
the 
credit supply will be fully available to meet it. 
The second
 one is 
that it
™ll be especially difficult 
to interpret data over the second half of this year and the first half of next year, as investment and 

purchase decisionmaking is increasingly either paralyzed or distorted by uncertainty about 

federal tax and spending policies, and that, on balance, the uncertainty itself will depress activity 

and lead to weaker outcomes for 2012 and 2013.  Third, the one place I do still see a potential for 

an upside surprise is in housing, and I 
believe
 purchasing mortgages might be helpful here, but 
not necessarily in the ways that you might think.  And, finally, I 
have assumed that we choose 
alternative B today
.  Furthermore, in light of my assumptions about the fiscal cliff, we™
re more 
likely to face deteriorating conditions than simply unsatisfactory progress as we approach the 

end of the year; 
and that the deter
ioration will lead us to continue asset purchases well into 2013. 
In recent meetings
, I™ve talked at length about my belief in the first assumption, and I™
m not going to repeat that today.  But I™d like to discuss assumptions 2 and 3 in this round and 

rese
rve comments about assumption 4 for the policy round.  
Beginning with my pessimism about 

the rest of this year and the first part of next, almost every conversation that I™
ve had with a 
business person or a banker recently has ha
d the same theme: 
Things s
eem pretty much the 
same
Šslow, steady improvement in business fundamentals, but with a new tendency to put all 

long-term investment or expansion decisions off until after the election.  Oddly enough, these 
                     
             
                  
businesses have the luxury of postponing decisionm
aking precisely because things have 
improved.  They™ve strengthened their balance sheets and found ways to grow the bottom line 
even in the face of sluggish top-
line growth. In fact, their profitability
-improvement efforts are 
likely at least partly 
responsible for the slow improvement in labor markets.  Indeed, the business 
investments that do get the green light are mostly directed at saving labor, and no one mentions 

any plans for hiring.  I believe the marked slowdown in business spending that we™
re already 
seeing is 
a direct result of a wait
-and
-see attitude. 
As we get closer to the end of the year and the expiration of tax cuts, implementation of 
expense sequestration, and expiration of fixes for doctors and alternative minimum taxes, 

businesses 
and individuals will have to start making adjustments for what could happen, whether 

or not it actually does.  For example, contractors who expect that they™
ll have to cut staffing if 
their contracts are affected by sequestration are legally required to is
sue layoff notices in 
advance, even if the spending is not ultimately cut and the layoffs don™t actually happen.  Those 

who receive the notices will surely adjust their spending accordingly, and this potential pall on 

holiday spending has to be making retailers nervous about their inventories.  Those same 

retailers are having to pull the trigger now on their inventory decisions in the face of a potential 

shutdown of E
ast 
Coast ports by a longshorem
en™s
 strike.  So who could blame them if they 
decide to shav
e a bit off their purchases just to be sure? 
Health
-care companies are especially 
cautious as they plan for both sequestration and implementation of health-
care reform.  Simple 
operational changes, like tax withholding tables, have to be put in place for all businesses.  For 

individuals, asset sales decisions, especially for sales of businesses, will have to be made soon to 

ensure the current capital gains tax rate. I had the personal experience of doing a new will 

recently, and my lawyer explained to me 
that things would be very different if I died this year or 
              
                
        
   
         
 in January [laughter].  For these reasons, I believe that the fourth quarter is going to be 
affe
cted 
by the fiscal cliff regardless of its ultimate resolution as businesses
, in particular
, hit the 
brakes. 
And I ca
n™t convince myself that a lame
-duck Congress will somehow resolve all of the fiscal 
issues by the end of the year, no matter how the election turns out.  In fact, the best case I can 
construct is a temporary extension that pushes the poli
tical wrangling well into the first quarter 
of next year.  And after the debt ceiling brinkmanship we saw last time, I think a perfectly 

plausible scenario is a plunge off the fiscal cliff
, on the assumption that some sort of deal will be 
easier to construct after the damage becomes more obvious.
  So I think we have to make 
contingency plans for how we can shore up confidence in the face of a really bad outcome, 
rather 
than thinking just about 
how we react if the recovery stays unsatisfactorily slow.  For these 
reasons, I
™ve taken on board a bit of a lean toward the 
ﬁFiscal 
Cliff
ﬂ scenario in the near
-term 
portion of my forecast. 
In contrast, my continued optimism about housing and the underlying strength in the 
economy shows through in my medium-
term foreca
st.  I think 
that 
the inventory factors that 
began to emerge early in the year are now taking full hold in house price movements, and that 

the momentum arrow is pointing up.  This makes a difference.  
The s
taff estimates that roughly 
3 million households, 
almost 
one-
fourth
 of underwater households, moved from a negative to a 
positive equity position in the second quarter.  The Tealbook baseline forecast assumes a 

5 percent increase in house prices this year that
™s already pretty much baked in, 
followed by a 
leveling
-off.  But some models are predicting continued strong gains in house prices.  Staff 
forecasts of house prices and residential investment are on the conservative side, tempered by 

concern about foreclosure pipelines, 
the elevated level of vacant h
ouses, weak household 
formation, and the tepid pace of 
the 
housing recovery so far. 
                                  Here I think there™
s reason for more optimism. 
Foreclosure pipelines are full because the 
exits are still clogged, but the pace of new delinquencies has slowed markedly.  
The exits are no 
longer clogged by national moratoriums or retooling for new modification programs.  The 

current backlog is more closely tied to state
-specific or operational issues that seem to me 
unlikely to suddenly clear and release a flood of foreclosures onto the market.  
As for the vacant 

inventory, a large portion of the vacant homes not listed for sale 
is outside of bank REO 
inventory.  
Becaus
e we don™t know why they™
re held off the market, I
™m not sure we can make 
assumptions about their sudden return to the market.  I view the potential for pent-up demand to 

show through in faster household formation and put upward pressure on house prices as even 

more likely than the potential for a surge in foreclosures to hold prices down.  At some point, 

demographics win.  Those kids now living at home with their 
parents will not stay there until 
they™re 40.  
[Laughter] 
And when they do form households, they™re going to require housing 
units, whether rental or owner occupied. 
MR. 
FISHER
.  We™re going to hold you to that. 
MS. 
RASKIN
.  Ship them to Betsy™s house.  [Laughter] 
MS. DUKE.  To me, this represents the one area of dry tinder in the economy that could 
be lit with a spark of confidence.  To be sure, mortgage lending conditions are still extremely 

tight, but some recent developments should help.  The specte
r of putback risk has reportedly 
been holding back loans to borrowers at the lower end of GSE standards.  
The 
FHFA has now 

committed to reducing putback risk beginning in January 2013 through better front-end quality 

control and time limits on liability.  Wit
h house prices on the rise, fewer loans should fall 

through 
because of
 appraisal issues.  Regulatory uncertainty should clear, 
as new regulatory 
               
     
                  
      
          requirements for loan origination, securitization, and servicing are likely to be finalized in the 
coming month
s. Probably the biggest drag on lending is the shrinkage of loan origination capacity.  The 
industry is showing signs of strain in what looks to be only a tri
llion
-dollar origination year, 
compared 
with 
a peak origina
tion of $3 trillion not that many years 
ago. 
But if high profits are 
the best fertilizer, we should see more banks entering the business.  I want to investigate actual 

data, but anecdotally, the bankers I spoke with this time 
who
 were in the mortgage business were 
actually having record profits, while those who weren™t in mortgage origination were wondering 

about their survival.  I™
m talking about the difference between a range of 
0.5 to 0.6 ROA, 
for 
those with no mortgage business, versus one of 1.30 to 1.50, for those with a mortgage business.  

So, for all of these reasons, I think there™s a lot of meat left on the house price and housing 
finance bone, and I™
m optimistic about that part of the forecast.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO
.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Because
 John captured my views on the 
economic outlook, I™m going to jettison most of what I would have said.  In fact, I think John 

captured my views better than I had captured my views.  So I thought I™d turn back to labor 

markets
, moved by some of Charlie Plosser™s comments.  The first comment I™d make 
is that it™s 
important to distinguish between cyclical lab
or market conditions and longer-
term labor market 
issues.  I don™t think there™s any doubt that we™ve got some chronic labor market issues in the 

United States.  There
™s been evidence of declining dynamism in U.S. labor markets for well over 
a decade.  There certainly is a substantial sense tha
t people currently taking lower-
income 
service
-sector jobsŠ
if they had better ed
ucation and trainingŠwould be available for jobs that 
might then 
be created with higher value added. 
What Charlie referred to as polarization is 
                         
     
                   
  
     
   undoubtedly true, but again, a chronic issue rather than a cyclical one.  I actually think that 
unlike so many other questions, there™s been a substantial convergence of viewsŠnot entirely, 

but a substantial convergence of viewsŠaround the proposition that a relatively small portion of 

the big jump in unemployment that we™ve seen is attributable to structural fact
ors. There
™s been, 
as you all know, substantial, good, and careful work from the Federal Reserve Banks of 

Cleveland, New York, 
and San Francisco over the past several years that
 has supported that 
conclusion.  A
nd I think among academic researchers, the c
onvergence is also manifesting itself
, as shown most recently in Ed Lazear™s paper at Jackson Hole, following on, by about five 

months, Jesse Rothstein™s paper, 
which surveyed much of the same material and came to many 

of the same conclusions. 
Jeff
, at the last meeting
, suggested that a paper done by Richmond Fed research staff was 
a dissonant voice on this basic proposition that structural unemployment was not a big part of the 

story.  This paper, of course, starts from a very different perspective on long-
term unemployment 
than the literature I just referred to a moment ago.  The Richmond Fed paper argues that an 

unobserved heterogeneity among unemployed workers means that newly unemployed workers 

have inherently different exit rates
, and that over 
time, the composition of the pool of the 
unemployed shifts toward workers who started with the lower exit rates.  I looked at the paper 

after Jeff talked about it at the last meeting, and I spoke with others here at the Board about it, 

and I actually don™t think it establishes a case for structural unemployment. There are a lot of 

empirical and technical questions about the paperŠ
it™s certainly interesting 
and may well have 
significant merit
Šbut I actually don™t think it™s making a structural argument, at 
least not if we 
think of ﬁ
structural
ﬂ as referring to nontransitory unemployment that can™t be affected fairly 
directly by fluctuations in aggregate demand.  It would be unsurprising to learn that firms are 
                
      
        
  
          more likely to lay off relatively less
-valued employees whose lesser perceived abilities may 
mean that they™re less likely to be quickly plucked up by a firm that is hiring.  That phenomenon 
is entirely consistent with 
a demand
-driven increase in unemployment.  
More generally, the 
Richmond Fed model attempts to decompose the variation in the pool of the unemployed over 

time.  So it addresses the reasons for fluctuations in unemployment over historyŠin recessions, 

but also in recoveries.  The reasons for unemploym
ent increases also explain the reversals that 
take place during recoveries.  That is, as there are fewer unemployed
, firms cannot afford to be 
as demanding and thus are more likely to turn to the pool of the supposedly less 
valuable 
workers. 
This seems
, to me at least
, more a 
cyclical than a structural explanation
, and thus, 
again, whatever the ultimate merits of the paper, I don™t think 
it really undercuts the consensus 

reached in the papers to which I referred earlier. 
One final thought on structural unemployment, 
and this relates a bit to what Janet was 
saying a moment ago.  The Richmond paper describes something as the ﬁtrue duration 

dependence
ﬂ position, as opposed to the ﬁunobserved heterogeneityﬂ position that it takes.  The 

true duration dependence position is that, quite apart from any inherent worker qualities, the bad 

luck of being unemployed for an extended period will itself begin to erode the overall 

employability of enough workers that there 
will 
be macroeconomic effects. As Janet said, 
histo
rically
, we haven™t seen much evidence of this in the United States, though many, myself 
included, have thought that the severity and duration of the current employment problem could 

produce some observable h
yste
resis effects this tim
e around.  L
ogically
, one would think that at 
some point these effects would manifest themselves.
  But I have to say, 
to date
, there still isn™t 
much indication of any such effects.  And indeed, I think if one looks at what™s been happening 

to long-term unemployed, you might sa
y there™s actually been a little bit of an improvement in 
                                       
their performance, which would suggest that we™re not sliding closer toward h
yste
resis, but that, 
once again
, for reasons not entirely understood, the U.S. 
labor market seems relatively insulated 
from those effects. But again, as Janet said, basically
, whether you believe that h
yste
resis is 
around the corner or not doesn™t change your policy prescription.  If you think that it hasn™t 
clicked in to date but it might, that™s an argument for greater stimulus now in order to stop it 

from happening.  If you think that there™s unlikely to be h
yste
resis and thus the cyclical 
explanation dominates, then obviously the unemployment should be susceptible to increased 

aggregate demand stimulus.  So, in that sense, I think 
these arguments
 happily converge around 
the same policy prescription.  And for me, 
this all, again, reinforces the view that the story of the 

economy is still one of inadequate aggregate demand.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. LACKER.  Mr. Chairman. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  First
, I™d like to thank Governor Tarullo for reading the Richmond Fed 
paper
.  Second, I™d like to point out 
that
Šin terms of the distinction I was making before 
between what the unemployment rate would converge to in the long run and the reference rate 

that™s relevant for current policyŠ
a shock that hits the economy today, if it™s a structural shock 

that™s permanent and long lived, 
it is going to affect the longer-
term normal rate of 
unemployment
. But whether it™s permanent or transitory is irrelevant for whether it affects the 
policy-
relevant rate today.
  See what I™m saying? It doesn™t matter if it fades out right away or if 
it™s going to last a long time. It could affect the policy
-relevant rate to
day either way. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  How does that handle policy lags?  Monetary policy doesn™t 
work for 
a while. 
       
                     
                 MR. LACKER.  I think that™s orthogonal.  I think that™s tangential to this question.  In the 
models, you™ve got policy lags.  Policy tak
es effect over time, but it™s still the case that you™re 
carrying around this reference rate
ŠPresident Bu
llard talked about a flex price equilibriumŠ 
and it™s affected by both transitory and permanent shocks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My outlook has not changed materially since 
the JulyŒ
August meeting.  Maybe incoming data ha
ve been mixed, but forward-looking 
indicators still remain consistent with an economy growing in the near term in 
a range between 
1½ per
cent and 
2 percent. 
Similarly, the fact
ors shaping the medium-term outlook have not 
changed significantly
; the general contours of my outlook remain the same.  Yes, some of the 
incoming data during the interme
eting period suggested modest increases in household spending 
and employment, and the household sector showed some further slight signs of improvement.  

But no data 
are 
yet showing a basis to believe that these modest increases will be sustained to 
such an extent that faster momentum might be expected
.  Indeed, other data, such as those for 
business spending and consumer confidence, remain soft.  It is not yet obvious that this path, 
or 

even
 a couple of months of stronger-
than
-expected economic activity
, could reduce the amount 
of slack in labor market
s or alter the trajectory of expected inflation to a degree that would 
obviate the need for a further easing of monetary policy.  
Last week™s employment report
Š payroll employment only 55,000 higher than reported in July, 
after taking into account 

revisionsŠdoes not suggest above-trend 
economic 
growth or a declining trend in the 

unemployment rate.  It suggests, 
instead
, that the unemployment rate is likely to move sideways 
with no sign of a substantial and sustainable strengthening in the pace of economic recovery. 
               
                          And this unsatisfactory modal projection is what exists 
before
 even considering downside 
risks to the outlook.  One particular downside risk that remains quite elevated relates to what 
we™ve been talking about
Šthe depressed level of labor participation and the enhanced level of 
long-
term unemployment. 
The decline in the labor force participation rate since the
 beginning of 
the recession is ominous, and although the Board staff predicts that over the next couple of years 

the labor force participation rate will flatten out, the recession
, as Governor Yellen described, 
may well have permanent effects on the labor force participation rate
, just as the high-
pressure 
labor market of the late 1990s pulled people back into the labor force 
who
 had been excluded for 
a long time
Šonly now, unfortunately, 
in reverse. 
In addition, with a substantial and growing 
proportion of unemployed workers having been jobless for long periods, we face an elevated risk 

that such a high level of long-term unemployment will persist long enough to permanently 

depress labor supply and potential output.  Unlike downside risks emanating from the European 

crisis and U.S. fiscal policyŠ
which
, were they to occur, 
theoretically can be addressed with 
accommodative monetary policy after the fact
Šthe potential h
yste
resis created by drops in the 
labor force participation rate and increases in long-
term unemployment will prove intractable to 
address with accommodative monetary policy that isn™t inflationary.
  So I find the particular 
downside risk of h
yste
resis to be especially pernicious because it™s difficult to address after the 
fact. 
But
, more optimis
tically, it is one downside risk that monetary policymakers do have some 
ability to mitigate prior to its occurrence. 
Similarly, I wonder about the permanent or transitory nature of household and business 
expectations.  The economic outlook appears damped by some form of pessimism.  Look at the 

Michigan survey question on the proportion of households expecting unemployment to improve.  

Earlier this year
, that number had recovered, but now it has dropped down again.  
Similarly, 
      
        
     
                         
  households™ income expectations for the coming 12 months have hardly recovered at all since the 
recession despite the fact that actual income has somewhat increased.  On the business side, 

expectations for business conditions six months hence as measured in the Empire State and 

Philadelphia Fed surveys have dropped back sharply again.  In the case of the Empire State 

survey, they™re back close to levels seen during the recession.  Capital spending plans also don™t 

look great.  Surveys from the National Association 
for
 Business Economi
cs show capital 
spending to have dropped sharply in the second quarter.  Surveys from the National Federation 

of Independent Business show capital spending to be gradually rising, 
but still remaining at less 

than half of 
its pre
-recession level. 
It™s diffic
ult to project whether these expectations will 
transition from being temporary blips to permanent shifts, but the fact that these expectations 

have tried to recover from the recession before but been knocked back, sometimes more than 

once, might be a facto
r that could keep households and businesses from getting too hopeful 
again. The longer we have an economy that looks bleak as far as the eye can see, the more this 

bleakness gets built into expectations.  Households and businesses now see a recovery slow to 

materialize.  They assume that things will get better because they always have, but then th
ings 
don™t 
get better
.  So households and businesses start to wonder if this is just a delay or if it™s just 
the new normal.  If they think it™s the new normal, it could become just that.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In terms of the outlook, I™m reasonably close to 
the consensus forecast you put forth, and just a shade more upbeat than I was at ou
r last 

meeting
Šthat is to say, maybe a tenth or two lower on the unemployment rate for 2013. 
I™ve 
interpreted the incoming data since the last meeting inclusive of the jobs report on Friday as 

approximately a 
wash and feel 
as though the situation in Europe looks just a bit brighter.  So, 
             
       
     
   
                    
  
 overall
, I would say it appears we™re still about as 
ﬁstuck in the mud
ﬂ as we have been over the 
last several months, and I agree with Governor Tarullo™s characterization that it™s largely an 
aggregate demand phenomenon. 
In trying to think about the factors that are leading demand to be so sluggish and about 
the channels by which monetary policy might be able to help, I™ve been struck by a few pieces of 

survey evidence.  Now, they turn out to be the s
ame pieces of survey evidence that Governor 
Raskin was just referring to, thereby scooping a fair portion of what I was going to say. 
MS. RASKIN.  It happened to me for a long time.  [Laughter] 

MR. STEIN.  I™m going to 
just start juggling next time. 
Anywa
y, just to underscore, 
really
Šon the Michigan survey, we had a very interesting briefing a few weeks ago by Claudia 
Sahm,
 in R
esearch and 
Statistics
, who
™d been looking carefully at these data.  And the gist of the 
finding is, not only 
is it 
low, but 
also, basically
, it fell 
from
 2007 to 2009, and it really hasn™t 
recovered since.  Moreover, it™s not well explained by household characteristicsŠt
here™s a large 
negative residual there in a way that seems different from previous experience. 
In a similar vein 
but mu
ch less scientifically, I looked at a different survey, the Conference Board™s Consumer 
Confidence Index, which also fell in August.  Very much to your point, they do a breakdown of 

the index into views of the current situationŠ
a present situation in
dex
Šand a future 
expectations piece, and all of the drop was coming from the future expectations piece.  
So I was 

curious.  I went back and compared it 
with
 previous peaks of unemployment that we™ve had.  
The ones I looked at were May 1975 and December 1982.  W
hat you see is
, at those times when 
unemployment was also very high, if you ask
ed people about the present situation, it was dismal, 
but if you ask
ed them about future expectations, it was not nearly so bad as it is today.  These 
are 
just a couple of data points, but 
they™re 
consistent with what I take to be the spirit of Claudia™s 
                  
             
         
    
 work, which is, it™s as if, given where we are today and given the current situation, 
people feel 
the future is considerably more pessimistic
.  And again, I think this is pessimism as opposed to 
uncertainty, which has a slightly different implication because it™s less clear that, if the fiscal 

cliff resolves itself, this kind of thing gets fixed. 
Another survey on the business side
: I just yesterday got a s
urvey that Duke University 
does in conjunction with 
CFO 
magazine
, where they talk to 900 CFOs of U.S. firms.  One of the 
new questions in there this time
ŠI think, 
actually
, Steve Sharp
e helped them design this 
questionŠasked the firms if they would in any 
way change their capital spending plans for a 
given change in interest rates.
  Here
, it is strikingly like a large
-sample version of President 
Fisher™s CEO conversations, where only 3 percent of the firms say they would in any way 

change their capital spen
ding for a 50 basis point movement in rates.  
Now, I take Vice 
Chairman
 Dudley™s critique here.  First of all, in this one, unlike consumer confidence, we don™t 
have a benchmark
, so I don™t know what people would say in normal times
.  But as a Bayesian
, I™m inclined to think that there™s something going on here, even though I wouldn™t say it™s a huge 
thing. 
So, putting this together
Šnow, 
this part is very impressionistic, but I gue
ss the overall 
feeling I get 
from 
looking at these various pieces of survey e
vidence is the sense that when we 
make a policy move now, we™re playing more for whatever effect we can have on consumer and 

business confidence than for the normal hydraulic 
effe
ct we would have on financing conditions 
per se.  That is to say, we may know more about how to move interest rates than about how to 

influence confidence, but it™s the latter that, in some sense, is the dragging anchor.  This is not an 

ﬁalways
ﬂ situation.  I think it™s, in some 
respects, 
the opposite of where we were in 2009 at the 
                     
                    
  
  time of QE1
, when really the thing to do, the imperative, was to fix financing conditions, and 
people would figure it out one way or the other. 
I don™t know if this has any implications for policy. I
t strikes 
me that
, if this is right, it 
should color particularly how we think about the communications aspect.  I, 
like many others 
here
, believe
 that the need for action is clear, but I think, less so than usual, the bond market is 

not really our primary audience.
  So maybe when we think about policy, 
we want to worry less 
about putting together the biggest, most inclusive package that has the maximum bond market 

impact
, and worry more about, how do we deliver a simple and coherent message that normal 
humans can understand, as opposed to mainly Fed w
atchers
?  I think we™ll have a chance to talk 
about some of these issues.  I™m not sure if this concept is fully operational, but I have this 

conviction that we really have to think about our audience as being business m
anagers and 
householdsŠ
more so 
than at other times
.  There™s so much talk about, what are the Fed watchers 
expecting us to do
?  And I think we don™t want to get overly caught up in delivering just to them.  

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Than
k you.
  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
It does seem to me that there™s a decent 
degree of agreement
, or at least overlap
, about the status and outlook for the economy, and that 
the real question is, what can monetary policy do, 
and
 what should it do going forward?  And 
I™m going to defer that to tomorrow. 
In that spirit
, I propose to deprive the Committee of my 
detailed recitation of intermeeting events and proceed to 
the executive summary part of it
, which 
is, 
really
, that we™ve b
een on a round trip.  We had positive news early in the intermeeting 
period, which 
was a trip to hope and back, and it left me very much in the same place where I 
started
:  I see an economy with a substantial amount of slack that is growing at about 2 
percent
;          
                     
        
       inflation that is bouncing around just below 2 percent on commodity effects, 
but close to target
; and better financial conditions for now.  But as Europe improves, the fiscal cliff begins to 
approach in a serious way, and what I am hearing is that there is little to no hope of action in the 

lame duck.
  Of course, that depends on the arrangement of forces after the election, s
o it™s 
completely unknowable. 
Ultimately and most important
, there is little, if any, reason to expect 
significant improvement in job creation in the coming months. 
My conversations with a group of about 10 diverse industrial companiesŠ
this is not 
auto
s, so it™
s away from one of the real strengths
.  The other parts of the industrial sector, 
let me 
say
, are pretty weak
, and they s
trongly confirm that last point about employment.
  Outside of a 
couple of bright spots like housing and li
ght
 vehicles, it™s soft everywhere, especially in Europe.  
Big customers are postponing orders
; they™re not canceling them.  It™s nothing like from 2008 to 
2009, but the softness that began about six months ago is now the new normal for these 

companies.  The game is about share gain and taking out costs.  It™s 
a low
-growth environment.  
All new projects are on hold, and there is no hiring.  In fact, the 
entire goods
-producing sector of 
the economy lost 16,000 jobs in August.  If you look just at the manufacturing piece of that and 

go back over a quarter, there was a net creation of 15,000 jobs, and two-thirds of that is auto.  I 

want to say that you hear, 
ﬁUncertainty, uncertainty
,ﬂ 
from all 
of 
these people, but they™re really 
talking about two different things.  These are not people who roll over at 4:00 a.m. to check 

Twitter for the latest news from 
Karlsruhe
 on the German decision.  A 
particular compan
y in the 
beverage manufacturing business had a big order from a German OEM for a beverage line, and 

that order has been pushed out at least a quarter.  That™s uncertainty.  It™s about demand.  
As far 

as Europe relates to these companies
Šand 
these are pretty global companies
Šit™s really focused 
on demand.  The fiscal cliff is something different.  There™s a sick feeling in people™s stomachs 
                   
  
     
  
       
              
 that this is really bad, that this is our country not being able to function, and 
it™s like last August 
on steroidsŠnot that there™s anything wrong with steroids.  [Laughter]  They™ve been very 
helpful to me lately. 
Let me say where that leaves me
.  The question that looms isŠ
and I™m going to
, again
, leave aside monetary policy
Šwhen do we break out of this
?  And I really do believe that we 
will.  We always have. 
I can 
remember many of these cycles where you really wonder if this is it 
and we™re never going to get out. I really do feel that
 if you look at our own projections, 
essentially
, all of us project that we™re going to have those 3 
percent, 
4 percent catch
-up years.  
They™re now scheduled for 2014 and ™15, but really, there™s a ton of uncertainty around that.  So 

I™m going to share this highly anecdotal evidence in an effort to end on something of a high note. 
I talked to both private equity investors and hedge fund investors, and it™s always very 
interesting to compare the two of them.
  The hedge fund investors are in a really difficult 
environment.  They™re traders who get marked every quarter, 
and
, in a world that has very few 
ways for them to make money, they™re generally very conservatively positioned, and their 

investor base seems to be fine with that.  
Private equity firms are feeling quite differently about 

things.  They basically think about creat
ing value over a three
-to five
-year period, and many PE 
firms right now, large and small, think that this is a great time to buy. In fact, a str
ing of large 
industrial properties, which would ordinarily have been expected to trade to corporations, 
has 

trade
d to private equity.  T
here are three reasons why the private equity firms are feeling 
aggressive.  First, the
ir natural competitors
, these big companies
, are all frozen on the sideline
s, 
sitting on their cash, ruled by risk-averse public boards, and out of the game.  If anything, 
they™re 

going to wind up being net sellers as the recession goes on.  Second, leveraged 
finance markets, 
as Andreas was discussing this morning, are very attractive
, with low rates and issuer-
favorable 
            
                                    
      
   terms that are just about
 reminiscent of the bubble days, and all 
of 
that provides critical 
flexibility in case deals don™t go well. 
Third
Šand really the one that™s relevant for this policy 
exercise
Šprivate equity firms think about the medium term, and they see the future as bett
er. 
These large private equity firms 
are completely global; 
they 
each own hundreds of companies in 
every major economy and 
in 
every vertical
; and they systematically mine the data that they get 
and they™ve got the talent on board to do that.  This is not the private equity industry of 20 years 
ago.
  So they™re seeing something.  They really are.  It™s pretty consistent, and what™s holding 
back the volume of deals is only supply.  There was quite a similar pattern back in the early 

2000s after the dot-
com c
rash.  In that period, as many will recall, the S&P lost about half of its 
value.  We had a very soft economy in 2001 and 2002, a stri
ng of corporate accounting scandals 
leading to Sarbanes
ŒOxley, and a deflation scare in 2002.  Across the board, 
net sellers of 
businesses were
 on the sidelines, and the private equity firms were extremely aggressive during 
that period.  Those deals turned out to be, 
in many cases
, some of the best investments in the 
history of the industry.  It turned out to be a great time to buy.  I would also add that they were 

net sellers in 
2005 and 2006.  So the question is, 
why take any signal from this, right? I realize it 
doesn™t tell us anything at all about the next few quarters
.  B
ut I will say that it™s a bit of a sign
al to me because this is a group of investors with very successful and, in 
some cases
, long track 
records that were looking ahead to strong growth in the medium term, 
and they were willing to 

put more than just an opinion on the line in that belief.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Could I ask the Governor a question?  Geographically, 
do they express any preferences about where they want to have the business? 
MR. POWELL.  Yes.  T
he hedge funds are, as 
a staff mem
o from Matt and Fabio
 pointed 
out, unanimously not believing a long-run solution in Europe.  They™re just very pessimistic.  
I                  
            
       
          
would say the private equity firms are 
in the same place.  You see very little private equity 
interest in Europe.  There™s great uncertainty 
and
 that kind of thing.  
In t
he United States, you see 
a lot of activity
Šagain, restrained only by a lack of supply.  When there™s a good company 
that™s out there, the bidding is furious, and they™re all saying, 
ﬁThis is the time.
ﬂ  This happened 
10 years ago. 
And Asia
ŠI can™t really give you any call on that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you very much.  I see I have two hours now.  
[Laughter] Let me summarize and just make a few comments.
  Participants didn™t see much 
change in the o
utlook, on net, during 
the interme
eting period.  Economic grow
th is still sluggish. 
The near
-term growth outlook is modest, and the recovery is in a holding pattern.  Output and 
employment growth are falling short of levels needed to reduce unemployment.  Headwinds for 

recovery include fiscal policy, deleveraging, tight credit, and international factors, including not 

only Europe, but also slowing in China.  
Some felt that we risk a lost decade, but another view is 

that recovery has been consistent with previous experiences with banking and financial crises, à 

la Reinhart and Rogoff. 
Recent labor market reports have been weak, although unemployment has fallen in the 
past year.  Some decline in unemployment is due to reduced participation, and employment-
to-population ratios are at post-trough lows.  H
yste
resis is a risk and a possible rationale for action.  
Retail sales data were a bit better, and households continue to deleverage, but consum
er confidence is soft, and people are unusually pessimistic.  
Real 
estate activity is improving in a 
number of D
istricts.  Sales are up
, permits
 and 
prices are also rising
, inventories are low, and 
delinquencies are falling.  Rising prices may stimulate further sales.  There is some strength also 

in commercial real estate
.         
   
           
  
       
      With regard to measurements of slack, there was, again, discussion of the issue.  Staff 
analysis concludes that slack is high, and it was noted that inflationary pressures remain low.  
Some argued that measurements of slack should distinguish the long
er-run normal rate and the 
current equilibrium rate
, or natural rate, which varies over time.
  Discussion of the structure 
of 
the labor market noted that routine jobs are disappearing, but 
declining dynamism may be more 
chronic than cyclical, and the long-
term unemployed are not completely shut out of the labor 
market. 
Uncertainty remains an important issue for businesses, holding back investment and 
hiring.  Job growth is particularly weak.  Small businesses are concerned about taxes and 

regulation.  The fis
cal cliff is a particular risk, as is electoral uncertainty. Some research 
suggests that higher uncertainty acts like an aggregate demand shock.  Policy uncertainty is a 

headwind, but not the only one, as the Bloom index suggests.  
In agriculture
, the dro
ught will 
impede GDP growth over the next several quarters.  However, farm income has been supported 

by high prices and crop insurance.  Energy activity is expanding.  Manufacturing reports are 

mixed.  Auto sales are up.  Firms are focused on gaining market share, but among financial 

firms
, private equity is more optimistic and aggressive. 
In the financial sector, long-
term interest rates are very low
, with negative real yields, but 
it was noted that the equilibrium real yield in the economy may also be neg
ative.  Financial stress 

ind
exes are not particularly worrisome, and financial froth has not been reported.  
Firm balance 
sheets are strong
, and credit supply is available when loan demand strengthens.  The ECB™s 
actions have again helped calm Europe, but further progress requires action by governments.  

Risks remain serious, 
and economic 
growth on the Continent should remain weak. 
                    
  
   
   
          
         
              
  
 With respect to inflation, the outlook has not changed much.  Inflation seems likely to 
remain near or below 2 
percent in the m
edium term. Low inflation is also predicted by DSGE 
models.  Businesses are not particularly concerned about their costs.  Inflation expectations are 
stable, and there™s little evidence of disinflation. 
There was a good bit of premature discussion of mone
tary policy
, which covered, among 
other things, the effectiveness of possible actions, the risks and benefits of actions and inaction, 

and issues of communication. 
Any questions or comments? [No response] 
I come after Governor Powell
, so I have an 
even 
more difficult task. I™ll try to respond a little bit to some of the comments that were made 
today.  The basic outlook is, as everyone has pointed out, that we have an economy 
that 
is 
growing very slowly, at or below trend, and, by the usual Okun™s l
aw re
lationships, we™re not 
seeing very much progress in the labor market. 
Unemployment is about the same 
as in 
January, 
and I note that aggregate hours 
are 
also only about ½ percent higher than 
they 
were
 in January.  
President Bullard noted that there was a p
eriod of improvement in the unemployment rate around 
the turn of the year.  One interpretation of that is that it was a one-
time payback for the rapid 
drop in jobs during 
the recession. 
In any case, 
economic 
growth, if anything, is slowing relative to earl
ier in the recovery. 
Now, how do we explain, understand, and interpret the very slow growth we™ve been seeing? 

That was also 
discussed in the go-round.  One possibility is that there™s been a once-
and
-for
-all 
level shift, that we™ve dropped down to a lower level and 
are 
continuing a
t trend at about the 
earlier pace.  So the suggestion there is that we are close to potential and output 
growth going 
forward will remain trend
-like.
  This interpretation does not look implausible if you eyeball 
graphs for GDP or consumption growth.  It is consistent with some 
earlier episodes of financial 
      
               
        
           
     crisis, and
, among others, the IMF has given this perspective a little bit of support.  
The 
alternative interpretation held by others around the table is that we remain well b
elow potential.  
I think it™s perfectly possible to rationalize that.  First, there have been ongoing headwinds, both 
endogenous and exogenous.  The endogenous ones include 
financial balance sheet, financial 
accelerator type
s of 
effects 
and the exogenous ones include Europe, fiscal, and the like.  So 
there 
have been continuing headwinds, and, of course, 
sticky prices
Šas was pointed outŠ
are part of 
overlapping price-setting coordination issues and the like.  I think both of these interpretations 

are conceivable, and they probably both have some truth in them.  
As President Bullard 
mentioned, I don™t think it™s very likely that we™ll return to the pre-
crisis trend. 
Now, on the permanent drop in the level, I™m a 
little bit bemused by the appeal to 
Reinhart
ŒRogoff because the
irs is a strictly reduced
-form observation, 
it has no structural 
interpretation, and it could involve any number of reasons, including uncontrolled factors 
such as 
poor policymaking.  So I don™t take that as a very convincing answer unless I understand better 

what the rationale is that is explaining the slower growth.
  The second story does provide a 
rationale, does provide an explanation.  Notably, labor utilization does appear to be exception
ally 

low, and I won™t repeat Governor Tarullo™s comments, but Eddie Laz
ear, who I don™t think is 
necessarily inclined to find 
a cyclical source of unemployment
, is just the latest of the majority 
of studies in this area 
to find a significant cyclical compo
nent.  It™s true that the short-
term 
equilibrium unemployment rate can vary.  There™s no question about that.  S
taff 
members have 
tried to include some of that in their analysis.  B
ut we need 
a story.  It™s possible, based on that 
kind of analysis, 
that the equilibrium unemployment rate is 
above the long
er-term natural rate at 
this point.  We don™t know.  I want to emphasize that on all of these thingsŠon the economy, on 

the effects of policy
Šwe™re incredibly uncertain, and we have to make decisions under 
                 
   
            
      
    
       
   uncertainty.  We can™t let waiting for certainty be the condition for taking any action.  We have 
to make the best choices we can, given a very uncertain situation.  
So, in that kind of world, of 
course, there are 
type 
I and t
ype 
II errors.  This is similar
 to what 
the Vice Chairman was saying. 
We are close to our inflation objective.  We™re quite far from our unemployment objective, at 

least the long
er-run unemployment objective.  Arguments 
have been made that staying far away 
from the long
er-run unemployment level for a protracted period has its own costs 
besides the 
temporary costs of the cyclical unemployment. 
In terms of our policy tools, I do agree with President Plosser that having a good grip on 
the costs and the risks of those tools is very importan
t, and that™s one reason why we have been
, in some ways, not as quick to use the tools as we might have been if we were using short-
term 
interest rates as our policy tool.
  But I feel that I™d like to thank the staff for the work that™s been 
done over the last couple of interme
eting periods. I think the work on market functioning, the 
work on financial stabilityŠ
all 
of 
those things have made me more comfortable, 
at least
, that we 
can manage the costs of these 
unconventional policy tools. 
Now, I might as 
well take the advantage to talk a little bit about the policy tools and some 
of the issues that have been brought up.  I have great admiration for Michael Woodford.  I hired 

him, I coauthored with him, I was his colleague for many years, and I think he™s a 
terrific 
economist.  And I think a lot of what he said in his paper at Jackson Hole was very useful.  I do 

think that he understates the consensus in the literature about the impact of unconventional tools, 

particularly asset purchases, on the economy.  I won™t go through an extended discussion, but I™ll 

make just a couple of observations on the empirical side.  
He focused primarily on the event-
study evidence.  He came to that with a M
odigliani
ŒMiller type of financial markets perspective, 
which has a lot of theoretical appeal but obviously is not empirically very successful.  It doesn™t 
                  
    
    
                 
     explain a lot of premiums
, a lot of volatility
, in actual financial markets.  So
, using that 
perspective, he was inclined to dis
miss the results from the event
-study research. 
But this 
research does tend to find, 
almost uniformly
, that asset purchases do have effects on financial 
conditions, notwithstanding the fact that it™s very difficult to measure the surprise component of 
a change in asset purchase policy. I was very
 much involved in the literature on measuring the 
effects of surprises in the federal funds rate, and there at least you have a futures market that can 

tell you what was expected.  Obviously, 
that™s very difficult in the case of asset purchases, and 

theref
ore you w
ould expect the event
-study literature
, if anything
, to bias down the findings, the 
impact of asset purchases on financial conditions.  But beyond that, in looking at only the event 

studies, Woodford™s paper ignores two other major literatures.  O
ne is a substantial literature on 
the effects of relative supplies of 
Treasuries on term premiums.  I would cite, for example, 
Kutt
ner
 (2006) and Greenwood and V
aya
nos (2010), and this appears also in work by Ga
gnon, Hamilton and Wu, and others.  
And a sec
ond line of research is based on no-
arbitrage term 
structure models, such as the 
Li and Wei
 paper that has been used a lot here at the Board.  So 
there have been 
a number of different approaches, and again, I do think that the bulk of the 
evidence is that 
these tools do have effects on financial conditions.  Obviously, 
there are issues 
about the transmission to the real economy, and I take some of the points that have been made, 

but there are factors there working in both directions.  For example, to the ex
tent that credit 
markets are becoming less tight
Šstandards and terms are becoming less restrictiveŠl
ower 
interest rates will have more effect rather than less effect. 
The central message of Woodford™s paper, though, which I do agree with very much, is 
that expectations management is really critical to managing monetary policy at the zero bound. 

And I agree with Governor Stein that the language is very important.  How we present what 
         
    
              
         
      
   
           
  
    we™re doing is going to be very important.  I
n particular, 
and 
we™ll talk about this tomorrow, 
trying to signal that the Fed, rather than being pessimistic, is determined 
and 
that the Fed will be 
supporting the economy.  We™ll be there.  We™ll be a backstop.  We™ll provide confide
nce. I 
think that™s a very important part of what our communication should be about.  P
ersonally
, I™ve 
learned something from both Woodford™s discussion and th
at discussion around the table about 
how we should be talking to markets and to the public.  And a very small thing, but in my press 
conference statement tomorrow
, I™m going to try to talk a little bit more to the average person 
than I have been, and try to explain what we™re doing and why it™s helpful more broadly.  So I do 

expect the expectations c
hannel to be very important, but I think I disagree that by itself it™s 

sufficient
. The main problem is that we™ve already said that we™d keep rates low for three years. 
How much further out can we go? 
For example, 
Woodford argues that a nominal GDP targ
et, 
if 
adopted, would allow us essentially to make commitments many years in advance.  I™d like to 

actually raise the question once again to the group because we looked very carefully at nominal 

GDP targets more than a year ago now
, I think, and there was 
really no support at that time
.  The 
basic argument is that
, in order to work, people have to be persuaded that you™ll stick to this 
target for a very extended period, many years, even though a nominal GDP target may involve a 

period of inflation well above your normal range of inflation.  Moreover, of course, there™s also 

the risk that, if that happens, then inflation expectations will become unanchored.  So I think that 

was the case against nominal GDP targeting. A few people have talked about it. 
If I™
m missing 
something and you want me to hedge more when I™m asked about it tomorrow, which I™m sure I 

will be, I™d like to hear that tomorrow because, again, the take of this group a year ago was th
at nominal GDP targeting, price-
level targeting, and so on, 
while useful, are limited in 
that they 
             
                 
         
       
     
     require credibility very far in the future. 
And that™s why I think one of the benefits of asset 
purchases is that they can be used as a concrete action, as a commitment device
, to help 
strengthen the expectations ef
fect of announcements and communication so that they really are 
complementary
Šmore than we have given them credit 
for 
and more than I really said in my 
remarks at Jackson Hole. 
So there 
are
 a lot of interesting issues here.  I think what I™d like to end on 
is just to come 
back to the point that I know we™re all in debating mode.  We want to persuade our colleagues, 

and that™s certainly laudable, but the fact is that nobody really knows precisely what is holding 

back the economy, what the correct responses a
re, 
or 
how our tools will work.  A
nd I believe we 
all have to try to think hard about, 
in a Bayesian context
, using information that we have and 
thinking about both the risks of action and the risks of inaction, what the best choices are, 

acknowledging and
 understanding that whatever we do, it™s going to be a shot in the proverbial 
dark.  I think, 
really
, it™s going to be very important for us to pull together, 
in a sense
, to support 
whatever efforts that we make.
  Any questions or comments?  President 
Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thanks for those remarks.  I 
found them very useful in my own thinking.  I, too, thought the staff™s work on LSAPs over the 

last couple of inter
meet
ing periods has been really helpful, but even mor
e broadly, I certainly 
came to the question of the efficacy of the LSAPs from the same M
odiglianiŒ
Miller framework 
that Mike sketched, and I found the empirical work on the asset pricing side very informative.  It 

certainly shaped my thinking moving away from the Mo
digliani
ŒMiller framework. 
Our statements, 
alternative A and 
alternative B
, make reference to continuing to study the efficacy of 
the LSAPs.  Part of that will have to be ongoing work and ongoing study of that linkage between 
                               
        what™s going on in the financial markets and how that™s getting through to the real economy.  
At least for me
, that™s a major source of uncertainty still. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Let me make one comment on that, which is, 
you 
sometimes hear the following kind of statement:  
ﬁTight monetary policy is not causing the 
problem
; therefore, easing monetary policy won™t help.
ﬂ  That™s a non sequitur.  If, say, tight 
fiscal policy is the problem, if that™s the reason the economy is growing slowly, it doesn™t mean 

that 
monetary policy can
™t mitigate that.  So I think that kind of argument needs to be looked at 
very carefully.
  We are doing a lot.  We are absolutely doing a lot.  There™s no question about it.  
Nobody can blame the Federal Reserve fairly, in my opinion, for being tightfisted and stingy and 

not willing to take risks to try to support the economy.  
But the fact that it™s not our fault that the 
recovery is slow doesn™t mean that we can™t try to help if we think, in fact, that the benefitŒ
cost 

ratio is appropriate. 
What I™d like to do is let Bill English do his introductory remarks for tomorrow.  I™m in 
your hands.  The reception starts at 5:30.  Would people like to continue with the policy round, 

or should we just have Bill and then start fresh at 8:30? 
PARTICIPANT. 
Break
. PARTICIPANTS
.  Fresh. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fresh.  Okay. 

MR. 
FISHER
.  Governor Powell needs to take a nap. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  He™s not the only one.  [Laughter] 
All right.  We™ll ask Bill 
to make his opening presentation and take any questions, and then we™ll recess for reception and 

dinner.  
Bill. 
         
    
  
    
          
   
  
     
          
                                                                         MR. ENGLISH.
7  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think the policy 
alternatives are being handed around right now.  They are the same as the ones we 

distributed earlier this week. I guess I™ll wait just a mome
nt until everybody has 
them. 
The first page of the handout illustrates the effects of three different policy paths.  
The black
 solid lines in the charts depict the experimental consensus forecast, which 
is conditioned on unchanged policy.  The 
red
 dashed lines show the results of a more 
accommodative policy, one 
that™s 
consistent with an a
lternative B that shifts back the 
date in the forward guidance to mid-2015 and, in addition to $30 billion of MBS 

purchases a month and completion of the MEP this year, involves buying longer-
term 
securities at a rate of $75 billion a month through the middle of next year.  The 

balance sheet implications of this alternative are shown at the top right.  So long as 

the public correctly anticipates that the Committee will follow this policy, the result is 

a more rapid economic recovery that takes the unemployment rate to 
6.3 percent by 
the end of 2015, about ½ percentage point lower than in the consensus baseline; the 

inflation rate (shown at the bottom right) is a bit
 higher but remains near your 

2 percent longer
-run objective. 
The 
blue dotted lines show the results of an even more accommodative policy; 
this corresponds to alternative A and includes a new $1.25 trillion LSAP and a shift in 

the date in the forward guida
nce to mid
-2015.  
In this case, the unemployment rate 
falls to 
about 6.1 percent by the end of 2015, and inflation runs a little higher than 
under the other policies. 
If, in reviewing the outlook under 
the 
unchanged policy, the Committee views the 
likely outcomes for employment and inflation as inconsistent with its mandate, it 

might choose to ease policy by strengthening the forward guidance in the statement 

and engaging in additional asset purchases.  Alternative B
, on page 5, 
may offer the 
Committee an attractive approach to moving strongly in that direction at this meeting, 

but without committing now to a large, discrete purchase program.  Alternative B 

completes the MEP and starts buying additional MBS, with an explicit proviso that 

the Committee will c
losely monitor developments ﬁin coming monthsﬂ in deciding 
whether to continue the purchases and scale them up. 
The first paragraph of 
alternative B updates the description of the economy to 
reflect the mixed incoming information over the period.  The second paragraph 

differs from past statements by expressing the medium
-term outlook as a conditional 

forecast, noting that the Committee is concerned that ﬁwithout further policy 

accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained 

improvement in labor market conditions.ﬂ  Then the third paragraph announces that 

the Committee will complete the MEP as planned and will commence purchasing 

MBS each month.  The options you™re offered here are rates of $30 billion or 

$40 billion a month.  The higher rate of purchases would have the advantage of 

providing more impetus to growth, but some policymakers may prefer the lower rate, 
7 The materials used by Mr. English are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
      
                          
             
      
      
    
              perhaps to allow for some future ramping-up in reaction to shocks, such as a full 

encounter with the fiscal cliff or
 a worsening of the problems in Europe.  Staff work 
suggests that purchases even 
at the higher pace would be unlikely to cause problems 
with market functioning. 
The fourth paragraph signals another decision point coming in the future.  It says 
that if, ﬁin
 coming months,ﬂ the ﬁoutlook for the labor market does not improve 
substantially,ﬂ the Committee will continue its MBS purchases 
and undertake 
additional asset purchases ﬁas appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a 

context of price stability.ﬂ
 The paragraph offers an option to include the possibility 
of employing other policy tools as well.  Participants may find that additional 

reference attractive if they think that changes in forward guidance, new lending 

programs, or a reduction in the inte
rest rate paid on reserves might also be appropriate 
in the future.  The paragraph concludes by noting that, as always, the likely efficacy 

and costs of asset purchases will be taken into account as the Comm
ittee calibrates its 
purchases. 
In paragraphs 5 and 5
, the statement offers two options for restating the forward 
guidance.  Both versions begin by putting the Committee™s decision with respect to 

the forward guidance in a more positive light and in the context of making progress 

toward its objectives by indicating that
, ﬁto support continued progress toward 

maximum employment and price stability, the Committee expects that exceptionally 

low levels of the federal funds rate will remain appropriate for a considerable time 

after the economic recovery stren
gthens.ﬂ  Paragraph 5 then continues by shifting 
the 
date of the expected commencement of policy firming out to mid-2015.  By contrast, 

paragraph 5
 replaces the calendar date with new conditional language that ties the 
timing of liftoff to the path of the
 unemployment rate, subject to constraints on 
inflation and inflation expectations.  Some participants may see this conditional 

language as preferable to offering a specific date because it will allow market 

participants to adjust their expectations for li
ftoff flexibly as information bearing on 

the economic outlook is received. 
The immediate market reaction to 
alternative B is hard to predict, in light of the 
policy expectations currently in the market and the decision point that would be 

highlighted in paragraph 4.  Primary dealers appear to place high odds on a new 

program of securities purchasesŠ
generally expected to increase Federal Reserve 
holdings by around $500 
billion 
to $600 billion by the end of 2013Š
and some see it 
as likely to be described in flow terms.  But it is not clear how they would gauge the 

likely scale of purchases under 
alternative B. An 
al
ternative B in which the 
Committee decided over coming months to purchase $75 billion in securities per 

month during the first half of next year would be roughly equivalent to the 

$500 billion 
to $600 billion now expected.  With most outside forecasts anti
cipating 
only slow improvement in labor market conditions over coming quarters, the market 

may come to expect the purchases to exceed this amount.  With regard to the forward 

guidance, ﬁmid
-2015ﬂ is in line with expectations, but the language in paragraph 5
 might be seen as pointing to even more accommodation.  On balance, a
lternative B 
might prompt a modest decline in longer-term interest rates, higher equity prices, and 
                          
              
                     
  
          
    
        a depreciation of the dollar.  However, the magnitude and persistence of the effects 

will depend importantly on what investors see as the implications of the statement for 

the ultimate size of the SOMA portfolio, as well as which version of the forward 

guidance the Committee chooses. 
Alternative A
, on page 3, 
may appeal to members who see 
the Committee as 
having persistently missed its dual objectives in the same direction and believe that, 

with the fiscal cliff looming and uncertainty about Europe unresolved, the downside 

risks to economic growth are very large.  They may believe that the 
Committee needs 
to send a clear signal that it is willing to substantially increase its holdings of 

securities and extend the forward guidance.  They may be concerned that the 

effectiveness of 
alternative B would be undermined by investor uncertainty about 
both the Committee™s decision to extend purchases beyond the next few months and 

the ul
timate size of such purchases. 
The first and second paragraphs of a
lternative A are close to those of 
alternative 
B.  The third paragraph of alternative A announces a new lump-
sum LSAP 
program, comprising $750 billion of longer-term Treasuries and $500 billion of MBS, 

at a combined pace of about $75 billion per month through early 2014.  The fourth 

paragraph clarifies that the new program replac
es the MEP and that the Committee™s 

reinvestment policy will continue.  The fifth paragraph, as in a
lternative 
B, extends 
the forward guidance to mid-2015.  Alternative A also provides possible language for 

a 10
 basis point reduction in the IOER rate. 
Beca
use $1.25 trillion lies well outside the range of most market forecasts 
for a 
new LSAP program, alternative A would likely lead to a notable drop in longer-
term 
interest rates, as well as higher equity prices and a lower foreign exchange value of 

the dolla
r.  These effects could be increased somewhat and accompanied by some 
decline in short-
term interest rates if a reduction i
n the IOER rate were included. 
Alternative C, 
on page 7, might appeal to policymakers who see the recent 
economic data as consistent 
with the view that the economic recovery is on a 
sustainable path and proceeding about as well as could be expected given the effects 

of the financial crisis.  They may see the elevated size of the Federal Reserve™s 

portfolio as well as the recent rise in 
oil and other key commodity prices as implying 
some upside risk to inflation.  As a result, they may judge that there is no need to ease 

policy through a change in the forward guidance or a new LSAP program, and they 

may even anticipate that the funds rate 
will need to be raised significantly earlier than 
markets anticipate. Other participants may have views that are shaped less by 

concerns about the outlook, but believe that the costs and risks associated with 

additional asset purchases are likely to exce
ed the benefits in terms of improved 

economic conditions. 
The first paragraph in a
lternative C is somewhat more positive about economic 
developments than in alternatives A and B.  The second paragraph is similar to the 

August statement but projects somewha
t stronger growth and higher inflation.  There 
are two versions of paragraph 3:  The first maintains the ﬁlate 2014ﬂ forward 
                                                    guidance, with an option to change the date to ﬁlate 2103ﬂ
; the second version, 

ate
-dependent forward gui
dance 
with language describing 
the factors the Committee would consider in determining the appropriate time to raise 

the target federal funds rate.  The fourth paragraph is similar to the August statement, 

except that it provides a more balanced outlook for policy. 
The markets would be greatly surprised by a statement along the lines of 
alternative C, especially if it signaled an earlier rise in the federal funds rate. Interest 
rates would likely jump higher, and stock prices could drop sharply. 
Draft dire
ctives for each of the alternatives are presented on pages 9 through 12 of 
your handout.  
Thank you
, Mr. Chairman.  That 
completes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you very much.  Are there any questions for Bill? 
President Fisher. 
MR. FISHE
R.  Mr. Chairman, if I could ask Simon and the D
esk
Šagain, just to have a 
factual grip here
:  What kind of market penetration will we have on mortgage-
backed securities 
under the 
program of 
$30 and $40 billion per month?  You mentioned this earlier.  I apo
logize. 
MR. POTTER. 
That™s the flow rate relative to gross issuance. 
MR. FISHER.  Yes, sir. 
MR. POTTER. 
If we™re about one-third right now, if we added $30 billion, we™d be 
about 60 percent
; at 
$40 billion
, we™re about 70 percent.  
But i
n terms of the stock, I think that 
wouldŠ
what was that
, L
orie
? MS. LOGAN.  I don™t have the exact numbers for the particular scenarios, but the stock 
would be 25 percent under the $30-
billion
-per
-month pace, and it would be slightly higher under 
$40 billion per month
. I 
don™t have that exact number, and it depends on the length, but just for 
a maximum
, under the $2 trillion scenario that we had run, the maximum was 36 percent.  So 

that gives you the very upper bound. 
MR. FISHER.  And if w
e assume that we finish the MEP at 
year
-end, what will be our 
duration? 
       
      
     
    
        
     
                 
    
 MR. POTTER
.  The duration will be eight years, but we™ll own quite large amounts of 
some of the longer-duration securities.  T
hat™s 
in the Treasury part of the portfolio. 
MR. FISHER.  And of some of the particular issu
es, we have significant
Šabove 
70 percent
.  I
s that
 correct now? 
MS. LOGAN. 
We™ve a 70 percent per CUSIP cap.  So we can™t buy any
Š MR. FISHER.  That™s our cap per 
CUSIP? 
MS. LOGAN
.  That™s the c
ap. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 
MS. LOGAN
.  We™ve only hit the ca
p on ten issues, I thinkŠthe number that we™ve hit 
the 
maximum 
70 percent on
.  And most of those were old bonds in 
very small size. 
MR. FISHER.  Thank you very much. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Other questions?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chai
rman. Bill, I just wanted to clarify since we have 
a few minutes here.  When we do this on page 1 here, there 
are 
three lines
, and then 
alternative 
B has a couple 
of 
options in it.  Are you saying that this is a rough guide to what 
alternative 
B would del
iver? 
MR. ENGLISH. Ye
s. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Or 
do you feel as though it wouldn™t make too much difference which 
option is chosen within the subgroups that are proposed?  O
r is it just 
that it™d get too cluttered
? MR. ENGLISH. 
What we tried to do here was write
 down something that seemed 
plausibly in line with 
alternative B. Alternative B has a couple of different choices that the 
Committee would have to make.  One is, 
later on
, what do you do in a few months after you™ve 
observed the economy?  Do you continue purchasing into next year? We™ve assumed that you 
                   
                
    continue purchasing for about, I think, seven months in this.  And then the other question is, 
what do you do with the forward guidance? 
We™ve assumed
, basically
, that the forward 
guidance goes out to mid-2015 and is compellingŠe
verybody believes 
it.  It™s possible, as I 
mentioned, that because market participants™ sense 
of 
the outlook is a bit weaker than our sense 

of the outlook, they may read that 6½ percent unemployment rate as pushing the liftoff even 

later
.  If that were picked up, then you™d get a little bit more impetus to the economy out of that, 
but we™ve not modeled that here. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  And the other thingŠI™ve been concerned about the withering 
of 
alternative C here.
  Alternative C isn™t mentioned in the graphs. 
MR. ENGLISH.  Alternative C would be, as long as you left the liftoff date unchanged, 
pretty similar to the consensus forecast.  What I™m taking out of that is the sense in the words in 

alternative C that mig
ht hint that things could move more quickly than that. 
So the straight 
consensus forecast is no change in the forward guidance, no additional purchases beyond the end 

of the year.  That broadly is consistent with a
lternative C but maybe doesn™t quite get 
the sense 
of what the words in a
lternative C could mean to market participants. 
MR. BULLARD.  Well, when you describe it, 
you say, ﬁ
Markets would be surprised
.ﬂ  
I think 
that™s 
accurate
Šthey
™d be very surprised by a statement like thatŠand that you proba
bly 
would have some 
effe
ct.  Plus, if we were going in that direction, which I guess we™re not, you™d 
have the possibility of moving up the date 
of liftoff
. MR. ENGLISH.  Right. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
One important point here
:  The black lineŠ
the consensus 
forecast
Šimplicitly has in it
 a significant disappointment 
for
 the market because they pull back 
      
           
       
     
               their expectations for liftoff to late 2014, and they 
remove 
their expectations of any furt
her 
expansion of the portfolio. 
MR. 
BULLARD
.  I see.  So I should read this as ﬁConsensus forecast/a
lternative C.ﬂ 
MR. ENGLISH.  Roughly. 
MR. BULLARD.  Roughly speaking.  Well, I guess, Mr. Chairman, 
I have a concern 
whether 
we have three options that are live options.  And I think it™s been hard while the 
Committee has been
 trying to think about ways to ease, and when the Committee shifts in the 
other direction, the same thing will happen.  But I think you want to have some things that are a 

little bit tighter, a little bit easier, and might actually have a chance of
Š CHAIRM
AN BERNANKE. 
We circulate this and ask whether it spans the range of 
views
 so, of course, we always welcome suggestions. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Well, it™s up to you.  But if you try to span the range of views, you 
might have to put something on the table that™s not going to be adopted.  But from my point of 

view, I
™d like to see three live things that we could do and things that we might be able to 
maneuver around. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  The other way we
™ve used the alternatives
, of course, 
is to 
try out different lan
guage or alternative language. 
And in the past, 
we™ve co
mbined, mixed 
things together. 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have two questions.  One is for you, Bill.  
I™d like your help 
with 
understanding the second sentence in B(4).  I™m having trouble with it.  I 
don™t think I understand it correctly, particularly the role of price stability.  So let me tell you 
      
   
     
      
    
                                 what I think it says, the way I read it. 
It says, ﬁIf the outlook for the labor m
arket does
 not improve substantiallyﬂ in coming monthsŠ
so, if that happensŠthen we™re going to do X.  So X, 
I think, 
is, as I read this, ﬁundertake additional asset purchases 
. . . as appropriate until 
such 
improvement is achieved in a context of price sta
bility.ﬂ
  As I think about that, if that 
improvement is achieved but it™
s not in a context of price stability, that seems to say to me that 
we™re going to still keep purchasing assets.  Have I got this wrong? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I want to defend Bill because he pointed out this problem. 
MR. LACKER.  I actually pointed it out to him yesterday. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You
 pointed it out to him.  Okay. 
MR. 
ENGLISH
.  You™re not 
the 
first
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
We have poetic license here. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  You 
don™t mean that literally, right? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It means that we
™re looking for improvement in a context of 
price stability. If we see improvement 
without price stability, that
™s not a good thing, and we 
won™t continue purchases. 
MR. LACKER.  But th
is says you
™re going to wait until you get im
provement with price 
stability. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it™s clear what
Š VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It™
s ﬁsubject to
.ﬂ That™s really what it means. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It
™s ﬁsubject to.ﬂ  W
hen we actually clari
fy this, assuming 
we go ahead and do more in January or whatever, we™
ll be a little clear
er in this kind of language 
here. 
                 
  
         
      
  
          
                 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  The second question I haveŠand I probably should have 
asked this during our first agenda item.  I™
ve asked t
his at times in the past
.  On the table is a 
flow of purchases of mortgage-backed securities.  I™
ve asked in the past 
about the thought 
experiment of buying mortgage
-backed securities versus buying an equivalent amount of 
U.S.
 Treasuries.
  What I
™ve asked 
about is, all right, comparing those two options, undoubtedly 
your forecast, as you™ve said, is that 
mortgage
-backed security yields 
will be lower with 
purchases of 
mortgage
-backed securities than 
with 
purchases of 
Treasuries, and that mortgage 
rates will 
be lower. 
Now, my gut instinct is that some other rates will be higher.  And I™
ve asked 
about this in the past, but did you do any work on that this time? 
MR. POTTER.  Which rates? 
MR. LACKER. 
Aren™t other rates going 
to be higher if we buy mortgage-
backeds rather 
than T
reasuries?  Because presumably
, that means 
Treasury rates will be higher than they 
otherwise would be.  Presumably, some other rates are linked to T
reasuries 
and not mortgage-
backed securities, and presumably, they™
re higher. Isn™t there some other rate that
™s going to go 
up if we buy mortgage-
backed
s rather than 
Treasuries? 
MR. ENGLISH. Not 
go up
, but go down by less. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Go down by less. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I think that™s right. 

MR. LACKER.  Oh, okay.  Well, noŠbut, see, I™m asking to compare buying X amount 
of T
reasuries 
with buying 
X amount 
of mortgage-
backed.  So rates 
go downŠ 
MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we are still buying Treasuries under the MEP in this 
program. 
       
           
           
                      
MR. LACKER.  Yes, I know.  But instead of buying $30 billion of mortgages, buy 
$30 billion of 
Treasuries. 
MR. ENGLISH.  I think the answer to your question is in table 1 in the options memo 
that we sent, which had an experiment where you do $500 billion of T
reasury purchases or 
$500 billion of MBSŠjust one or the other.  T
he term premium effects are a little bit smaller if 
you buy the MBS, so T
reasury yields decline by less.  They still decline. It
™s still a purchase of a 
longer-
term security and still taking duration out of the market and still p
utting downward 
pressure on longer-
term rates, but by less.
  The mortgage rate goes down by more if you buy 
MBS than if you buy T
reasuries, because you
™re pushing MBS down more and mortgage rates 
down by more.  And our estimate of the effects on inflation and output are similar in size.  
They
™re a little smaller for the MBS purchase
, based on our modeling and our assumptions, than 
for 
the 
Treasury purchase, but they™
re in the same ballpark. 
MR. LACKER.  So what other rates go down by less or are higher b
ecause you™
ve 
been 
tilting toward 
mortgage
-backeds
? MR. ENGLISH. 
In FRB
/USŠDave Reifschneider 
will tell me if I™m wrong
ŠI think, 
basically
, that 
other long-term rates, corporate rates or whatever, would go down by more if you 
bought Treasuries than if you bought MBS. 
MR. PLOSSER.  So the MBS would provide 
less pass
-through, in some sense, to 
corporates and other things.  Is that the idea? 
MR. ENGLISH
.  Yes. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Depends on what you think the 
degree of substitutability 
is between 
them. 
          
       
       
    
   
             
     MR.
 ENGLISH.  Yes.  And this really is pushing pretty hard on our ability to model this 
stuff, but that™s what our modeling 
says
. MR. LACKER.  So that takes away some stimulus, right? 
MR. ENGLISH. Ye
s, that™s right. 
MR. LACKER. 
And the MBS, on netŠ 
MR. POTT
ER.  Well, not overall, 
necessarily. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Well, it doesn™t take away stimulus relative to doing nothing.  
It takes away stimulus relative to
Š  MR. ENGLISH. 
Buying
 an equivalent amount of T
reasuries
. MR. LACKER. 
Right. 
MR. POTTER.  On thoseŠ 

MR. 
LACKER
.  In that sector. 
MR. POTTER.  Not necessarily for the economy as a whole. 

MR. LACKER. 
Right.  So the rationale for MBSŠ
is it that
, on net, 
real outcomes are 
better?  Or is it more of a sectoral argument? 
MR. ENGLISH.  The argument we gave in the memo was that you want to have a 
balance across the two so that you can ramp up or ramp down.  We know from the capacity 

memo that we sent the Committee before the last meeting that there
™s a maximum amount
, roughly, 
that we 
were comfortable saying 
we could buy over the next couple of years.  That 
maximum amount 
has a ratio of 
Treasuries to MBS, 
and 
we™ve roughly maintained that ratio in 
these purchase programs. 
MR. LACKER.  I understand.  Thank you. 
                              
                   
      MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
That
™s the main argument.  
There
™s a second argument, which 
is not in the model sims we
™ve run, but a lot of people believe that MBS could have effects that 
the model isn™t picking upŠ
say, large
r effects on house prices
, bigger effects on mortgage 
refinancing, 
or 
something like that
. CHA
IRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart has a two-
hander. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Is there a connection or correlation between lowering mortgage-
backed rates and other securitization vehicles such as auto, student loan, credit card? 
MR. ENGLISH.  There might be in practice, but we™re not picking that up in the 
modeling that we
™re doing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Just one observation.  Presumably, the reason why you 
also might want to split it is a market functioning issue. 
You can go 
bigger if you split it 
between two markets than if you conce
ntrate all on one market. 
MR. POTTER.  We are still buying in the 
Treasury market. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
That was just a comment, but I have a question.  It 
seems to me 
as though the key money line in B is, ﬁIf the outlook for the labor market does not 

improve substantially, the Committee will continue its 
purchases of agency 
mortgage-backed 
securities and undertake additional asset purchases.
ﬂ  That
™s the key money line.  
Now, I
™d like 
to get st
aff members™ 
views of what they think people are going to interpret that line to mean in 
light of, say, the SEPs that are going to be put out 
and the Chairman™s press conference 
statement.  How do we think people are going to interpret that line?  That™s c
ritical
Šyou have to 
have a view on that to know what you™re really voting for, in some fundamental sense.  I know 

it™s judgment, but I™d love to 
hear your view. 
                  
    
   
  
     
      
          MR. ENGLISH. 
We™re not sure.  
I think we argued in our memos that it might be 
something like a
 ½ percent
age point 
decline in the unemployment rate that
™s sustained. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, I don™t mean the effects on the macroeconomy.  I 
mean, when people write the articles at the end of the day, what are 
they going to think about 
how big this is likely to be? 
MR. POTTER.  I don™t think it will showŠ 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  They
™re going to have our SEPs, and they™
re going to 
have this information that shows that this unemployment rate trajectory
Š MR. 
KOCHERLAKO
TA.  You mean the purchase program itself? 
MR. POTTER.  The total amount forŠthey™re going to try 
to work out an expected date. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Yes.  And so I guess I™m asking, what kind of expected 
date do we think they can work out? 
MR. POTTER. 
The SEP will give them some information.  I don™t believe that shows a 
substantial improvement in the labor market for quite some time.  So that means that they
™ll probably be looking for sometime in 2013.  That™
s the way we
™ve been modeling this, I think.  
And the assumption you had, Bill, was something like $600 billion of total purchasesŠi
s that 
right? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Including purchases under the MEP, it was $750 
billion
.  But
, as I said 
in my remarks, it could easily be more.  P
eople might see that the e
conomy is expected to be 
weak for quite a while
; they might carry it out further into 2013 and get a bigger amount. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
For me, the obvious question to you, Mr. Chairman, at 
the press conference might be
, given the SEP and your views, wh
at does the SEP forecast imply 

in terms 
of ﬁi
mprove 
substantially
ﬂ?       
                
                              
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  My answer will be that 
we want to see
Šnot what we saw 
last 
Friday
.  We want to see increases in payrolls.  We want to see some progress
Šnot sh
arp 
progress, but some pro
gress
Šin the unemployment rate
.  And we want to have a sense that the 
economy is moving in a 
direction that will help labor markets get better. 
We used the word 
ﬁoutlook.ﬂ  So a pickup in GDP growth would certainly be a factor in the outlook for labor 
markets, for example. I think we have a fail
-safe here
, which is that if it doesn™t have any effect, 
then we have the efficacy clause here as well.
  But the idea would be that we want to see 
something different from the current 
waiting
-in-place kind of situation where there™s no 
progress, 
the 
unemployment rate stays about the same, and monthly payrolls are 100,000 and 

less. 
And I will emphasize that it
™s not a single indicator or a single trigger number; 
we™re 
looking holistically at the labor market indi
cators and, in fact, more broadly because it™
s the 
outlook for the labor market that matters, not just the current number. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So you
™d have to see improvement in the labor market 
that you thought would be sustained in the future. 
CHAIRM
AN BERNANKE.  Right. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
For what it™s worth, the B
lue 
Chip forecasts 
for the 
unemployment rate going into the middle of 2013 are very flat
.  Then, in the second half of 2013, 
they™
re expecting to see a more noticeable downtilt in the unemp
loyment rate.  So that™s another 
way of 
looking at it. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So the market would presumably put in nine months 
or 
more
Šthat
 would be a reasonable guesstimate, 
I guess. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Again, it™s
 the outlook and not the actual. 
VICE CH
AIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Yes. 
                         
                    MR. PLOSSER.  I just want some interpretation of the word ﬁsubstantiallyﬂ here because 
the market is going to ask you that as well.  What constitutes substantial progress? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Substantial progress means that we are seei
ng ongoing 
progress in the direction of improved labor market conditions. 
MR. PLOSSER.  So it
™s not something about 
the magnitude of the rate of change. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It
™s not the magnitude, but really a 
movement in that 
direction 
that 
is, I m
ight 
say, persuasive or indicative that there is now progress in the right 
direction
, as opposed to simply remaining static or 
getting 
worse.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  This is on the same point. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  David Wilcox showed us employment in his forecast summary, and 
when they do all of the seasonal adjustment right, it looks as though half of the improvement we 

got in the labor markets this past winter or the winter before, was spurious, seasonal stuff.  

Would what we saw last w
inter suffice? Would we stop after that? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would think so.  It dropped 1 percentage point between 
August and 
April. 
MR. LACKER. I
™d be on board with that.  But his 
analysis suggests that 
that 
would be 
like another seasonal head fake. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, we
™d look at a range of variables.  O
f course, there™s 
nothing that says if you stop, you can™t start again. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No
, but l
ast winter, though, it wasn™t really that 
convincing because, remember, payrolls were strong but GDP was weak, and we had this riddle. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We had this riddle.  Yes, that™s right. 
                    
          
     
             
     
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  And so you could argue that you wouldn™t necessarily 
stop 
last winter
, because 
you didn™t have the GDP growth to support the 
labor market. 
MR. POTTER.  I don™t think our outlook changed that much.  
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We basically want to see progress in terms of the key macro 
labor market variables. 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  Well, let me ask Bill Dudley™s question again.  What do you 
want the 
USA 
Today
 headline to be? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
ﬁBernanke, 
the Hero
ﬂ? [Laughter] 
ﬁFederal Reserve 
Says 
It Will Support Economy.ﬂ 
MR. 
FISHER
.  That™s the 
sports section, Mr. Chairman. 
MR. 
PLOSSER
.  ﬁFederal Reserve All In.ﬂ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
ﬁFederal Reserve Will 
Provide Support to Labor M
arket.
ﬂ MR. 
LACKER
.  By buying 
MBS? 
MS. 
DUKE.  And housing. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Housing.
  People understand that. 
MR. 
LACKER
.  Okay. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  D
id you have a question, 
President 
Pianalto? 
MS. PIANALTO.  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  Bill, you made some comments about the 
6½ percent unemployment trigger in 
alternative B, paragraph 5
. You said that some forecasters 
have slower progress on the unemployment rate, so they may view 
what is in alternative B 
as more accommodation than markets expect.  If you look at your page 1, 
ﬁAlternat
ive Monetary 
Policy 
Scenarios,
ﬂ that 6
½ percent rate, as you mentioned, is about mid-2015.  I know we™
re 
            
      
         
                      trying to get away from the date, but you made those points.  You didn™t say very much about the 
inflation rate, because here it says ﬁ
no more than a half percentage point above the Committee™s 

2 percent objective.ﬂ  When you look at those scenarios, with alternative B, we don™t get 

anywhere close to 2
½.  We™re just slightly above the 2.  At one point, we looked at some 
language that said ﬁclose to the Committee™s 2 
percent objective.ﬂ  And I see that 
alternative 
B, 
and even a
lternative A, is 
close to our objective.  What are some of your thoughts
?  J
ust as you 
had
 some thoughts about the 6½ percent being interpreted by some as being more aggressive, 
would that 2½ percent objective be viewed as, again, more aggressive, and is it necessary given 

the scenarios that you™ve laid out here? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLE
Y.  It™s not an objective, though, right? 
GOVERNOR YELLEN
.  It™s not an objective. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It™s not an objective.  
It™s just a tolerance level.  That™s 
quite different. 
MS. PIANALTO.  But it™s 
a matter of
 perceptions also.  We™
re talking 
about 
communications.  And we™ve made a lot of progress and laid out a 2 
percent objective.  What are 

the advantages? 
Using
 ﬁclose to 2 percentﬂ 
would still 
give
 us the 
flexibility that
™s laid out in 
these scenarios
, but we
™re not communicating to the pub
lic that we
™re throwing out ½ 
percentage 
point.  I
t seems 
as though 
we™re throwing out a number, 
whereas
, ﬁclose toﬂ gives us some of 
that flexibility. 
MR. ENGLISH.  I think the ½ percentage point buffer was intended just for clarity.  If 
you said ﬁclose t
o,ﬂ everybody would ask the Chairman at his press conference, ﬁWhat do you 
mean by 
‚close to
™?
ﬂ and t
ry to extract that information.
  People will be looking at the SEP, and 
the SEP shows inflation below 2 or at 2, roughly, but not going above.  So I don™t think they™d 
                                      
    misread the 
½ percentage point buffer as suggesting an intention to set out to push inflation 
above 2.  It would simply be seen as a buffer.  There could be transitory shocks that would 

change the inflation outlook for a time, and the Committee could look through those and say, 

ﬁOkay.  We™re going to go up as high as maybe 2½ 
for a little while, but after that
, we think 

inflation is going to come back.  In the end, we™re getting to our objective, and that™s okay.ﬂ 
But 
whether you want to say e
xplicitly ﬁ
½ percentage pointﬂ or ﬁclose toﬂ is a question of 
communications.  It™
s a little clearer to say the number and not use ﬁclose to.ﬂ  But this is a 
communications issue for the Committee. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Yes.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
Can I ask one more press conference 
question?  Suppose somebody says, ﬁWe get to the end of 2013, it™s December 2013, and we™
re 
exactly where we are today.
  So 
the 
unemployment rate, job growthŠeverything is pretty much 
exactly where we are today. 
Do you envision that we™
ll still be continuing asset purchases at that 
point?ﬂ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  As we go through time, as the balance sheet grows, as we 
observe the effects on the economy, we™
ll be 
continually reevaluating the efficacy of the program 
and the costs that it is imposing.  And if we feel that we
™ve 
reached that point and the program is 
not being effective, then we w
ill have to stop.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes. I
™ll just add on to what you said, Mr. Chairman.  This 
question is an important one, but I think there 
are 
just 
two ways you could end up being in the 
same place.  It could be that there were a lot of bad shocks and the asset purchases helped you 

stop that, or maybe not.  We™
ll have to make that call at that time. 
                                 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
We have overnight
.  If any genius around the table would 
like to come up with better language, I would be more than happy. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Mr. Chairman, I counsel you against 
offering 
that
.  [L
aughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Any other questions?  Are we all set?  [No response] 
Bill, 
what do you want us to do with these handouts? Do you want us to take them home and bring 
them back? 
MR. ENGLISH.  You have lots of Class 
I informat
ion in your Tealbook, so you 
can 
keep 
them. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  All right. 

MR. ENGLISH.  But please don™t leave them on the subway.  [L
aughter]. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Don™t leave them on the subway.  So 8:30 tomorrow 
morning.  T
he reception is available at 5
:00 p.m. 
[Meeting recessed] 
        
    
           
     
      
           September 13 Session 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good morning, everybody.  We should have a reasonable 
amount of time.  We need to get the statement in by 11:30 and close the meeting by noon.  But 
first
, to get started
, why don™t we begin our policy go-round
? I have President Williams first on 
the list. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B with the forward 
guidance on the funds rate in paragraph 5
.  The case for further action is clear. In the absence of 
significant additional monetary stimulus, progress toward our policy goals would remain stalled.  

Such an outcome is simply inconsistent with the notion of appropriate monetary policy and, in 

my view
, is unacceptable. 
We must aim for a
 path that brings us measurably closer to our goals 
over the forecast horizon, and we must take concrete actions that get us on that path.  
Open
-ended purchases of MBS represent a substantial step in that direction.  With this action, 

unemployment will fall more quickly and inflation will return toward 
2 percent faster than under 
the status quo. 
The flow-
oriented asset purchases in 
alternative B also provide flexibility that™s 
particularly valuable, given all the uncertainties of the economy, the fiscal cliff, and Europe.  

They serve as a useful automatic stabilizer as market expectations about the ultimate size of the 
program adjust in response to changes in economic conditions 
and
 the outlook.  
If the 
labor 
market shows signs of substantial improvement sooner than expected, the program can be 

curtailed.  In contrast, if the recovery falters, the program can provide additional needed support. 
There would be similar benefits from incorporating such an automatic stabilizer into our 
forward guidance of the future path of the funds rate.  The language in p
aragraph 5
 does just 
that.  Incorporating this language into our statement would allow us to finally get the calendar
-                   
                        
 date monkey off our back and provide better guidance on our policy reaction functionŠ 
importantly, at least, on economic conditionsŠ
for funds rate liftoff that 
is both clear and 
consistent with our dual-mandate objectives.  It™s also flexible enough to handle a variety of 

future paths for the economy and inflation.  Indeed, the beauty of this approach is it provides 

guidance for contingencies where our forecasts go wrong, which they inevitably do. 
Finally, I continue to favor lowering the interest on excess reserve
s rate, the IOER rate, to 
15 basis points.  We should be using all of our tools in the same direction.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE
.  Thank you very much.  
President Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support 
alternative 
B with the 
$40 billion per month mortgage purchase program and prefer option 5
 which moves us away 
from dates and fo
cuses on the economic outcomes we seek to achieve. 
Inflation is quite low, and 
unemployment is quite high, and most of our forecasts for the past nine months have 

overestimated how quickly we would see improvements in 
either element of our mandate. 
Altern
ative B embraces the sense of doing what it takes to move the economy at an 
acceptable pace toward full employment with stable prices. 
Alternative 
B continues to take out 
duration, provides some direct support to housing, which is just beginning to recover, and 

extends guidance on the funds rate liftoff, which, given our lack of progress toward our mandate, 

seems appropriate. 
I strongly support the $40 billion rather than the $30 billion monthly 
mortgage purchase program. 
I would also prefer to include economic targets rather than date targets in our guidance.  
Thus, I would prefer the conditionality language in 5
. The language has two advantages.  
First, 
the conditions for changing our policy stance are clear and observable to the general public.  

Second, 
date
-conditional language can be subsequently undercut by Committee members™ 
                 
                       
   
 comments that suggest a different date may be appropriate, thus altering the effect of policy 
relative to the intent of the consensus reached 
by the Committee. 
Because 5
 conditions the 
policy on observable outcomes, the public can adjust its expectations automatically to changing 

economic circumstances, and there is less likelihood of perhaps inadvertently diminishing our 

policies™ effectivene
ss due to Committee disagreement. 
There seem to be two arguments against taking action at least as strong as B at this 
meeting
.  F
irst, that it would be ineffective.  Estimates in Boston are that following 
option A 
would reduce unemployment by approximatel
y 0.8 percent by the end of 2015.  This is roughly 
in line with the Board staff memos and the consensus policy submissions from three other banks 

that reported a preferred policy that was close to A.  
If accurate, this implies creating more than 
1 million jobs relative to doing nothing at this meeting. I do not view that as de minimis. 
The second argument against more aggressive action is that it will cause inflation.  Again, 
the consensus forecast exercise is instructive.  Among banks that provided numeric submissions, 

those that assumed further easing assume underlying inflation will remain well anchored.  This 

assumption is consistent with the Boston forecasting model.  Two of the Banks that provided 

numbers and assumed earlier tightening than we do have 
virtually identical unemployment rates 
with and without tightening, but a dramatically higher inflation rate under the baseline policy.  

This is markedly different than the staff forecast, the DSG
E models that we have seen, 
and the 
models used by B
anks as
suming the need for easing.  It would be interesting to discuss the 
theoretical basis and empirical evidence for such an inflationary process, which I presume is tied 

to dislodging of inflation expectations.  However, absent a strong empirical basis for su
ch an 

inflation process and with inflation tracking below our target and roughly consistent with the 

staff forecast in models that assume expectations remain well anchored, I view the risks of 
                      
     
    
           
 inflation as being well contained through 2015, even with a more aggressive policy than in 
alternative 
B.  Thus, I support B but would strongly prefer the forward guidance in the language 
of 5
 and the larger mortgage purchase amount.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Given the Committee™s outlook 
and overall assessment of the economy, I would say that additional accommodation is 

appropriate.  I think the question then becomes what form that accommodation should take. 
Alternati
ve A and 
alternative 
B offer 
the Committee the opportunity to do large-
scale 
asset purchases.  As you said in your Jackson Hole speech, Mr. Chairman, and 
as the staff 

analysis indicates, the benefits of large-
scale asset purchases are still under study and 
still 
uncertain.
  And the question is, how do we deal with that?  How do we deal with the 
issue that 
we don™t know exactly how much the benefits are, even though we might feel confident about 

the sign?  Governor Yellen and the Vice Chair
man
 said the right things yesterday about this, 
which is to act forcefully 
and
 to enhance the benefits of our large-
scale asset purchases as much 
as possible. 
How do we enhance our purchases as much as possible?  Well, the stimulus from our 
purchases hinges critically on th
e forward guidance.  They work together.  If you buy assets and 
hold them for one day and then sell them the next day, they are providing no stimulus.  If you 

buy assets and hold them for 10 years, they™re providing a lot of stimulus.  T
he stimulus 
that 
the asset purchases are providing the economy depends on the timing of exit.  T
o enhance the benefit 
of our large-
scale asset purchase
s as much as possible, 
we need the best possible forward 
guidance, and I would say that B(5
) as opposed to B(5) provides that forward guidance. 
                 
  
              
       
  
      
         
 I talked yesterday about the ambiguities that come 
by trying to communicate our reaction 
function with a date.  Today I™ll focus only on the economic aspects of B(5
. One, 
it provides 
an automatic stabilizer against macro shocks.
  Two, 
it offers protection against inflation.
  And, 
three, I want to talk about the mechanism through which it™s offering stimulus. 
The automatic stabilizer feature of B(5
 is relatively clear.  We talk a lot about downside 
risks in this room.  We have a bad shockŠ
and there 
are 
many possibilities out there
, I won™t go 
through them all.  If unemployment goes up 
and we have B(5) in place, which is date guidance, 
people 
will
 wonder
:  What is the Fed going to do?  How are they going to respond to that shock? 
With B
(5
 in place, 
if 
unemployment goes up
, it means automatically it™s going to take us longer 
to get back to the 6½ percent.  That means that people know th
at interest rates are going to be 

low for longer, andŠ
this is important because the extra accommo
dation that™s going to be 
provided at this meeting is likely to take the form of asset purchasesŠ
the assets that are being 

bought are being held for longer.  So a bad shock automatically translates into more stimulus 

because of the explicit numerical marke
rs being provided in the guidance. 
I™ve painted this as an ex post story of why B(5
 is preferred, but it actually has an ex 
ante component to it.  Essentially we™re offering insurance to the economy against bad shocks, 

and that means that people have less need for saving 
to deal with those bad shocks, and that 
stimulates spending.
  We™ve talked a lot about uncertainty.  H
aving the Fed have a reaction 
function in place that 
it has 
communicated clearly helps reduce uncertainty because people know 
how the Fed is going to react to those disturbances.  That™s the kind of stabilizer property that™s 

in B(5. Let me talk a little bit about inflation protection.  It™s a part that matters a great deal to 
me.  I™ve been and remain concerned about the possibility tha
t the long
-run natural rate of 
            
     
   
                          unemployment may well exceed our current estimates.  Here™s how I™ve been thinking about this 
issue.
  Suppose we only had one mandateŠprice stability.  How would we go about 
operationalizing that goal?  Well, presumably we would choose monetary policy so as to keep 

the medium-term outlook for inflation close to 2 
percent. 
Now, we have to struggle a little about 
what ﬁclose toﬂ means, and I™ll talk a little bit more about this later, but for me I™m willing to say 

that 50 basis points is close enough.  I would say that if you had a price-
stability mandate, 
then 
promoting price stability means keeping the medium
-term outlook for inflation within 50 basis 

points of target, 50 basis points below or 50 basis points above.  
This is 
only the price-
stability 
mandate, and this is exactly the language about inflation in B.  In other words, the way I read 

alternative 
B(5
) is 
it™s saying that the Committee has the option of raising the fed funds rate if it 
ever perceives that it is not satisfying its price
-stability mandate because inflation exceeds 
2½ percent. 
Now, this is not a trigger, to be clear.  And we should be clear when we talk about this 
that it 
is not a trigger.  It™s a threshold, and it™s a threshold for conversation.  At that point, 
the 

forward
-guidance commitment is no longer operational.  In some sense, we™d be back to business 
as usual in this Committee.  The Committee would have to weigh the cost of violating its price
-stability mandate against whatever performance it™s ac
hieving on the employment mandate and 

decide what to do.  And those conversations would inevitably be interesting ones.  
I actually 
think that B slices through what might appear to be a very challenging problem.  It provides 

valuable accommodation while al
lowing the Committee to be able to protect its price
-stability 
mandate. 
Let me turn now to how it does that.  What™s the magic behind B(5
) that allows it to give 
us this protection against inflation as well as providing the accommodation? It comes from t
he 
                 
    
    
       
    
       
   
      
           fact that a lot of our estimated rules of past behavior, like a Taylor rule, have us raising interest 
rates just because unemployment is too low.  The mechanism behind B(5
 is to say we don™t 
want to raise interest rates just because unemployment is to
o low, w
e want to raise interest rates 
because we™re worried about inflation.  If it turns out that unemployment is low but inflation is 

under control in the sense that our medium-term outlook is within 50 basis points of 2 
percent
, there™s no reason to raise interest rates just because unemployment is too low.  The way B(5
) is 
providing stimulus is by saying 
the 
FOMC will tolerate low unemployment. 
There™s a lot of talk about how we should stimulate the economy by having high 
inflation.  That is not what™s going on in B(5
. What™s going on instead is 
that 
the FOMC is 
going to hold off on raising rates until unemployment is lower, and that provides stimulus 

because people know that we won™t be choking 
off 
the party
, as it were
, before it™s really under 
way.  This willingness to tolerate low unemployment is exactly how the optimal
 control 
exercise 
works in FRB/
US. 
If you look at 
the o
ptimal 
control exercise 
in 
FRB
/US, in the fourth quarter 
of 2015, unemployment is 5¼ 
percent
, the outlook for inflation is 2.3 percentŠthat™s not what™s 
providing the stimulusŠ
and you get liftoff at that time. The Committee in that FRB
/US simulation is holding off on raising rates, and that stimulates a faster return to low 

unemployment, 
to the natural rate. 
For those of you who are suspicious about FRB/
US, it™s 
obviously just one of many models, but you get exactly the same mechanism in a N
ew Keynesian model.  
Iván Werning 
has a great paper along these lines.  High future output after 
you leave the zero lower bound stimulates high output at the 
zero 
lower bound.  
There™s no extra 
inflation at all in 
Werning™s paper because actually prices are fixed. 
It™s all about the 
commitment to deliver on lower unemployment and higher output than you would otherwise 

think. 
               
       
        
                      
  If you™re liste
ning to me about the mechanism, you should be thinking
: If you™ve got 
such great inflation protection and low unemployment provides good stimulus, why not have a 
lower unemployment threshold than 6½?  I would agree with that.  I think we should be willing 

to consider that.  President Pianalto raised a concern that maybe 50 basis points was too large a 

spread.  As I said, I™m willing to go that far out, 50 basis points, but maybe one way of shaping a 

compromise along those lines is to have a lower unemployment threshold.  That™s a good thing
; it provides stimulus.  And then have a tighter inflationŠnot even tighter, j
ust say 
ﬁclose to
ﬂ 2 percent, which actually
 is vague enough 
that
 it could allow for 50 basis points.  But I put that 
on the table as possibly one way to shape a compromise.  I think B(5
 is very valuable in this 
context. 
Alternative 
B(5
 provides an economic stabilizer, it provides inflation protection, and 
it™s a credible mechanism. It™s a way to provide a credible mechanism to say we™re go
ing to be 
willing to tolerate low unemployment. 
Yesterday Governors Raskin and Stein talked about low expectations in the economy, 
that really what we have to be thinking about is ways to bolster expectations.  Communication 

along the lines of B(5
 is goi
ng to be very helpful 
in that regard
.  We often pay a lot of attention 
to the words in this room, and the words are important in what we say, but in something like 

B(5
 the numbers 
appropriately are 
going to be the main focus.  How do we explain these 
numbers to the public?  I certainly have thought about this.  I
t™s very easy to communicate the 
idea that we have a target, 
2 percent, but we need a tolerance around that target.  I think every 
businessperson, 
at least
, will understand you have targets for 
performance, but there™s some 
tolerance that you have around that as well.
  Some people are going to say 50 basis points is too 
large, but we should be able to make a case about why we feel 50 basis points is appropriate, 
                             
   
                   
 given the kinds of shocks that could hit the economy on an ongoing basis, but the idea of having 
a tolerance is a very reasonable one. 
Why 6
½ percent? 
As I™ve suggested, we could go lower, but I think 6½ 
percent says 
we™re trying to minimize the possibility of being in breach of our tole
rance range.  We have a 
tolerance range
Šit doesn™t mean we want to exceed it.  We™re very prudent about minimizing 

the possibility of any breach of that. 
I will wrap up at this point.  We™ll hear, I™m sure, from others that the LSAPs have costs, 
and 
I shar
e some of those concerns about those costs.  I think the response to that is to try to 
make the benefits as big as possible, and the language of B(5
 is the way to go along those lines.  
I offered a suggestion for changing B(5
 yesterday. I™ll offer tha
t up for the Committee™s 
consideration.  I do worry, 
as written in the draft statement that the staff circulated yesterday
, that t
he last sentence is a little confusing.  At least I found it so, but if we feel we could go out 

and explain it to people, I™m happy to live with that; however, I hope people are willing to 

consider my suggested alterations.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
We™re going through at a rapid pace. 
We™
re going to be done within the hour here, I think. 
MR. TARULLO.  Don™t bet on it.  [Laughter] 

MR. BULLARD.  I have just a few comments here on policy, so I just wanted to follow 
up on my comments from yesterday a little bit. I do not think that this is the right juncture to 

unveil a large and aggressive easing program.  I think the road ahead this fall and winter could be 

rocky.  We would be better served to take a more opportune time to take such an action.  
We are 

looking at economic data that 
are 
middli
ng.  We™ve got financial stress, which is relatively low, 
             
               
       
     
        
         
   at least for now.  Our counterparts in Europe, not us, are the ones in recession, and, in my view, 
should be the ones that are easing aggressively.  U.S. equity markets suggest continuing faith in 

U.S. expansion.  Long-
term rates are exceptionally low. 
We may also be playing down the costs around the table here of walking farther into the 
woods than we already have on balance sheet policy.  President Plosser has emphasized those 

costs, and I think rightly so, and he has done a good service to the Committee in emphasizing 

those costs.  One thing that hasn™t been mentioned very much 
is that there is a distinct possibility 

that we would be feeding into commodity price increases, which is part of what happened during 

the QE2 episode and was a bit counterproductive.  We could argue about that.  We haven™t 

talked about it a lot, but I am a little bit concerned about that based on the action that we are 

likely to take today. 
I am not one that buys into the critique that monetary policy has been a long ways off 
target in the 
past five years. It is true that the economy is not performing as well as we would 
like.  There is a clear hypothesis for that based on the fact that we are dealing with a collapsed 

housing bubble and the aftermath of a financial crisis.  
But the Committee, by all accounts, has 

done a lot.  Much of it has been quite innovative, and the call of the Committee and of the 

Chairman has been essentially correct during the 
past several years.  So 
I am not one that thinks 
that we are 90 degrees off from where we should be or could be at this juncture. 
For our action today, as encapsulated in option B, we can cite two things that do make 
some sense and that I am sympathetic with as a rationale.  One is that we do have a global 

slowdown.  I am concerned about it.  I think it is very legitimate to worry that that slowdown is 

going to 
affect the U
nited State more than it has so far, and that that is a compelling argument for 
getting ahead of that and tak
ing aggressive action here.  T
hat is one reasonable rationale. 
And I 
                           
     
                        also think we have some room to maneuver on the inflation front, but only some.  I think 
it is nothing like 2010 when all measures of expected inflation were down a lot and trending down 

further. 
We can cite these factors.  I don™t think we have as good a rationale as I would like to 
see for a move of this magnitude. 
Within alternative
 B, I do think it is a good moment to adopt a meeting-
by-meeting 
approach to balance sheet policy that I have been advocating for a long time.  I hope that this will 

put us more into a mode that is similar to the one we are in under normal interest rate policy 

where we
 can sensibly adjust the policy at each meeting, given the change in the outlook and the 

change in the economic situation.  T
his will likely serve the Committee pretty well going 
forward, and I appreciate that 
alternative B has that feature. I am satisfie
d with the formulation 
in B with respect to that dimension. 
On paragraph 5, I definitely support 5 and not 5
. As many of you know, I have argued 
that explicit mention of an unemployment number is a tactical mistake
 that may not serve the 
Committee very well.
  As Governor Yellen remarked yesterday, hysteresis in unemployment 
cannot be ruled out in the U.S.  And I might remind the Committee again that Europe has not 

seen 6
½ percent unemployment for a couple of decades.  Today it is over 11 percent in Europe, 
despite some major countries undergoing structural labor market reforms. 
I am concerned that 
we are telling the public that we can do more about unemployment than we really can.  It is more 

labor market policy than it is monetary policy, and it could possibly throw monetary policy off 

for a generation to tie explicitly to unemployment and to promise that monetary policy can do a 

lot about unemployment. 
The story in Europe is exactly that there are structural problems that 
developed over time.  Unemploym
ent 
has remained very high for a very long time, and the 
structural reforms have not been undertaken by the various governments across Europe.  It is one 
                 
      
                         
    thing to have bad labor market policy.  It is another thing to have bad monetary policy because 
you ha
ve bad
 labor market policy.  I am concerned about this, and I™d advise against going in 
that direction. 
In addition, I think there are hazards of tying to any particular measure of economic 
performance because all of our metrics have clear deficiencies, and many of them are mentioned 

around the table here.  One of the 
deficiencies 
for unemployment is that unemployment can fall 
for the wrong reasons.  W
e were just citing yesterday that the unemployment rate did fall, but it 
didn™t fall in a way that we thoug
ht was indicative of better labor market performance.  So you 
could have a situation where you feel like unemployment has gone down to 
a relatively low 
level, but you are not very satisfied with labor market outcomes, 
and you still feel like the 

Committee 
should be aggressive in that circumstance.  T
his is a problem that we have with all of 
the economic data that we look atŠ
that each piece of dat
a only tells a part of the story about the 
overall economic performance. 
We would be better off to preserve the 
Committee™s judgment 
on economic performance. 
Outside of the statement it™s fine for various members to say, ﬁI™d really like to see 
unemployment come to here,ﬂ or ﬁI™d like to see labor force participation come to here,ﬂ or 

whatever other metrics 
that you
™d like to see certain types of labor market measures hit certain 
thresholds.  But I™m not sure that you want to tie the Committee™s hands in making a judgment 

about overall economic performance.  So I™d have no problem beefing up the language on labor 

markets, if people feel like we maybe have been insufficiently attentive to this and saying that 

we are going to pay more attention.  That™s fine with me.  But I™m counseling against putting an 

explicit number on this or really any other data, to the extent w
e can avoid it, in the statement. 
         
                     
    
       
                   And, finally, on this paragraph 5
Šand then I have a few more comments
ŠI think 
thresholds or triggers like this draw lines in the sand that we may not want to be drawing.  W
e are all in agreement that if we are inside the 
boundsŠ
say, 2
½ percent and 6
½ percent
Šthat we 
are not going to raise rates.  But if you cross the bound, you are implicitly sending a signal that 
you are going to do something.  I™m not sure the Committee has really decided that we would 

actually do someth
ing in that circumstance.
  Putting on my dovish 
hat for a minute, you are 
creating this thing where you are saying you will act if the triggers are violated. I don™t think we 

have really discussed that or really think that that™s what we would do.  If inf
lation is at target, 
and unemployment comes downŠand President Kocherlakota was at least in part touching on 

this
Šthe Committee may not want to tighten at that juncture.  What if you don™t want to tighten 
at that juncture?  Then why are you giving that 
as the trigger? 
That part to me has not 
been 
formulated
 in a way that I can get my head around. 
Let me comment just for a few minutes on Mike Woodford™s Jackson Hole paper, which 
I do think was a seminal survey of monetary policy at the zero lower bound.  If you haven™t 

looked at itŠand I know many of you haveŠthe paper is divided into 
just 
two parts.  There is 

balance sheet polic
y, and there is policy 
to commit to stay at the zero interest rate for longer. 
If you know Mike, you know that he is very pessi
mistic about balance sheet policy, being an anti
-monetarist kind of guy.  He does not think balance sheet policy is very effective, except to the 

extent that it has a signaling effect and that the Committee is better served by doing something 

rather than j
ust promising to do something. 
I agree with the Chairman™s assessment that Professor Woodford is underestimating the 
effects of balance sheet policy.  I do think QE2 did have a significant influence on the United 

States and especially on expected inflation
 and actual inflation.  The effects to the real economy 
      
           
  
     
         
      
      
           
   are harder to trace out, but those are always hard to trace out.  So I think today™s 
alternative 
B action is a sensible way to manage the balance sheet policy going forward and that policy does 
have s
ome prospect of being effective, so I™m not going to argue against the efficacy of the 
policy. 
Professor Woodford thinks that the only way to provide accommodation, in large part, is 
to commit to stay at the zero lower bound for longer.  I agree also with 
the Chairman that the 

length of time that this Committee may be able to commit to stay at zero gets less and less 

credible as you go farther out in the future.  That is something that is not well captured by the 

model.  If you start going out many years, so many things can happen over that period, in reality, 

that it is not clear that you are communicating anything.
  But the main message I took from the 
paper, and an effective message, was this: 
If you are trying to make this commitment to stay 
lower for l
onger, it is a very subtle matter to get it right.  And he reviews a lot of central banks 
and a lot of central bank actions, some of which he characterized as counterproductive in terms 

of trying to get the right type of commitment from the perspective of 
the model on staying lower 
for longer.  
In fact, 
what 
I took away 
from it 
was
, the main danger is that continuing to commit 
to later and later liftoff could be sending this pessimistic signal
Šif we don™t do it correctlyŠ
that 

the reason we are staying lower
 for longer is not that we are trying to make up for the fact that 
we have been stuck at the zero lower bound, but instead it is that the outlook is deteriorating and 

is continuing to deteriorate in a very negative way.  And 
I think we have to be careful a
bout that, 
and that 
maybe
 we have sent that signal, unwittingly perhaps, in some of our actions. 
I am going to give a suggestion, not a policy suggestion, but a suggestion about the 
proper way to think about this from Professor Woodford™s perspective 
in my interpretation.  T
he 
whole point is you are constrained by the zero lower bound for a period of time.  Then, after you 
               
           
       
                    would otherwise raise interest rates, you stay at the zero lower bound for a time to make up for 
the fact that you were constrained duri
ng the earlier period of time.
  My example about how we 
should think about this is as follows.  Suppose the Committee was committed to a Taylor r
ule the 
way John Taylor likes to use itŠhis is a much more aggressive and 
hawkish 
Taylor 
rule, which 
would even 
call for raising rates today.
  And suppose everyone agreed on that.  This is just 
hypothetical, obviously.  And that rule would call for us to raise rates today, but we would say, 

ﬁWe are not raising rates today.  We are staying at zero today.ﬂ  The reason we are staying at 

zero today is exactly the Woodford reason, which is that we were constrained by the zero bound 

for a couple of years.  T
herefore, we have to stay at zero for a while
.  And it is exactly at that 
point that you gain credibility for the po
licy
.  You are trying to make up for the zero bound 
constraint by st
aying at zero
 even though the data are telling you, according to the standard 
Taylor rule or other Taylor
-type rules
, to be more aggressive at this juncture.  Y
ou are staying at 
zero 
because you need to make up for the fact that you were at the zero lower bound for some 
time. 
I do not agree with Professor Woodford that the nominal GDP targeting approach would 
do this.  My main complaint about nominal GDP targeting is that it ignores th
e possibility of 
what is likely an altered real GDP growth path.  And certainly, if you look at the data, as the 

Chairman was saying yesterday, on levels of real GDP or consumption, it looks like we are on a 

different path than we were. 
So to commit us to
 get back to the previous real GDP trend, which 
is partly driven by 
the 
bubble economy in the mid-2000s, I think would be a mistake. 
However
, for 
price
-level targeting
, I have looked at graphs and tried to get an analysis of 
where we are with respect to th
e price level.  If you look at the price-
level path established 
during the period from 1995 to 2005, which was a relatively successful monetary policy era for 
             
      
    
     
   
       
   
            
the Committee in terms of hitting our inflation target, we are actually very close 
to or right on 
that price
-level path.  And in that sense, that has been a great success of the Fed during this 
episode.  Unlike the U.S. in the 1930s, w
hen policymakers allowed the price
-level path to 
deviate from the previously established path, or Japan in the 1990s, in which, again, they allowed 
the price
-level path to deviate from the one that had been established, we did not do that.  We are 

right on the 1995 to 2005 price-
level path. 
In that sense, policy has been successful, and we have 
not committed the mistakes
 of the past.  That is also one reason why I think we have made 
essentially the right call over the 
past several years. 
I am going to stop there.  Those are my 
thoughts on monetary policy.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes, just a point of clarification.  I view the language of 5
 as a 
threshold, not a trigger.  Threshold language would be, 
ﬁlow rates appropriate, at least as long as 

the unemployment rate exceeds 6
½ percent.ﬂ  A tri
gger would be, ﬁA low rate is appropriate 
only as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6
½ percent.ﬂ  So I think it is written as a 
threshold, not a trigger. 
MR. BULLARD.  Can I respond to that?  I agree that that is the language in there, but I 
think mark
ets will interpret it as a 
trigger.  
Or let me say, as a fair
 way, I think there is a danger 
that markets will interpret that as 
a line in the sand or a t
rigger
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I think it™s pretty easy for the Chairman in the press 
conference
Šif we
 were to go this routeŠto explain what a threshold means.  I don™t think it is 
that complicated. 
MR BULLARD. If it™s not a t
rigger
, why put the number in? Put a lower number in. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s okay, too. 
       
                
           
               
     
   
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  President 
Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am going to support 
alternative 
B. Having said that, I have some reservations about going down the path of a new LSAP, 
particularly the whole-hog approach that™s in a
lternative A. I am reticent on two
 counts. 
First, I remain unconvinced about the likely efficacy of expanding our asset purchases.  
As I said in the economy round, I think the conditions that made the first two LSAP programs 

successful
Ša lack of liquidity in MBS markets in the case of LSAP1 and elevated concerns 
about outright deflation in the case of LSAP2Šare not present in the current environment.  
This 

time around, it seems to me that we face a more conventional problem of inadequate demand, 

and I am not convinced that lowering general 
market rates will stimulate much credit expansion 
and spending.  
Furthermore, it is not clear to me that credit conditions in mortgage markets have 

eased quite enough to the point that more MBS purchases w
ill have a significant impact. 
Second, I have learn
ed to be humble as regards outlook certainty.  I have not completely 
abandoned the hypothesis that the willingness of businesses to hire and businesses and 

consumers to spend will improve on the other side of the election and fiscal cliff negotiations.  

As I commented yesterday, I believe there is some upside risk.  Though the European situation is 
not rapidly converging to a truly comprehensive resolution, I see some hope that the process of 

incremental steps may cumulatively lead to a large leap in overall confidence. 
I don™t have a 
whole lot of conviction that these optimistic outcome
s will be realized, so I accept the case for 
some policy response to current circumstances 
in the Committee™s outlook. That said, I will 
support 
alternative 
B™s modest pace 
of 
$30 billion per month.  That would be my preference 
for 
expansion of our MBS portfolio. 
      
     
                        
   
          
   
   With respect to the choice between paragraph 5 and 5
, I am sympathetic to the idea of 
replacing calendar dates with economic conditionality.  I have said that in e
arlier meetings. But I 
am not in favor of the formulation in 5
, at least today. 
I have views 
similar to 
President 
Bullard
™s.  The unemployment rate is a partial and potentially misleading indicator of labor 
market performance.  The pace of employment gr
owth needed to attain a given unemployment 
rate can be very sensitive to changes in the participation rate. For example, at current 
participation rates, it will take just over 200,000 jobs a month to get to a 7 percent 

unemployment rate by the end of next year.  I would consider 200,000 jobs a month over the 

next 16 months to be consistent with sustained significant improvement in the labor market. 
But the Board staff, and many on the Committee, have noted that labor force participation 
rates appear to be 
well below the levels that can be explained by demographic trends.  My own 
staff estimates that only 40 percent of the drop in participation rates since the beginning of the 

recession is due to labor force aging.  
If the participation rate were to revert t
o the level it was 
just last September, job gains of 200,000 per month would, everything else being equal, yield an 

unemployment rate that would be barely below 8 percent by the end of 2013.  And I would not 

be willing to say that such an outcome would con
stitute a lack of progress in meeting our 

employment mandate. 
Paragraph 5
, as it is written, contains no reference to broader labor market conditions.  I 
believe there was a reference in an earlier version, but it is has been removed.  I think that this i
s a significant omission, particularly with an unemployment threshold as ambitious as 6
½ percent
.  I™m not comfortable with a number that low, combined with a lack of any reference at all to our 

broader employment objectives.  T
here are enough facets of the 6
½ percent decision to consider 
that it feels a little rushed to me at this meeting. 
      
          
    
      
      
    
             
 As regards paragraph 4, I would include the reference to other policy tools. I think the 
meaning of this paragraph should be that if conditions don™t improve, the Commi
ttee will 
continue the MBS purchase program and may undertake additional asset purchases, 
employ 
other policy tools, or both.  If I misunderstand the meaning of that paragraph, then I would ask 
for a little bit more work on this paragraph and further clarification this morning.  
Thank you, 

Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lockhart, in 5
, the very last sentence does 
reference labor market conditions.  Did you note that? 
MR. LOCKHART.  Let me look at that.  I stand corrected.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Resource slack is large, labor market 
conditions lack momentum toward improvement, and the inflation profile in our projections is 

slightly below our long
er-run objective for the most 
part. 
I support strong and meaningful policy 
actions today to address these deficiencies. I accept that 
alternative 
B delivers on these 
requirements.  I think that the $40 billion of MBS and 5
 are very helpful in delivering 
that. I 
will simply note th
at the formulation of forward guidance in 5
 is not quite as strong as I have 
preferred in the past, but I do think that it is a good, careful approach that will in fact boost 

monetary policy accommodation, and I can certainly support that, if it is adopted. 
I think that the wording paragraph 2 is extremely important. It states the monetary policy 
concern 
as follows:  ﬁ
The Committee is concerned that
, without further policy accommodation, 
economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained improvement in labor market 

conditions.ﬂ  That is very important.  It follows through on the minutes from our July meeting, as 

well as your grave concerns
 and 
remarks expressed at Jackson Ho
le, so I favor that. 
                         
         
  
       
    I favor this combination of essentially open-
ended asset purchases, which are flexible 
when you put paragraphs 3 and 4 together, plus the enhanced 
state
-contingent 
forward guidance 
in paragraph 4.  
President Bullard went through this rationale a little bit. Let me just summarize 
and say I put a lot of weight on the research literature that Mike Woodford described.  I thought 

he did a terrific job.  In Woodford™s formulation, clear expectations of forward guidance are 

important and effe
ctive for delivering policy accommodation. 
In fact, I held my breath when I 
read the page where he described when I had talked about the 7
/3 thresholds, and I thought that 
Mike was kind and gentle in criticizing but saying that that type of forward guidan
ce did deliver 
more accommodation than what his best choice was.  In that sense, the language in 5
 would 
indeed be helpful.  The evidence for LSAPs that you mentioned yesterday, 
Mr. 
Chairman
, was 
very important.  The two reinforce each other very well. 
In paragraph 3, as I mentioned, I favor the stronger pace of MBS at $40 billion.  I think 
that paragraph 4 makes this essentially open-ended by conditioning further LSAPs on substantial 

improvement in labor conditions, joint with price stability, and 
with
 policy effectiveness, as you 
mentioned yesterday.  So there are important safeguards there.  It can be flexible and can turn 

around if in fact it is not working as best we would hope. 
In terms of labor market improvement, it would be unambiguously an improve
ment if we 
got something on the order of payroll employment increasing 200,000 per month for several 

months.  If the unemployment rate declined either with momentum or continuous improvement, 

and, indeed, we got 
GDP growth above trend, those would be all of the markers that we would 
expect for a strong recovery that would be associated with an 
improving labor market.  We may 
well not be lucky enough to see all three of those at the same time, so we will have to pay 

attention t
o that. 
       
   
                 
   
             
   
        
      
      
As you mentioned, the l
ast sen
tence
 in 
paragraph 
5 gets at this larger characterization of 
labor market improvement beyond just the unemployment rate, but the unemployment rate is a 
very important marker.  I think that 
the 
paragraph 5
 forward guidance is explicit
ly state 
contingent, and it allows us to remove the calendar date.  I
t is very easy for us to be against 
calendar dates.  I think that most of us are uncomfortable with this formulation, that policy can 

remain low until late 2014 or beyond.  But we are uncomfortable because of the ambiguous 

nature. Is it a forecast?  Is it commitment? It is easy to be against that, but you have to be in 

favor of something in order to actually take it out.  The state contingency in 5
 is very useful.  So 
the 6
½ unemployment rate marker, 
with the 2 plus ½ percentage point on inflation, is a useful 
safeguard.
  Presidents Williams, Rosengren, and Kocherlakota spoke well about how this works, 
and that it is critical to describe our attitudes about inflation above our goal of 2.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start by saying something positive 
about alternative B.  [Laughter] I very much like the idea in paragraph 5
of replacing our 
problematic calendar
-based guidan
ce with language that is conditional on future economic 
conditions.  I think this is much needed change.  It focuses our communication, our forward 

guidance, on a reaction function, and reduces the danger that Michael Woodford very eloquently 

laid out that our forward guidance is actually just making people gloomier about the economic 

fundamentals. It™s a very real danger, and I think there is a very real possibility that that is 
the 
effect our forward guidance has been having over the course of the last y
ear. 
Okay.  That was my positive remark.  I would like to move on now to some improvement 
opportunities I see.  [Laughter] I think in 5
 that it would be better if we avoided using a specific 
numerical value for the unemployment rate as a threshold or tri
gger, whatever we are going to 
         
     
            
              
           
   
    do. I took a step back.  T
his is a large change in our statement.  This is a fairly dramatic change 
in the set of language we use 
to characterize our forward guidance. It™s an ambitious statement. 
In view of our experience with the forward guidance earlier this year, where we got 
boxed in for something that in hindsight we could have anticipated, I tried to think of ways in 
which this language could unexpectedly box us in or tie our hands in ways that we don™t 

anticipate now.  I think this numerical unemployment rate is one of them. 
President Lockhart 
was very eloquent about this.  This makes us hostage to labor force participation rates.  W
e would be vulnerable to a scenarioŠhe sketched it outŠin which employment picks up, and that 

starts drawing people into the labor force.  This is not an unfamiliar phenomenon historically, in 

which labor force growth that 
tails off 
and turns negative when the unemployment rate goes up, 
then picks up when employment growth starts rising.  Given the behavior of the labor force over 
the 
past several years, I don™t think we should have a lot of confidence in our ability to project 

how the unemployment rate would behave in a scenario in which employment growth picked up 

a lot.  I think this is a really serious risk.  I
t would be better to write the statement in terms of the 
qualitative language used earlier that President Lockhart was referring to. For example, we 

could say, 
ﬁThis exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least 
until the Committee has seen substantial ongoing improvement in labor market conditions.ﬂ 
I think that formulation would be preferable to the language that uses a specific numerical target. 
The s
econd opportunity I see has to do with the inflation language in the same statement.  
We used the phrase that 
ﬁthis 
exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate 
will be 
appropriate at least as long as
ﬂ blah, blah, blah, ﬁprovided that inflation at a one-
to two
-year 
horizon is projected to be no more than 
a half
 percentage point above the Committee™s 2 
percent 
objective and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.
ﬂ  So the logic is 
                
  
              
      
          
     clear, to give ourselves an out if the inflation picture deteriorates substantially.  Personally, I 
think the ﬁclose to 2 percentﬂ language would be better.  That™s more consistent with the kind of 

standard we described in our consensus statement.  Proliferating conditionality language can be 

confusing.  But there is a deeper problem with this language.  My sense is that it has been true 

for the 
past 20 years in which we have achieved price stability
ŠI believe it has been true
Šthat 
inflation over the medium term, the next couple of years, was projected to be close to 2 percent 

or below that.  I haven™t gone and checked, but I am virtually sure that™s true.  T
his was a period 
during which we achieved and maintained price stability.  I
t is essential to maintain that 
credibility because it can be co
stly to re
gain, but we started this period by moving preemptively, 
before the forecast of inflation moved away from that low rate.  And in the future, 
it is going to 

be important for us to be able to move preemptively. I
f this condition is violated, it is
 in some 
sense too late. 
It
™s not like we are going to go back to the 1970s right away if this condition is 
violated, but I think this sets too low a bar.  T
here is a way to word this that tightens this. 
We 
can say, instead of ﬁprovided that inflation at a one-
to two
-year horizon,ﬂ we could say, ﬁunless 
inflation, at a one-
to two
-year horizon, would be projected to be more than ½ percentage point 
above the Committee™s 2 percent objective.ﬂ  S
omething lik
e that makes clear that we would 
move to keep this condition true, that we are not going to wait until this condition is violated in 

order to move. 
The t
hird suggestion I have for improvement in B(5) 
concerns the last sentence. I suggest 
we delete it. I think it is quite confusing.  This represents the fifth different statement of 

conditionality on the second page, in two paragraphs. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Are you saying the last sentence in 5
?            
          
                                        MR. 
LACKER. 
Yes, , the last sentence. 
It is not clear if it only applies after we get to 
6½. Does it apply before or after that?  It is tempting to think, well, the second sentence is pretty 
strongŠthat must trump it.  But it™s not obvious.  And then, it
™s expressed in terms of the pace, 
and the rest of the conditionality is about the level of the unemployment rate.  So does this mean 

that if we get to 6
½ percent 
but unemployment is not continuing to fall rapidly enough, we are 
going to keep tightening po
licy
? I don™t think you mean that.  I
t just seems unnecessary and 
confusing to me. 
The f
inal suggestion I will make
 is, 
again, the lack of grammatical accuracy in the way 
inflation is referred to in 4 is unbecoming to 
the Committee.  We take a lot of care
 to 

communicate precisely. In something so critical, it is a little disturbing. It just seems like a limp 

and tepid sort of boilerplate reference to inflation.  ﬁ
In the context of price stability
ﬂ has always 
struck me as a little bit vague. 
Why not say 
ﬁunless doing so would compromise 
price stabilityﬂ? 
We are committed to price stability. It™s in the mandate. I would prefer to see something 
stronger like that. 
Let me take a step back here. 
If you look at this language, it™
s complicated.  The 
conditionality is expressed in four or five different ways in various parts of these two paragraphs.  

Just in terms of complexity, I think it™s going to be hard to boil it down and simplify.  
ﬁUntil 
labor market conditions get better
ﬂ is probably going to be the 
headline, but the nuances are 
going to be hard to parse out for people just reading it.  Your press conference is going to be 

really critical here. 
The broad thrust of the language of this thing is to very significantly intensify our focus 
on unemployment.  We have been moving in that direction for some time, but I view this as 

implicitly weakening our commitment to price stability
.  Taking this statement as a whole
, that™s 
        
              
                  
     how I view this.  I know the worry about price stability seems like a remote and distant concern 
right now.  I know that it looks like it is under control.  It looks like we have things covered, 

looks like we are far from breaking out, looks like we have gotten away with it 
the 
past couple of 
years.  We™ve seen inflation rise up and not have it trigger any erosion of expectations.  But the 

potential, if we lose it, is for far more costly effects on the economy than the incremental impact 

of the 1 
million jobs that the staff 
has shown might be associated with today™s actions.  I think 
that shift in focus represents a broad overconfidence about our models; a broad overfocus on 

point forecasts
, forecast means, mean forecast paths
, and their analytics as well as a lack of 
humilit
y that would be appropriate here. 
As for the deeper issues of the day, I cannot support a new asset purchase program.  W
e are fluctuating around a sluggish growth path, and I don™t think we should react to the downside 

wiggles that are of this magnitude.  F
urther stimulus at this time is unlikely to improve 
economic 
growth much without causing an unwanted increase in inflation.  I have talked about that before.  

This will complicate risks, 
creating 
greater complications in our exit strategy. 
The larger we 
make the balance sheet, the more vulnerable we are to small miscalculations in policy along the 

exit.  It just provides so much scope for expansion in bank lending and deposits that it makes us 

very vulnerable.  And the larger we make it, the more vulnerab
le 
we are
. I strongly oppose purchasing more mortgage-backed securities.  Central banks should not 
choose which economic sectors to support.  Doing so, if it has any effect at all, restricts credit 

access in other sectors. And I don™t see how we can defen
d that.  Such allocational initiatives go 
far beyond our mandate.  They undermine our claim to deserve independence for the conduct of 

monetary policy, and threats to our independence have been growing recently.  I think these are 
                                 
    
     
             just going to heighten th
ose threats. 
Buying MBS is bad policy and bad politics.  The only 
circumstance in which I
™d support it is if there weren™t enough T
reasuries out there to buy.
 One final comment.  T
here was some discussion at the last meeting of the slogan ﬁWe™ll 
do what it takes.ﬂ I think we haven™t given enough thought to the possibility that what it takes is 
patience.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I want to comment on one of your observations, 
President 
Lacker, about the last sentence of 5
. I read it slightly differently than you do, and I 
don™t know how 
other people read it. I read the sentence preceding it 
as saying 
that we currently 
anticipate that th
ese are 
the right metrics, but then the last sent
ence says that that current 
anticipation 
could be modified by what we see over time.
  You are basically saying that you are 
not completely locked into the first thing, regardless of what economic information you see in 

the future.  So I think the sentences 
actually do work together in a reasonable way. 
MR. LACKER
.  So the policy we™re adopting here is that an exceptionally low rate for 
the funds rate is going to be appropriate as long as the unemployment rate exceeds 6½ percent, 

inflation is well contained,
 or we decide that some other indicator of labor market conditions 
is more appropriate. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We currently anticipate that this is the right range, but 
our view is going to be modified by future information about a broad range of indicators.  
That is 

how I read it.  T
hat seems to be more intelligent than saying we are locked into this, regardless of 
what happens, regardless of what we see, and we are not allowed to learn about anything as the 

economy evolves.  I
t creates a little nuance, 
which is reasonable in terms of how one would 
expect the Committee to operate. 
                 
    
    
     
    
       
         
        MR. LACKER.  Well, then, why not soften the 6½ and use 
more general 
labor market 
conditions. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Because 
you are trying to give guidance about what the 
Commit
tee
 thinks 
at the time, what we think today that might be modified 
or might not be 
modified by future information.  But clearly it would be unintelligent not to modify your view if 
the information strongly contradicted your prior view.  That™s how I read i
t. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Despite massive monetary policy 
accommodation over the past four years, a stronger recovery has not yet materialized, and last 

week™s labor market report was a frustrating remi
nder of this long slog.  Like others, my forecast 
accounts for any number of risks related to Europe, the U.S. fiscal cliff, and 
the 
regulatory 
environment, and does recognize that policy accommodation may need to remain in place for 

some time in order to 
support the recovery.  I understand the case for taking action in order to 
spur the recovery and bring down unemployment faster.  To that end, the Committee agreed to 

undertake additional balance sheet actions only a few months ago.  Today, we contemplate doing 

more.
  Certainly, the data flow since the last meeting was a bit softer than I had expected, but not 
sufficiently so to warrant a further expansion of our balance sheet.  In that regard, I note that the 

Tealbook had pulled forward the timing of the f
irst rate increase since our last meeting. 
As I weigh the cost of action versus 
the 
status quo, I have appreciated the thoughtful 
analysis of Board staff and a number of my colleagues around this table about the effects of 

another asset purchase.  Unfortun
ately, I find 
that the risk
s associated with further action carry 
less precise measurement, but, to the extent they are possible, pose significant cost if realized.  

Impairing market functioning in certain financial markets, the potential for the Federal R
eserve 
                 
             
               
      to experience financial losses in the future, and risk
s to financial stability 
due to the extended 
low rate environment all strike me as significant when weighed against potential benefits.  A 
larger balance sheet also has the potential to further c
omplicate an exit strategy. 
Another LSAP also may have near-term adverse consequences.  Given the recent rise in 
gasoline prices, additional asset purchases could generate a further rise in oil and gasoline prices, 

which would weigh on middle- and lower-
income households and, thus, partially offset 
estimated benefits. 
I also remain concerned that a balance sheet expansion could at some point raise inflation 
expectations.  Longer-
term measures of inflation expectations
, or breakeven inflation, 
appeared 
to re
spond strongly to past LSAP announcements.  Given that current longer-
term breakeven 
inflation measures are consistent with our stated goal, I am concerned that another LSAP 

program could push longer-term expectations above a level consistent with our obje
ctives. 
If this were to occur, we would face a difficult tradeoff between allowing longer
-term expectations 
to drift higher or reversing course by reducing the size of the balance sheet.  Either option strikes 

me as damaging to both the real economy and o
ur credibility. 
In terms of the forward guidance, I agree with those who note the time-contingent 
guidance has been problematic.  And so conceptually I agree that the state
-contingent guidance is 

preferable as long as we can articulate this guidance in a m
anner that is fully consistent with our 
January 2012 strategy statement, including our assessment of risk to the financial system.  Thank 

you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  President Fisher. 
         
    
  
                 
   
    
        
          MR. FISHER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I mentioned yesterday when I made very 
short comments about the economy, 
I would interlocutate today at greater length 
[laughter], 
so I 
ask you to bear with me. 
We seem to be mesmerized by the siren call of LSAPs. I can™t sing like Orpheus, and I 
know I will have no success in tying you to the mast or stuffing wax in our crew™s ears.  So what 
I am going to do is simply give my very best advice as a loyal officer on your ship.  I believe we 

are getting further off course. I believe we were misled by our navigati
on equipment.  
We have 
very sophisticated models, and we have a superb crew of analysts but, as you yourself said 

yesterday
Šand I quoteŠﬁnobody really knows what is holding back the economy, and nobody 
really knows what really works.ﬂ 
One thing I learned as a midshipman at the Naval Academy was that great battles at sea 
or on land are fought with modern tools, but they are decided ultimately by judgment.  AndŠ 

always
Šone listens to and respects the elements. I think everybody agrees at t
he table that 
inflation is not an immediate or presently foreseeable threat.
  Our desired port, given our 
mandate, is increased employment. I happen to believe personally we are way off course. I 

believe we are ignoring, at our peril, the elements. I ha
ve reported from my watch station again 

and again that the very people we wish to stoke consumption and follow demand by creating jobs 

and expanding business fixed investment are not influenced by our policy initiativesŠ
that is, by 

our LSAPs. 
Small and med
ium-sized businesses are job creators, and yet the soundings, as mentioned 
yesterday by President George, 
of the 
National 
Federation of Independent Business
™ s
urveys and 
others, tell us that over 90 percent of those businesses are either not interested in borrowing or, 

as I mentioned yesterday, 
have no problem accessing cheap financing.
  Monetary policy is not on 
           
            
  
     
    
   
   
        
      
        
 their radar as a concern, except that it raises fears among some 
of future inflationary 
consequences.  Their principal concern, as President Georg
e mentioned yesterday, is with fiscal 
and regulatory uncertainty. 
With regard to fixed investment and job creating 
cap
-ex, as I said yesterday, the math is 
pretty straightforward.  Big businesses dominate that theater, and again and again I have reported 
to this Committee that with some exception
ŠDisney, for example, being one led by a very 
clever contrarian CEO
Š90 percent or so of those I survey will simply not be motivated by 
further cuts in the cost of capital to invest in job-
creating cap
-ex beyond their maintenance needs.  
And 
this 
is 
due to 
the uncertainty of taxes and final deman
d and federal spending prospects. 
This time, as I mentioned yesterday, I asked my CEO contacts if 
their 
cost of borrowing 
were to decrease by some 25 basis points or more, how 
they would 
react. 
Would this induce 
them
 to spend more on expanding payroll or job-
creating cap
-ex?  And the answer 
from
 9 out of 
10 was, you could cut the cost of borrowing by 1 full percentage point 
and 
we™ll use it to buy 
back stock.  That™s what we™r
e being directed 
to do by our board.  Governor Stein mentioned the 
Duke™s Fuqua School survey yesterday, which is even more comprehensive. 
But one of my CEO contacts, by the way, reminded me of the work I used to do for him 
and the company he then managed 
going back to 1975, and our recommendations for strategic or 
green
 field investments.  We focused on ROI:  As long as you get paid back and as long as you 
earn a profit
, you can justify it to your shareholders.  And presentlyŠ
and perhaps because of 
what we 
have already initiated
Šthe cost of capital, as President Dudley mentioned earlier, 
unlike the conditions of 1975, 
is just not part of the calculation.  And if they are going to be 
buying 
back stock, as they are being directed 
to by their boards, there is, 
to be sure, a wealth 
effect.  But 
based on 
the people I talked to, it just does very little to result in
 job creation sooner 
        
        
  
   
   
                       
      rather than later. I™ll give you a specific example. 
This is inside information and off the record.  
A company that ordinarily h
as cap
-ex expenditures between $15 
billion 
and $20 billion a year 
and has the option presently to either lay cable and facilities that would expand their 4G network 
to 90 percent of the country or buy more stock has been directed by their b
oard of 
director
s to 
buy more stock because of the economics that these low interest rates make possible.  Even 

though it strengthens 
their balance sheet, it defers their 
job-
creation capacity. 
Again, I am suggesting, as one of your loyal crew, respectfully, that the effi
cacy of the 
course you are leading us upon is questionable.  M
y best guess is that we will end up this 
program, if we proceed with B, with excess reserves that exceed $2 trillion and money lying 

fallow, unused, and underutilized toward achieving our goal o
f increased employment. 
When we last talked, it was suggested that perhaps my interlocutors were unsophisticated 
and didn™t see the whole picture.  I note now that some sophisticates have come to question the 

efficacy of this LSAP cruise, among them Mr. Woodford, who has been talked about excessively 

at this meeting [
laughter], and my friend and respected economist Bill White, who has not been 
mentioned whatsoever.  Using monetary policy to overcome bad fiscal and regulatory policy is, 

to my mind, not only faulty but a 
pyrrhic
 strategy. It won™t work, and it may be used against us 
in a backlash and lead us onto the rocks. 
Now, all of that said, Mr. Chairman, you™re the captain of the ship.  It appears that you 
and many of our colleagues wish to now plot a course with coordinates outlined in B.  We have 

decided to proceed, and we have instructed our boiler room, 
as we say in the 
navy
, to pour out 
another $750 billion or so in steam, and the boiler room has replied, ﬁ
Aye
, aye.ﬂ
  This is doable, 
and 
the staff h
as indicated that 
ﬁt
he challenges posed by exit remain manageable
,ﬂ though I do 
sense some timidity in their confidence.  There are warnings in the 
memos on LSAPs that exit 
                
    
  
            
      
  
                 following an even larger pro
gram
 can probably not be accomplished without violating what the 
Committee has heretofore said is our exit strategy principle. 
The engine room has replied, ﬁYes, 
we can do it.ﬂ  But there are murmurs among the crew that their conclusions are subject to
Šand 
I am taking words out of the LSAP 
memos
Šﬁsubstantial uncertainty,ﬂ and they c
ouch their 
responses with qualifying phrases like ﬁcurrently judgesﬂ and ﬁwould likelyﬂ and ﬁseems 
plausible.ﬂ  And as I said, listening to Seth very carefully yesterday, his qualifications or his 

disclaimers sounded very much like an Allegra commercial.  But, again, you™re captain of the 

ship; you™ve decided to proceed on a course.  The course is outlined in B.  Bill tells us that it may 

aggregate to another $750 billion or so depending on how much time we let this run.  
I am a 
member of your loyal officer corps.  And even though I doubt the efficacy of what we wish to 

do, and in fact feel that this is most definitely not the right course, and feel that this course may, 

as President 
Lacker just said, compromise the Fed™s security with regard to its independence, m
y job is to give you the best advice I am capable of rendering.  Your decision is to steer us along a 

course outlined in B.  I would say that the least worse of the options in Tealbook 
B is alternative 

B, 
reg
ular B, the first paragraph 5. 
I sent around a memo earlier in preparation for this meeting, and I argued that one could 
make the case that this could help offset the drag from higher GSE fees, 
lower 

mortgage
Treasury spre
ads, even though they are quite low, and help one of the three positive 
durable goods sectors that is assisting the recovery, the others 
being aircraft and motor vehicles
.  It is still operating below long
-run potential, so there is very little danger, in my view, of 
inducing cyclical mal
-investment. 
In addition, the general effects of inducing more refinancing 
may aid housing and households in ways that we can™t quite quantify. 
          
       
          
    
         
  
            
   
 may be laudable in the minds of some at this table.  We™ve heard good 
arguments for it.  But I agree with President Lockhart, andŠ
I believe
ŠPresident Lacker, that it 
is going too far too fast, that we are rushing it, and I would recommend against it.  I am referring 
specifically to the 6
½ percent unemployment rate 
and 2½ percent inflation cap over the one- to 
two
-year horizon
.  You have the phrase that ﬁlong
er-term inflation expectations 
continue to 
remain well anchored
ﬂ attached to that, but my guess is just ooching the now commonly 
accepted medium
-term or longer
-term t
arget of 2 percent 
by o
ne-half percent
age point would 
raise eyebrows and doubts amongst our skeptics, and some question marks, no matter how we 

state it
, in the marketplace. 
If you wish to proceed on this course, Mr. Chairman, my advice is to go with 
the 
Tealbook™s alternative B, not B
. Specifically, I would go with $30 billion, the lesser number.  
As Bill English said yesterday, it allows some ramping up in case the Committee decides, against 

my adviceŠand others™ 
like me
Što do more.  A $30 billion program, if I understood the Desk 
yesterday, 
on a flow rate basis means we are already taking down 60 percent of supply. 
I would edit paragraph 4 to take out reference to ﬁadditional asset purchases.ﬂ I would 
leave it more vague by simply referring to employi
ng 
ﬁits other policy tools as appropriate.ﬂ 

And after the phrase ﬁin the context of price stability,ﬂ I would add ﬁand well anchored,ﬂ another 

great naval term, ﬁand well anchored inflation expectations.ﬂ We have it in B
. I don™t see why 
we don™t have 
it in B
.  This is enough, in my mind, to bind the hands for some time to come for 
all of those who are with you in the wheelhouse of the ship we™re steering.  It is going to make it 

very hard to raise short-
term rates, as I mentioned yesterday, even if we 
end up with a stronger 
recovery 
than we currently foresee or imagine. 
       
     
       
     
   
         
                    
   
      I would recommend, as I suggested in my memo of last week 
and 
discussed yesterday, 
that in your press conference you emphasize that this is to help along the recovery in housing.  I 
would advise that you say that the majority of the Committee concurs, but emphasize that the 

Committee, as you said yesterday you would, will be constantly scrutinizing the efficacy and 

costs of the program.  In other words, Mr. Chairman, I would take ownership of this issue.  It is 

one of the distinct areas of recovery. It is an area where I believe we have had impact. I did 

support the MBS program when it was originally announced.  I think it is vital for regular 

people, not just for economists. 
The headlin
e you should be seeking in 
USA Today
 should be ﬁBernanke Acts to Support 
Continued Housing Recovery.ﬂ  You mentioned yesterday you plan to speak in different terms 

than usual, making it more simple and directed to what you refer
red to as the ﬁaverage perso
n.ﬂ 
I think that™s good.  You™re a great teacher.  I saw you do that most forcefully and effectively 

when you visited Fort Bliss.  And as I mentioned in our phone conversations last week, your 

objective should not be to communicate to a few dozen sophisti
cated economists 
about 
this 
model or that model.  It should be to convinceŠ
what was referred to in the last meeting
Šthe 
unsophisticated interlocutors who run America™s businesses, and the consumers who buy the 

goods and services produced by those businesses, and the press, particularly 
what
 the consumers 
read as opposed to 
the reference literature. 
So, in summary, Mr. Chairman, I disagree with this course.  I think it is a mistake.  I
t steers us closer to the rocks.  But I have offered you my best advice un
der the circumstances. 
I wish you luck.  I will do my very, very best in my public appearances in the upcoming week to 

support what we are going to announce, even if I have to take Allegra to do it.  [Laughter] 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
         
            
   
        
     
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
  Thank you.  President Plosser. 
MR. PLOSSER.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There are two policy actions under 
consideration today.  One is additional asset purchases, the other is an effort to extend and 
strengthen our forward guidance.  I would like to make 
a few comments about each of these. 
As I explained in the earlier go
-round, I am not in favor of undertaking a new round of 
asset purchases today.  In my view, the forecast has not changed enough to warrant further 

action.  Indeed, many of the Tealbook™s simple rules on page 2, Tealbook B, including the 

outcome-
based rule, suggest that policy is approximately well calibrated. 
Just like President 
Bullard, I do not see the urg
ency 
for large, aggressive actions at this time.  I™ll remind the 
Committee, we didn™t move earlier this year 
as the economy brightened and the outlook looked 
better
.  We did not take action.  We were patient.  
It t
urned out to be the right decision.  The 
econ
omy then weakened.  But we seem to be anxious to do further accommodation every time 
we see weakness and not do the reverse as the economy strengthens.  The message I take from 

that is that 
we 
need to be patient, that we need to not react to short-
run fluc
tuations. 
The recovery is frustratingly slow.  
The u
nemployment rate is uncomfortably and 
tragically high.  But, again, we have been told and we understand there is reason to expect this, 

given the size and nature of the economic shocks that have hit the economy.  The slow recovery, 

in my mind, is not evidence that our monetary policy stance is inappropriate.  The benefits of 

further asset purchase
s in curing what ails the economy are imprecise and tenuous at best.  
Indeed, the Board staff memo lays out numerous caveats and assumptions necessary in assessing 

the possible benefits of further asset purchases. 
While financial participants may be chomping at the bit for a new program, many 
economists throughout this country have raised doubts about the efficacy of such a policy 
       
                     
         
              strategy.  Despite sizable purchases and zero interest rates for four years, unemployment remains 
elevated.  But rather than question the efficacy of the policies, which would seem natural, our 

strategy seems to be to double down.  Now, th
e further sizable expansion of the balance sheet 

carries costs and will greatly exacerbate the challenges we face when it comes time to exit, as I 

talked about yesterday. 
In my view, embarking on another asset purchase program at this time is 
a highly risky strategy.  The consequences may prove very disruptive to the U.S. economy and 

harmful to the reputation and credibility of this institution for years to come.  We should not 

ignore these risks, even for the 
best
-guess outcomeŠa 50 basis point drop in the unemployment 
rate over two years. 
The proposal in 
alternative 
B is for a flow
-based program.  But to me, this seems to run 
counter to the theory of how such purchases are purported to work in the first place and the logic 

we have used in the past. If we 
believe that the effects of purchases are through a 
portfolio 
balance channel, then the public needs to understand the stock of securities the Fed intends to 

buy.
  The Board staff memo on the flow-
based balance sheet policy says
 that the conclusion of 
the 
simulation exercises
, and I quote, ﬁreflects the strong assumptions that investors, price-
setters, 
and 
wage
-setters all understand the Committee™s goals and its
 stopping rule for the flow 
LSAP
.ﬂ  How do we communicate that when we ourselves don™t even know what that stopping 
rule will be? It is remarkable to me that the Committee has not been able to communicate to the 

public our reaction function for setting the funds rate even in normal times.  And now it seems 

we expect the public to believe and unders
tand what our reaction function will be for LSAPs and 
balance sheet rules
.  LSAPs are not a nimble instrument.  If this program doesn™t produce the 
desired results or the predicted outcomes for 
the 
unemployment rate, what will we do? 
I would 
predict that with a 
flow
-based program, if we don™t get the results, we won™t stop.  We will 
            
                
   
        
     
   
   continue.  How will we know when to stop? W
e seem to have convinced ourselves that such a 
policy is effective and important.  Maybe so.  If it proves not to be, and we don™t g
et the desired 
results, will we just keep on buying assets, reevaluating, and say, ﬁOh, yes, it™s going to work.  
We just have to do some more.ﬂ I am not terribly confident of our ability to manage that 

effectiveness and give us a stopping rule. 
If we get
 the reaction function wrong, and we find ourselves with ever-
more larger 
balance sheets, the Fed may face balance sheet losses, no returns, no flows to the Treasury, or 

unacceptably large losses of some kind or another.  This could undermine our ability to 

implement an appropriate monetary policy in the future, to the detriment of both households and 

businesses.  Now, 
if the purpose of the balance sheet expansion 
is as a commitment 
device to 
keep rates low for longer precisely because it makes it harder to exit, then we need to be 

explaining this.  
We don™t tell this to the public.  We need to be more communicative about what 
we expect our policy to achieve and why 
we are 
doing it, and we™re not doing 
that
.  How do we 
expect the markets to understand this 
when we are reluctant to say so directly
 ourselves? 
This leads me to the issue of forward guidance, the other policy tool under consideration, 
either in conjunction or separately.  The intent of our forward guidance is for the Committee to 

commit to holdin
g interest rates lower longer than it normally would after the economy begins to 
recover.  The idea, as President Kocherlakota said, is 
that 
the commitment to do this is supposed 
to signal to households that the future is going to be brighter.  The future is going to be more 

economic 
growth, higher spending than they otherwise might anticipate.  And this helps 
stimulate less saving and more spending today.  The strategy works well in many of our models.  

Agents are completely forward
-looking.  Many of those 
have expectations that are right. 
But 
implementation, in my view, is very tricky. One needs to get the expectations right. 
                   
  
                   
                      We wouldn™t want the public to believe that we will let inflation run away from us, of 
course.  Michael Woodford has argued that t
here are 
way
s to implement this strategy
.  He has 
given us two examplesŠ
an earlier 
one is 
a price
-level
-targeting strateg
y and, of course, recently 
at Jackson Hole, 
nominal GDP targeting. I see the problem with this strategy in implementation, 
not the conceptual idea.  First, it presumes that households and businesses will correctly inter
pret 
our guidance and what it means, and that it means future growth will be higher.  
But it seems just 

as reasonable to assume, and perhaps so far that has been the react
ion, 
that 
they will read our 
actions as a signal that we believe the economic outlook is going to be a lot worse for longer.  

The public does not have that positive outlook, and if we don™t convey that to them in very 

strong language, the strategy won™t work.  It will not bring spending forward. 
This strategy requires us to manipulate the public™s expectations in a very particular way. 
That
™s the communication challenge with this strategy.  To follow th
e strategy requires placing a 
lot of weight on our abi
lity to communicate. You will recall that this Committee decided not to 
adopt price-level targeting not too long ago and did not adopt nominal GDP targeting when we 

had the opportunity to do so.  And we rejected those for a variety of reasons, one was 

com
munication and, of course, 
with nominal GDP targeting
, one of the major issues was 
defining what the right level of real GDP needed to be.  We found those both either risky or 

diff
icult communication strategies. 
What do we think that we have done now that will overcome those problems? Why do 
we think that the thresholds w
ill overcome those difficulties? We seem to be willing to 
implement the strategy in a half
-hearted way.  I™d note that I have been a strong advocate, and 
continue to be a strong advocate, 
for systematic reaction functions. It is very important to this 

Committee. 
But 5
 is not a reaction function.  

 says nothing about what happens, for 
              
          
      
       
   
        
                example, after we pass one of the thresholds.  And this is very important, 
because the 
public 
doesn™t understand what our reaction function is in normal timesŠor we don™t know what they 
perceive it to be necessarily
Šand we are not telling them what it is going to be afterwards
.  L
et™s 
suppose, for example, that the public believes that after 
we reach the 6
½ percent threshold, and 
we say nothing about what we will do after that, they presume we may go back to the Taylor 

rule.
  Well, if that™s what they expect to happen, it would lead perhaps to a view of 
very fast 
tightening of policy after we get to the 6
½ percent unemployment rate.  That would undo some 
of the positive effects that we are trying to gain by this forward guidance.  If that turned out to be 

the case, then this strategy won™t work.  How do we make that commitment?  The public has to 

believe, beyond just the thresholds, how we are going to conduct policy, and as 
of 
now we 
haven™t explained 
that. 
I don™t think we agree amongst ourselves enough about what our policy 
reaction function is, and as much as I desire a more contingent eco
nomic-
based reaction 
function, I don™t think the thresholds help us very much there.  
The language in 
alternative B
(5

 again, says nothing about 
how we will behave afterwards. 
In the end, I agree with Woodford that LSAPs are perhaps ineffective.  But if 
we are 
going to adopt forward guidance and use that as our powerful tool, we need a much more 

deliberate and extended communication strategy to lay the groundwork to explain how our 

reaction function and how our policy strategy 
are 
going to work, and a com
munication strategy 
that convinces the public that we are serious about it, so that they understand how it works, 
if we 

are to get the outcomes that we want. 
Obviously, I am not in favor of B.  But if I had to choose, at this point I would choose 
5 over 5, not because I don™t like the direction that 5
 is headed, I™m just not sure it is ready for 
prime time yet. 
I™ve never 
been in favor of the calendar date.  It has created many problems for 
      
   
          
           
           
           
   us over the last year, and I am anxious to get rid of it.  But we need to get rid of it not by a one-
time change in a statement. 
It is going to take more preparation and more analysis. 
Thank you, 
Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
President Pianalto. 

MS. PIANALTO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Unlike some of my colleagues, my policy 
statements have usually been on the shorter side because I have generally been supportive of the 

version of the policy alternative that the Committee has eventually adopted.  I™m finding today™s 

policy decision much more of a strug
gle.  So I™m going to take a little more time than usual to 

explain my policy position and to share my views on the benefits and risks of additional policy 

action
s. 
With the unemployment rate at 8.1 percent and the August employment report as 
disappointing as it was, I would like to see the expansion proceed at a faster pace.  I know that 

we all would.  So the question on the table is:  Can additional monetary policy accommodation 

spur economic growth and improve labor market conditions?  And if so, which actions would be 

most beneficial and pose the least risk? 
I agree with the staff assessment that large
-scale asset purchases have been effective. 
Our first LSAP program was effective at the early stages of the financial crisis when financial 

markets were i
n severe distress.
  Our second LSAP program was effective when it was launched 
in 2010, a time when financial stress was still significant, the risk of falling back into a recession 

was high, and the risk of an outright deflation was very real.  
Our LSAP p
rograms provided 
strong support to financial markets and helped to appropriately realign inflation expectations.  In 

today™s circumstances, I see the benefits of another LSAP program as being far more limited. 
                    
       
                       The circumstances that prevailed when we init
iated our previous LSAPs are not evident today.  
Financial markets are not in disarray, and deflation is not a serious risk. 
I also worry that another large
-scale asset purchase program carries the risk of 
complicating our ability to withdraw policy 
accommodation smoothly and in a timely manner, as 
well as the risk of exposing us to reputation risk in the event that we incur large financial losses. 
I commend the staff for doing yeoman™s work to develop exit tools, to identify some of 
the potential 
complications of operating with a very large balance sheet, and to simulate our 
balance sheet under various assumptions.  I know that we™ve taken precautions, but it is 

impossible to be fully prepared for the environment that we might actually face three y
ears from 
now.  So after putting together my thoughts about the benefits and risks associated with the 

available tools and considering my economic outlook, I was not in favor of launching another 

large round of asset purchases along the lines of 
alternativ
e B as it was originally proposed in the 
Tealbook.  That option called for the immediate launch of an asset purchase program until labor 

market conditions substantially improved, and the purchase program was committed to run at 

least through mid
-2013.  That option also called for an extension of the forward guidance on the 
fed funds rate through mid-2015. 
I recognize that the strategy behind this policy option is predicated on the theory that 
additional monetary policy accommodation will only reduce the une
mployment rate substantially 
if this Committee actually commits to act aggressively and persistently until that goal is 

achieved.  I understand why the commitment strategy works so well in theory, but we have not 

had much practical experience to learn from
.  I understand the value of commitment, but 
commitment can take many forms. I think there™s value in waiting a little while longer before 

deciding to initiate another large
-scale asset purchase program. 
The Committee™s better choice 
                  
           
      
   
  
    
           at this juncture is 
to find a way to commit through forward guidance about the federal funds rate 
liftoff and not to launch a significant asset purchase program.  
I™m of 
the 
view that easing 
monetary policy through forward guidance has also been a powerful tool for reducing long-
term 
interest rates. 
As I noted, I think that our first two LSAP programs were successful in countering 
financial market stress and deflationary pressure
s. We may yet encounter a crisis
Šeither from 
the fiscal cliff or from Europe
Šthat once again 
cause
s serious financial market distress or 
deflationary pressures.  We would be better served by using asset purchases in response to these 
kinds of threats or the threat of a recession than to try to eke out a little more 
economic 
growth in 
the current circumstance. 
In coming months we may know more about the prospects for fiscal 
policy and for Europe and about the outlook.  It™s valuable to have the option to respond directly 

to these situations
, and launching a full-blown LSAP program today reduces our flex
ibility. 
For all of th
ese reasons I have preferred to wait for the completion of our maturity 
extension program at the end of the year before deciding whether to purchase more long-
term 
assets.  However, it was clear at our last meeting that many other Com
mittee members judge that 
additional policy accommodation might likely be warranted even sooner, and last week™s 

disappointing employment report seems to have been the decisive piece of evidence for some 

members who have been waiting for more proof of the economy™s lethargic condition. 
While I still have reservations about some of the specifics of the proposal, the version of 
alternative 
B that is now under discussion offers the possibility of an acceptable way forward.  
For one thing, even though 
alternati
ve B does call for expanding our holdings of long-
term 
securities in the next several months, it does so through the acquisition of MBS
.  Because some 
research does suggest the MBS purchases can be more impactful than Treasury purchases, I like 
        
     
                     
    
     
           
this aspect 
of 
alternative B.
  But I would also prefer the smaller amount of MBS purchasesŠ
that 
is, the $30 billion per month. 
One option in 
alternative B also allows for the possibility that the Committee might 
deploy tools other than, 
or at least in addition to
, large
-scale asset purchases if in coming months 
we conclude that additional easing steps are warranted. I was going to suggest some changes to 
the second sentence in paragraph 4.  I preferred that we delete the mention of ﬁ
additional asset 
purchases
ﬂ and in
stead state that 
ﬁthe Committee will continue its purchase
s of agency 
mortgage-
backed securities
ﬂ and is prepared to ﬁemploy its other tools as appropriate until such 
improvement is achieved in a 
context of price stability.
ﬂ  But I do like President Lockha
rt™s 
suggestion that we insert ﬁmayﬂ in front of ﬁundertake additional 
asset purchases and employ 
its other policy tools.ﬂ I think this flexibility of phasing in more accommodation in various ways as 

needed could prove to be helpful. 
In addition to beginning MBS purchases, 
alternative
 B eases policy through forward 
guidance. I like, as many others have already indicated, the state
-contingent concept in 

paragraph 5
, but I regard the 6½ unemployment rate and the 2½ inflation rate to be much too 
aggressive and risky.  If 
the natural
 rate of unemployment turns out to be 6 
percent or larger, I 
think that not lifting the fed funds rate until the unemployment rate falls to 6
½ percent risks some 
build-up of unacceptable inflationary pressures.  I know there 
are safeguards built into the 
forward guidance to prevent 
an unacceptable increase in inflation expectations, but we should be 
more humble about our ability to forecast these conditions with much precision.  
Presidents 

Lockhart and Lacker both laid out so
me risk
s to
 using a number for the unemployment rate, and I 
agree with their thoughts.  But if we decide that we have to include a number, a better approach 

is to set the unemployment rate to 
ﬁat least as low as 
7 percent
ﬂ and to keep inflation at ﬁ
close t
o                                   
  
     
    
    2 percent.
ﬂ  T
hese settings give us more flexibility.  Without that extra flexibility, I do not 
support p
aragraph 5
 and instead I support the language in paragraph 5. 
In conclusion, even though my preference is to wait, I can support a
lternative B with 
paragraph 5 today.  Even though some MBS purchases would begin right away, expanding the 
scope of policy accommodation even further is going to require the Committee to vote once 

again in coming months on the size and the structure of the policy change.  This buys us some 

time to determine exactly what the Committee means when we say 
that we want 
ﬁthe outlook for 
labor market conditions to significantly improve.ﬂ It also buys us some time if the outlook does 

not significantly improve to decide whether additional asset purchases would then be the best 

course of action.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Yellen. 

MS. YELLEN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B.  My preference is for 
purchases of 
$40 billion MBS a month, and with respect to forward guidance, my preference is 
for 5
. The data we have received since our August meeting provides yet further confirmation 
that 
economic 
growth is proceeding near or slightly below the economy™s potential, and 
downside risks continue to be substantial.  For quite some time, the Committee has been in 

watch
-and
-wait mode.  We™ve patiently monitored the economy to see whether the MEP 
and
 our forward guidance would be sufficient to produce a stronger recovery.  The verdict now seems 

clear.  Absent further policy action, I see little chance that unemployment will decline in the 

foreseeable future.  We should not delay action any further.  Indeed, I hope we will send the 

message loud and clear that we intend to provide additional accommodation through new asset 
            
                                
   purchases until we observe substantial and sustained improvement in labor market conditions, 
and will maintain policy accommodation for an extended period as the recovery strengthens. 
I support the open-
ended 
and conditional nature of the asset purchase program in 
alternative B. I think it™s very helpful to spell out the goal of the program and to articulate the 
economic conditions we™ll need to observe before halting those purchases.  
In particular, we 
should promise to add accommodation through asset purchases until the outlook for labor market 

conditions has improved substantially, and we would stop doing so only if our outlook for 

inflation or assessment of the efficacy and costs of the program change
s sig
nificant
ly.  The 
challenge with such an open
-ended program is that its effectiveness will depend on market 
expectations of the ultimate size of our asset purchases, and we™re offering no clear guidance on 

how long we expect them to continue.  
In addition, 
we™ve included some escape clauses relating 
to efficacy and costs.  I, therefore, think it™s important that our public communications, including 

the Chairman™s press conference, emphasize our commitment to continue the program until we 

have seen ongoing and sustained improvement in labor market conditions. 
Even though the open-
ended nature of the program creates challenges in shaping 
expectations
, it also has the very desirable property that market participants should adjust their 
expectations about the size of the program in response to changing economic conditions.  And 

this means that the program should induce stabilizing movements in financial conditions as 

expectations adjust automatically to incoming data indicating a stronger or weaker economic 

outlook. 
There™s been quite a bit of debate both inside and outside the Fed about the likely 
economic impact of asset purchases, and there is sizable uncertainty about the effects of LSAPs. 

I appreciate ongoing staff e
fforts 
to refine our estimates of these effects.
  Nonetheless, in light of 
       
     
   
  
              
              the evidence that I™ve seen, I™m persuaded that this program can be a 
helpful 
tool 
for achieving 
our objectives.  And while I™m mindful of the implications of further asset purchases for capital 
losses and remittances down t
he road, these concerns pale in comparison to what I view 
as the 
potential economic and human costs of failing to reduce the unemployment rate as aggressively 

as we can. 
I™m hopeful that a determined commitment to continue providing accommodation 
until we
 achieve more rapid and durable progress in attaining our employment goal may bolster 
household and business confidence 
and
 spending.  Any stimulus provided through this channel 
will boost its 
effe
ct relative to the staff™s estimates. 
I think it makes sense to direct our new purchases to MBS to provide additional support 
to the housing market, and I support purchases at the higher rate of $40 billion per month, which 

is a rate that in the 
Desk™s assessment could be sustained for the next year or two.  Consi
stent 
with the open-ended approach, I™d be prepared to scale the flow of these purchases up or down as 

the economic outlook evolves.  If this flow of purchases is maintained through the middle of next 

year, our holdings of longer-
term securities would incr
ease by about 
$800 billion, which I think 
is large enough to have a substantial economic effect. 
Paragraph 4 of the statement spell
s out the conditions under which we will provide 
additional accommodation through asset purchases.  Paragraph 5, in contrast, 
concerns the 

conditions under which we will maintain the level of accommodation that™s reached when our 

asset purchases end. 
If we end up adopting 5 
rather than 5
, I consider it critical to make clear 
that an extension of the expected calendar date to m
id-2015 is intended as a policy shift to 
improve the economic outlook, and that it does not convey a downgrading 
of our outlook in the 
face of disappointing new data.  Whereas our previous language tied exceptionally low levels of 
               
    
   
      
          
    
 the funds rate to economic weakness, the new language incorporated into the beginning of B(5) 
is much more positive, and I think it™s a very significant improvement. 
As between the alternative versions of 
paragraph B
(5), while I can support B(5) today, 
I strongly 
prefer 
version 5
. We contemplated a formulation along these lines when we introduced 
calendar
-date guidance in August of last year, and we have discussed this formulation 
extensively for many months now.  President Evans, 
in his speeches
, and Presidents 
Kocherlakota, 
Williams
, and Rosengren have explained in detail and very persuasively why a 
formulation like this makes sense.  I don™t want to go over the arguments again that they have set 

before the Committee. I simply think that clarifying the economic conditionalit
y of the funds 
rate path is useful for precisely the same reasons that it™s useful to tie our asset purchases to 

economic conditions.  
And I also think
Ša point that President Kocherlakota emphasizedŠ
that 

the language has the possibility of bolstering household and business expectations about their 

future incomes, and this would be a very important mechanism potentially for supporting 

additional spending. 
In summary, I support the provision of additional monetary accommodation.  I anticipate 
that continuing our additional purchases w
ill be warranted
 well into 2013.  I also support 5
 today 
and hope that if we end up going with 5, 
we will make further progress in future meetings on 

refining our forward guidance. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I prefer 
alternative B.  As I™ve been saying for 
some time now, I believe it™s important for us to take stock of our remaining tools and make sure 

that they™re used to maximum effect.  I do not view reducing the IOER or any sort of discount 
         
    
   
     
           
        window program to promote lending to be viable options.  So for me, 
that leave
s us at asset 
purchases and future guidance about the fed funds rate. 
I find the idea 
that the MEP has just as much efficacy as the LSAPs to be plausible, an
d I 
supported both the original program as well as its extension through the end of this year as an 
accommodation move.  If the MEP does the job on long-
term rates
, without increasing the size of 
our balance sheet or drawing the same criticism as LSAP
s, so much the better.  But in not 
drawing criticism, the MEP might also be less visible and thus less likely to engender a 

confidence effect.  So it™s important to not only use the tool, but to be quite vocal about our 

estimates of its potency. 
In addition to continuing the MEP, I™m in favor of adding purchases of MBS.  There have 
been many discussions in this building about how LSAPs work and the extent to which long-

term rates affect equity prices.  I™m not, frankly, quite sure about the equity effect, but I™
m 100 percent certain that interest rates have a direct effect on real estate prices, and house prices 

are important components of household wealth.  They 
affect the 
number of households 
underwater on their mortgage, 
and, most important, rising prices help
 instill the confidence to 
buy a house either to live in or as an investment. 
Reductions in the yield on mortgage-
backed securities have not necessarily translated to a 
one-
for
-one reduction in home mortgage rates, 
as the primary
Œsecondary rate spread rema
ins 
unusually wide.  So our purchases of MBS could very well translate into additional profit to 

lenders rather than cost reductions to homeowners, but ultimately, 
that addition
al profit should 
entice additional capacity and competition into the market tha
t will reduce the cost and increase 
the availability of mortgage credit.
  And while much has been made of the benefit to the 
economy as homeowners refinance into lower payments and free up cash flow for spending, that 
          
   
          
             
   
       
       
   
 reduced payment for the homeowner translates into reduced income for an investor, and it takes 
some pretty heroic assumptions about the differences in propensity to spend for that channel to 

make a big impact on consumer spending.  Still, I think the confidence 
and wealth effects
, along 
with t
he incentive for increasing capacity
, make this a step worth taking.  I confess that I might 
have been on the fence with this if the employment numbers had been better, but given their 

weakness, it™s hard to argue that we™ve been watching closely and still haven™t seen any reason 

to take action. 
For m
y policy preference, 
I start with the desire to finish out the MEP rather than throw it 
overboard and replace it with something else.  Although it™s something of a coincidence that the 

MEP runs out as we approach the fiscal cliff, it™s also something of an advantage.  It gives us a 

logical point to take stock of 
the consequences of reaching the cliff and its resolution.
  To be 
clear, I don™t view it as a potential stopping point.  On the contrary, I think it hig
hly likely that it 
will need to be a point of escalation, 
and I want to make sure that we have some additional fire 

power left
.  I know this goes against the grain for those of you who believe we should launch 
everything we have as early as possible in ord
er to strengthen the economy enough so 
it can 
withstand potential shocks, but those who subscribe to that idea are probably a lot more 

convinced than I am about the actual power of our tools.  I, frankly, don™t believe these tools are 

powerful enough by themselves to strengthen the economy enough so that it will withstand those 

shocks, but I do believe that, 
in announcing their use, there™s a confidence effect that can change 

expectations and halt or slow a downward slide. 
I a
m willing to entertain the possibility that we are approaching the point where we 
resemble the wizard behind the curtain.  [L
aughter] 
If so, I want us to continue to appear great 
and powerful in the face of economic weakness for as long as possible.  
That
 is, I believe that our 
        
                   
   
     
               
 actions still have the potential to inspire confidence over and above any other possible channel 
through which they can work.  But if confidence is the most potent channel, 
the when
 and how of 
new announcements becomes a tool in its
elf. 
The Chairman was telling us at dinner last night that he had the opportunity to go and 
visit the Washington Nationals
™ batting practice and meet the players, and one of the players 
came up and
, upon finding that he was the Chairman of the Fed, said, ﬁHey, how about that QE3, 
man?ﬂ  [Laughter] 
I think this is evidence that there™s a whole world of people out there who 
have no idea what QE3 actually means or what monetary policy is.  They don™t know the Taylor 

rule, and they haven™t spent much time thinking about the Woodford paper.  [Laughter]  They 

won™t read the whole statement or tune into the press conference, but they will likely know that 

the Fed did something and that that something should help the economy. 
In the spirit of conserving some fire p
ower for what I view as a potential two
-step action, 
I prefer to add only $30 billion per month in MBS purchases.  It establishes the 60Œ
40 split that 

was assumed in the capacity memos and leaves room to escalate the amount of MBS, add 

Treasury purchases, 
or commit to a $1 trillion program as levers to be pulled if conditions 
deteriorate, as I fear they might in coming months. 
My own judgment is that a commitment to a 
large program will prove to be a stronger action, but that we can always change from open
-ended 
to a stock commitment.  It would be much tougher to try to go in the other direction. 
In paragraph 4, I prefer to exclude the mention of other policy tools, as those other policy 
tools could be interpreted as an intent to use the IOER or a lending p
rogram, 
neither of which I 
support. 
I prefer 
paragraph 5 over 5
, especially at this meeting.
  The action of adding MBS 
purchases to the MEP is already going to be a little complicated to communicate.  Have we or 
         
     
     
      
                  
  have we not launched QE3?  So our communication focus should certainly be on that action in 
this meeting. 
Use of a date 
in the forward guidance is familiar and it™s expected.  While I™m sure 
there™s going to be an ongoing discussion, I would still continue to use the date, but over time, 

explain t
hat it represents a departure from our standard policy rules and our own historic reaction 
function.  I found the memos about delaying liftoff until there was a greater certainty about the 

likelihood of return to the zero bound to be very reasonable and explainable, and it would be 

helpful to convey that we are also anxious to get back into a more normal environment. 
I have real concerns about expressing our policy in terms of specific triggers.  We worked 
hard on the statement that put the 2 
percent target out there, and I™d hate to create an impression 

that we™re now raising it. I™m especially reluctant to specify the unemployment rate 
as the single 
employment data point guiding our actions.  First, there™s always the risk that it™s perceiv
ed as 
too high or too low, and one has only to look at the most recent employment report that clearly 

showed weakness, even though the unemployment rate dropped 
two
-tenths, 
to get a little nervous 
about tying fed funds expectations to that single number.  
Indeed, last year as we saw a full 
percentage point decline in the unemployment rate, we were only kind of pleased about it, 

because it didn™t happen in the way we expected. 
Someone commented yesterday that we should begin to focus on how the general publi
c receives our messages, and this is a really important point.  I question whether the public will use 

this guidance formulation to adjust their expectations about policy.  I think they™ll hear these 

numbers as our targets.  But if the consensus is to move to conditioning on economic outcomes, 

we should, 
at a minimum
, take some time to set the table for its introduction. In addition, we 

should agree to leave this set-up task to the Chairman, and the rest of us should refrain from 

taking our own disagreements on the finer points public.  
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
                 
   
    
   
         
   
                  
  
   
      
 CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you, and I™d like to point out 
that 
the 
player™s 
financial portfolio is probably bigger than anybody at this table.  
[Laughter]
  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My reaction when you told me about the 
player in question was he has an awfully good financial advisor.  [Laughter] L
et me begin by 
saying that some people have basically asked the question, why act now? For my own 
perspective, I don™t think there is a particularly compelling reason to act at this moment, but that 

is only because I would have thought that action at any of the p
ast several meetings would have 

been equally appropriate.
  Charlie, in response to your questions, why wasn™t I or why weren™t 
others inclined to act earlier in the year when there was a trio of pretty good employment 

numbers? 
The answer 
is that
 they didn™t seem sustainable, 
just as the little bursts in the last 
couple of years hadn™t 
seemed sustainable. 
If they had been sustainable, that would have called 
for some action.  But here I think we are all seeing that the basic diagnosis of a bogged-
down 
economy over the p
ast few years has become a pretty persuasive one. 
The second thing I would say is I don™t think it is reasonable to oppose further action on 
the grounds that action taken in the past has not produced the complete, 
fast recovery that 

everyone would like to see.  T
he real question is the counterfactual one
: In the absence o
f action, 
in the absence of the LSAPs, what would be the situation now?  And there I think, 

notwithstanding 
the efforts of some to deny that there has been any effect
ŠI am not talking 
about people in this roomŠ
while one can debate reasonably and at length 
the actual amount of 
effect of the last couple of LSAP exercises, it is really hard not to see that there has been an 

effect
, and the 
disagreement seems to be 
over how much. 
Of course, we would all be happier if there had been a more aggressive set of poli
cies to 
deal with underwater mortgages and housing a couple of years ago.  I think in retrospect, as 
         
          
      
   
              
  
           people write the history of the Great Recession following the financial crisis, the failure to 
move 
more aggressively on housing is going to be seen as the biggest of the policy mistakes, even 
bigger than maybe not going for a larger stimulus package.  
But
 it is not up to us to determine 
what everybody else does.  We have to take the world as it is presented to us, and then balance 

the costs and benefits of the actions we can take in light of the good and bad decisions that other 

parts of the government and consumers and firms are themselves taking. 
As Jeremy was suggesting yesterday, there is in any set of LSAP proposals an anticipated 
combination of what he 
termed the ﬁhydraulic
ﬂ effects and some confidence or quasi
-commitment effect. 
I think it is hard to disentangle the two, even as we look retrospectively at 
the first couple of LSAPs.  T
here is some case to be made, as some of the skeptics have 
suggested
, that the conditions 
that obtained at the times of the LSAPs made what I have termed a 
confidence or quasi-
commitment effect particularly salient at those moments.  And th
at may not 
be quite as powerful right now. 
But, again, in the face of all of this uncertainty, which the Chairman alluded to yesterday, 
we do have to make a choice.  And it does seem to me that the costs suggested to date, while 

nontrivial, don™t seem overwhelming.  That is, they are a little bit more speculative than they are 

concrete. 
People are saying
, ﬁwe worry that there may be some effect on market functioning
,ﬂ without specifying exactly what that effect would be, or 
ﬁwe worry that there may at some point 
be some effect on inflation or on our exit capacities,ﬂ 
without telling a somewhat more filled
-out 
story as to what they think those might be.  While I would be shocked if there are not some 

unintended consequences, even of the LSAPs we™ve done to date, that is part of policymaking.  

There are always going to be some unanticipated 
consequences, and the best you can do is try to 
dig in as deeply as possible to spin out as many plausible outcomes as possible, and then make 
         
   
                
      
            
   
  
           that balance. 
Obviously, from what I™ve said here, that balance is in favor of taking further 
action
, as it has been before
.  And so I support 
alternative B.  But I just want to make clear to 
those who have questionsŠSandy and Dennis and othersŠthat I share a lot of the uncertainty, 
and I don™t have enormous conviction that anything we do now is going to be, as Eric put it, a 

game
-changer. 
It is going to be something 
that
 helps, not something 
that
 resolves all problems. 
On the 5 versus 5
 issue, Narayana laid out the two key considerations extremely well.  
First, that the use of the more-
specified forward guidance could maximize the effect of LSAPs. 
That is a very important consideration.  Second, and this was an extremely important point, he 

pointed out that 2½ 
could easily be consistent with a price
-stability
-only mandate just because of 
having toleranc
e around any goal that one is ever trying to achieve.
  To me, that might have 
suggested that perhaps, 
because we do have a dual mandate, there might be a different set of 

targets that would be adopted.  But it seems to me, 
at the very least
, Narayana™s rea
soning 
suggests why 
2½ shouldn™t be problematic. 
I don™t find the potential h
yste
resis argument or the potential rise in labor 
force 
participation to be dispositive here.  I don™t think Janet actually disagreed with me yesterday 

when I said that I had been
 surprised that we haven™t seen h
yster
esis.  And given that we haven™t, 
it™s probably less likely than we all thought.  But even if you thought it was, how would it 

manifest itself? Presumably, it would manifest itself in tightness in the labor market and rising 

wages, which are going to pass through into our inflation projections.  At that point, you™d say, 

ﬁOkay.  We are now seeing that the trigger or threshold has been breached.ﬂ 
There is something to what Charlie Plosser said about the market™s anticip
ation of what 
happens as we approach the thresholds.  When Charlie Evans was talking about this publicly, a 

very acute market observer commented offhandedly to me that he was somewhat sympathetic to 
              
                  
            this approach, but his concern was that there may be some expectation of pent-up and rapid 
increases, which markets would think would be coming depending on 
the circumstances as we 

approached
ŠI think, 
at that time
, Charlie™s numbers w
ere
 7 and 3.  I don™t think that is 
something to disregard.  It is probably something to take into account. 
These are all good arguments piled onto the ﬁwhy we all hate the dateﬂ argument for 
trying to develop something like what is in 5
. Having said that, I would remind all of you of the 
fact that I was initially
Šlate last year an
d early this past year
Šhesitant to move in that direction 
for a couple of reasons.  One, the communications issues, which severalŠ
most recently Betsy
Š have alluded to, are significant here.  But I thought they were significant last spring, even in the 

absence of an LSAP initiative
, which is going to take a little nimbleness to explain. 
The 
confusion with the policy statementŠ
what do these numbers actually mean
Šis a real 
consideration.  T
hough I should say
, at the time, I had some hopes that a revised S
EP could fill a 
good bit of the role of these thresholds or targets.  Those hopes have subsequently been dashed.  

[Laughter] I now see the costŒbenefit calculus somewhat differently, which is to say that the 

available alternative may not be as much of a s
ubstitute as I had hoped.  I would say that, 
notwithstanding my strong 
sense that 
this 
is 
the right direction for us to goŠfor the reasons 
Narayana stated
Šand that optimally we would have been prepared to go that way right now, 
I don™t really think the groundwork has been laid.  C
ertainly not externally
ŠI do think some 
underestimate the communications challenge that will exist. 
Second, I™m not totally positive that we have laid the groundwork internally
.  Maybe we 
did eight months ago, but all of those memos and things are in the archives instead of right in the 

front of our computer screens.  It would be a tougher case for me if everybody had converged 

around 6½ and 2½ 
because in those circumstances I might be inclined to say, ﬁAll right. 
         
       
    
         
           
          Communications ch
allenge
ŠMichelle is going to have a tough week, but let™s take the 6½, 2½, 
which is probably, in the end, right, but that™s not where we are.  I would say that not taking an 

employment number means that you are not actually communicating very effectively a
t all 
because otherwise it is just qualitative verbiage. 
You don™t really achieve what you are trying to 
achieve. 
In addition, 
saying a little bit over 2 is going to create even more communication 
problems because everybody is going to 
ask
,  ﬁWell, how much over?ﬂ I
t doesn™t really solve 
much, if anything at all. 
There is not agreement on these propositions right now.  
It is clear that we don™t have a 
consensus even among those who are going to vote in favor of a
lternative 
B on the numbers 
themselves
, so we are probably not prepared to move in that direction.  But I don™t think that 
should dissuade us from doing a lot of memo writing and communicating over the course of the 

next couple of meetings to see if we can move in that direction together.  Thank you, Mr. 

Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Raskin. 

MS. RASKIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Incoming data have been consistent with my 
expectations, reinforcing my view that additional policy stimulus is needed.  The inflation 

outlook is subdued, and the employment outlook is unsatisfactory, so a balanced approach 

requires the providing of significant additional stimulus. 
My comments will, again, focus on the communication channel.  First, I think that some 
marginal monetary stimulus could be 
delivered
, without incurring the costs associated with an 
LSAP
, through the use of forward guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook.  
While I 
appreciate the fact that an asset purchase program and forward guidance are not perfect 

substitutes, I 
like 5
 because it is close to a costless way of providing some accommodation. 
          
      
                    
   But even if we were not in agreement that more accommodation is necessary, I see little 
downside in shedding our adherence to a calendar date.  The calendar date, as we have heard, is 
working against us.  It is communicating that we are continuously downgrading our assessment 

of the future.  Why not, instead, show households, businesses, and markets what we are looking 

for in terms of particular economic outcomes?  Why not offer 
a sneak preview of what we need 
to see before we begin contracting?
  With such a preview and credible delivery, households and 
businesses and markets figure out how we are going to react.  Providing that window, and 

keeping the panes of that window clean, 
reduces volatility and pessimism about our commitment 
to support a recovery.  I
n mitigating this volatility and pessimism, as argued by President 
Kocherlakota and others, we maximize the effectiveness of the oth
er actions being contemplated. 
But we have be
en down this road before, so we ask, why now?  Why move to forward 
guidance that is dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later? We should 

consider forward guidance 
that is 
dependent on the economic outlook sooner rather than later 
because 
there could be costs to putting this off.  The primary cost is the permanent downward 

shift in expectations that becomes more probable the longer we wait.  The longer we put off 

these contentious decisions, the greater the probability that we let stand the 
perception that there 
is a new
, lower, slower trajectory of economic growth that we are comfortable with; the greater 
the probability we let stand the perception that the FOMC doesn™t adhere to the statutory 

directive of a dual mandate; the greater the pr
obability we let stand the perception that we act 
forcefully when we are off the price
-stability mandate but not when we are off the 
maximum
-employment 
mandate; and the greater the probability we let stand the perception that 2 percent is 

a ceiling. 
      
           
                               Forwar
d guidance that is dependent on an economic outlook counters these otherwise 
pervasive and erroneous interpretations and perceptions.  The longer we postpone correcting 
such interpretations and perceptions, the more pervasive, credible, and intractable the
y become. 
In short, we want to oxygenate the forward guidance before households and businesses 

permanently harden their expectations about both the future path of the economy and our future 

reaction to it.  All of this argues for moving away from a calend
ar date sooner rather than later. 
We still may not know what the right numbers are for insertion into a formulation like 5
, but we have all seen that in optimal control simulations under commitment in the FRB
/US model, the unemployment rate is around 6 pe
rcent at the time of liftoff, and inflation never rises 
above 2½ percent.  We have seen justification for these particular thresholds.  Moreover, 

6½ percent is still above the Committee™s view of the long
-run rate of unemployment.  The 
forward guidance in 5
 has come a long way since we discussed it in August of 2011.  It now 
contains a firm, definitive, non-vague inflation proviso.  A problem 
we 
debated in the August 
2011 meeting was the risk that moving the forward guidance from a calendar date to one bas
ed on economic conditions would dislodge inflationary expectations.  In the current version of 5
, that possibility seems extremely unlikely. Instead, if inflation at a one
-to two
-year horizon were 
above the small 
½ percentage point threshold of 2 percent, the Committee would be required to 
reengage on the federal funds rate debate, even if unemployment still exceeds 6
½ percent. 
It is, 
to use President Kocherlakota™s phrase, a threshold for conversation.  These are hardly putting in 

place conditions by which inflation can brew silently, unchecked, and unaddressed. 
At the end of this round, there are still some who say that the egg hasn™t been cooked 
long enough.  I might have to disagree, noting that I am not sure what we are waiting for.  


 could be in a form close enough to convince the public that the FOMC is following 
                
       
     
      
      
  
    
  
       
 a different strategy; one that tries to achieve its employment mandate more forcefully than the 
public has perceived thus far; one that more credibly delivers accommodation and, at the right 

time, contraction, than the markets have understood thus far; one that has none, if any, of the 

costs associated with an LSAP; and one that may be necessary now to make the MBS purchases 

in 
alternative 
B more effective. 
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Stein. 

MR. STEIN.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support a
lternative B. I will just comment on 
a few of the specifics.  First of all, in terms of the flow rate of purchases of MBS, I would go 

with 
$40 billion per month, though I can™t say I have a particularly strong view on this. 
With respect to the trigger
- or threshold-
base
d policy described in paragraph 5
, I am 
quite sympathetic to the strategy. 
It has the potential to be of significant help.  I appreciate and 
find quite compelling the arguments that President Kocherlakota and a number of others have 

made. 
There is really quite an appealing intellectual case to be made. 
Now, having said this, I find myself in very close agreement with Governor Tarullo in 
terms 
of whether now is the right time to move forward.  As he pointed out, there 
are
 two issues.  
There is the internal issue.  We have to get this right internally.  We have to really agree on the 

design and on the parameters.  T
he numbers really matter here. 
If we don™t coalesce around a 
reasonably strong version, one in which we make it clear that we have, as President 

Kocherlakota suggested, an ambitious unemployment threshold and some tolerance for a 

symmetric loss function on inflation, the intellectual c
ase for it in some sense starts to disappear.  
That™s one issueŠwe have to get that right. 
Second, the external issue is also challenging, and the communication here is crucial. 
To 
give one example, something that is not clear in
 my own mind is, how would we respond to the 
                       
     
            
     following question?  Have we really deviated from our previous forward guidance in the sense 
that now we are making more of what is really a commitment
, in the spirit of optimal control
, to 

do something that we would stick with, even if 
it™s, in a sense, time inconsistent?  Or
, is it just a 
statement, well, that we™ve introspected, we have thought about our reaction function, and we 

have discovered in our souls that we have a different reaction function than we previously knew 

ourselves to have? 
These are challenging things to explain, and it™s absolutely important to get it right. 
The 
concern, then, would be that if we throw something this consequential and tricky into what is 

already a hard
-to-parse statement in other areas,
 it could end up being somewhat 
counterproductive.  Again, I very much have sympathy for the underlying idea and the 

principles, and I would hope that we could further develop and do more work on it.  My own 

preference would be not to push it out the door in the next hour or two. 
With respect to paragraph 4, this is the part I had in mind when I said it was already a 
little bit hard to parse. 
You get a flavor of this in some of the comments that have already gone 
around.  In other words, it seems like it is really open to different interpretations.  Some of you 

have, as I hear it, read paragraph 4 as a quite strong and open-ended commitment to continue 

doing asset purchases as long as it takes until the labor market improves.  
At the other extreme, 
the way I heard Pres
ident Bullard reading the paragraph was, ﬁWell, it doesn™t really say much 
more than that we will do this for several months and then reassess where we are.ﬂ  Y
ou can 
certainly point to various forms of wiggle room in the phrasing.  I suppose the truth is sort of in 

between and a little b
it in the eye of the beholder. 
For my part, I would align myself quite closely with President Pianalto.  I appreciate the 
commitment arguments. I like the idea of having wiggle room, and that is 
because of
 my own 
        
         
        
    
                    understanding of the costs and the benefits, and that in spite of the fact that I do believe the 
benefits of past programs have been significant, I sense that we are verging into diminishing 

returns territory. 
Moreover, flexibility may be particularly warranted with MBS because there is 
a particular kind of market feedback that we might get reasonably quickly, which is to sayŠand 

Governor Duke mentioned thisŠthere is this issue about the pass-through from MBS spreads to 

primary mortgage rates. 
We will see
, presumably in a few months, whether that pass-through i
s weak or strong
, and one might want to update one™s policy based on that. 
In any event, as we talked about yesterday, given the language in paragraph 4, this makes 
the press conference important.  F
or what it™s worth, Mr. Chairman, I thought that the trial 
balloon answers that you were floating yesterday struck a good balance here, so I was certainly 

comfortable in that dimension. 
Given these two 
earlier
 points, one being that I think it is worth giving serious further 
thought to 5
, and the second being that there is some virtue to not getting overly locked in on 
asset purchases, I also
Švery similar to President Lockhart and to President Pianalto
Šwas 
thinking about whether 
there 
is 
an alternative fra
ming that would work here?  And my thought 
was maybe we can lean just as far forward, or even a little bit further, on the general principle of 

giving accommodation if the economy doesn™t strengthen but be more open as to whether that 

accommodation would t
ake the form of asset purchases or a change in our guidance. 
This could be done, in principle, either by rewording paragraph 4 of the statement or 
simply by
 the way the press conference is handled.  In the former case, if it™s done via the 
statement, you c
ould rewrite the two key sentencesŠ
it™s just a suggestion
Šas follows: 
ﬁIf the 
outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue to add 

further accommodation as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a 
context of price 
               
      
                       
   stability. In determining the nature of such accommodation, the Committee will, as always, take 
appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of the tools at its disposal.ﬂ I
t is less precise
, and I take that to be in the spirit 
of what you 
all 
were thinking as well.
  The intent is not to back 
away from being supportive but to be a little bit more flexible in the tools that are used to 

provide that support.  
Thank you. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will vote in favor of 
alternative 
B.  My 
support for 
alternative
 B leans heavily on the language in paragraph 4 requiring us to consider 
the likely efficacy and cost of further actions when and if they are proposed and considered, and 

I join strongly Governor Stein and Presidents Pianalto and Lockhart in an editing of paragraph 4 

that moves very much in the direction that Governor Stein just read. 
I am a supporter of paragraph 5.  I think that the arguments that have already been 
raised 
and vetted about 5
 are dispositive at this time.  I will say that the two things that need to be 
doneŠthe good news is there are only two things.  The bad news is those two things are, first, 

the Committee has got to reach agreement on the desirab
ility of moving to a state
-contingent 
forward guidance. I™m very open to the intellectual appeal of that, but going around the table, 

it™s quite obvious that we don™t fully have that, particularly around the levels in the language and 

the conditionality. 
The second is clearly the public communication aspect.  There™s nothing about it in the 
Jackson Hole speech.  There really hasn™t been any supportive discussion of it by the Chairman 

lately that I™ve seen. 
We could get ourselves to a place where this could be announced.  I
t would 
be the work of some months both internally and externally, in particular explaining how it does 
          
         
     
   
   
  
                   
 fit in with the principles that we adopted in January
.  I
t™s 
not something that 
can happen in the 
next 45 minutes. 
I will also vote in
 favor of extending the guidance to mid-2015 as proposed.  My own 
view of this is that the market moves the estimate of the liftoff date every day, and our proposed 
guidance doesn™t contain any surprise element. 
The idea that the date can contain a negati
ve, 
contractionary aspect is certainly
 plausible in a different setting, but not on the facts we face 
today. 
Let me say a couple of comments
 about LSAPs.  As I look back on the use of LSAPs so 
far, I too believe that the evidence supports the view that the 
effects of any LSAP are highly 
dependent not only on some mechanics, but also on the setting in which it is launched.  The main 

driver of real effects is probably that of enhancing confidence, confidence that bad outcomes will 

be avoided, and that there is reason to hope for good outcomes. 
In this view, it is really our credibility, the design of the program, 
and the setting that 
make it work.  For me, an argument in favor of 
alternative 
B is that it is limited to MBS at a time 
when the housing market is consistently surprising on the upside.  This alternative can be well 

explained and understood by the public as welcome support for housing as well as for the 

broader economy.  
So presented, it stands a decent chance 
to actually be noticed and appreciated 
by people who are neither Fed watchers nor professional market participants nor economics 
bloggers.  I encourage an emphasis on support for housing in our public communications around 

this action. 
My view is that alternative 
B can have positive effects on the 
economy but 
that these 
effects are likely to be quite modest, and I do come to that view without a great deal of certainty.  

It does seem clear to me that LSAPs have affected asset prices, and to deny that does call for
Šas          
                   
                 
   was done in a certain well
-ment
ioned Jackson Hole paperŠ
that most hackneyed of all economist 
jokes that while it may be observed in reality, it will simply never work in theory.  [Laughter] 
But of course, affecting MBS and Treasury prices is just the beginning.  We need translation to 

rates that actually matter for private economic activity and then translation to the real economy. 
Looking at the channels through which we believe our policies operate and 
the caveats, 
confidence intervals, headwinds, 
and multiple uncertainties that surround the estimates so well 

addressed in yesterday™s meeting, my strong sense is that the 
real effects will be quite modest, 
and it is all too easy these days to find credible private forecasts that agree. 
The last two 
forecasts that I™ve seen both from well known, credible sources who happened to be broadly 

supportive of accommodation, point to estimates of unemployment effects of around 20 or 

30 basis points for a program the size of QE2Šuse that as a rough proxy for this.  That would be 

300,000 to 450,000 jobs under those forecasts.  That might be equivalent to bringing the 

recovery forward by a couple of months. 
As far as the costs, I certainly agree that they appear manageable in the near term. 
There™s enough risk and uncertainty about the medium and long term that if the view of the 

likely benefits is right, one 
would have to believe further that the likely costs are close to nil to 
want to proceed with a large LSAP.  I also agree with President Bullard™s point earl
ier in the 
meeting that the problem has not been the lack of aggressive monetary policy.  As a separate 

matter, taking the Chairman™s points from yesterday, I do not feel that additional aggressive 

monetary policy is likely to provide much of a solution. 
I know that every member of the Committee struggles to balance these highly uncertain 
costs and benefits.  I™m supporting 
alternative 
B with a certain lack of enthusiasm, and I am 
somewhat uncomfortable with the road that we are on.  As others have mentioned, this is not 
      
            
          
       
        
  
   
   
          2008, 2009, or 
2010.  We™re now using LSAPs as a straightforward jobs program.  There is no 
credible threat of deflation, recession
, or financial crisis
, any of which could present a 
compelling case for action and the use of all of our tools, including LSAPs if appropriate.  Again, 

these are concerns about the medium and the long term, not the next six months.  My concern is 

that for very modest benefits, we are piling up risks for the future and that it could become habit-

forming. 
Thank you
, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
Vice Chairman. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.  My preference would be to act forcefully at 
this meeting.  I™d favor a
lternative B, 
paragraph 4 as written, p
aragraph 5
, and $40 billion per 
month of agency 
MBS.  Let me just talk about each of these a little bit. 
With respect to the thresholds, what I hear around the table is that there™s really a strong 
sentiment that thresholds can trump date guidance, and the thresholds that we even have today in 

5 in my 
mind
, trump date guidance. But I do accept the view that maybe we can even do better, 
and so in my mind the tradeoff is really between is it better to do something today to have a 

bigger package or is it better to keep working on 5
 to try to improve the communication and 
have it come later
? I would prefer to do it all today as a pack
age
 because if you do it as a package, it™s going 
to have more force in terms of its impact, but I accept the fact that the Committee is not really 

quite there yet.  I would 
hope that at least that the Committee would commit that we™re going to 

bring 5
 home in the next one or two meetings.  It would be very disappointing if we didn™t do 
that because I think most people around the table view the date as really quite problemati
c. The thresholds, 
as President
s Williams and Kocherlakota pointed out, 
are 
more powerful 
than a date.  The date creates a lot of uncertainty. When are we going to move it?  Why are we 
                     
                             
           
going to move it? When we move it, why did we move it?  Thresholds provide more 
information.  The date implicitly rests on some unobserved variables, and so people essentially 

have to look at the date and then infer what the things 
are 
that lie behind the date.  Why not just 
tell them what those variables are? 
Some of the problem 
with
 the thresholds 
is the limits of the statement.  The statement can 
only carry so much water, and we can™t specify all the parameters that would go into our 

decisionmaking as the economy actually evolves.  W
e have to recognize we™re not going to 
get 
to a perfect 5
 because the statement just can™t carry that water. 
We need to do the best we can 
and see what we can come up with.
  Then lastly, the dynamic nature of the thresholds far trumps 
the date guidance.  The market will adjust automatically, 
and as people have said, that™s an 
automatic stabilizer.
  So I™m reluctant to abandon 5
 at this meeting because it would make the 
action more forceful, but I do accept the pretty strong sense that a lot of people who don™t want 

to do it this meeting would
 actually be pretty inclined to do it subsequently once the work on the 
communication was complete and once they were convinced that they got the best 5
 version that 
they could possibly get.  I think we should keep going on that. 
With respect to the rest of the statement, I would not want to alter 
paragraph 4 because 
it™s critical to 
ensure the paragraph is forward leaning and implies the 
commencement of a new 
LSAP program should the economic situation not improve in a meaningful way. 
As I see it, we need 
to decide now what we will do if the economy continues to 
disappoint.  We™ll do more and how we™ll do more, and communicate this decision now because 

that will reduce uncertainty and support confidence, and that will support the recovery.  In my 

view, if we postpone those decisions about what we™ll do in the future if the economy 

disappoints, we just create more uncertainty about what our future policy actions are going to be, 
                  
   
         
       
            
   
   
   
  and that really undercuts the efficacy of the policy choices.  Deciding today so that people know 
that there™s more coming will actually create greater confidence about the Fed™s willingness to 

support the economy.  That reduces the downside risk and actually means, at the end of the day, 

the prospect i
s that 
we™ll
 have to do less rather than more because we™ll be acting today and 
supporting confidence today by communicating what our future actions will be. 
All that said, I am very sympathetic with a number of people™s remarks that don™t put a 
very high weight on the power of additional LSAPs.  I think L
SAPs have modest effects o
n the 
level of long-term rates, and the drop in long-term rates does feed through partially to the equity 

market and the foreign exchange market but not one-
for
-one as in the staff projections because 
that would contradict the whole portfolio balance framework, which is the basis for LSAPs. 
In assessing the 
effe
ct of past LSAPs, I™m not particularly a big fan of event studies.  I 
think the event studies are too focused on the reaction on 
particular days
.  T
he expe
ctation of 
LSAPs evolves more slowly, and it™s very hard to disentangle all the factors that affect financial 

asset prices.
  When we say that we™re going to do an LSAP, that not only affects people™s views 
of what™s going to happen in terms of financial 
markets,
 but also signals a view about our view 
of the economy, and both 
of 
those things affect financial asset prices.  So trying to disentangle 
what the effect 
is 
of the LSAP from what the effect is of our judgment that we need an LSAP is 
very difficult to determine. 
I also agree with Governor Stein and others that probably one of the more powerful 
aspects of LSAPs is the confidence channel and the signal that we™re willing to do as much as it 

takes.  During the heat of the financial crisis in 2008 and 2009 when we were rolling out all of 

these special liquidity facilities, I was very impressed by how much our policy actions supported 

confidence in market function just because we were showing up, just because the fire trucks were 
       
        
                 
  
    
            
    rolling.
  People, as I think Governor Duke noted, don™t necessarily understand exactly why we™re 
doing what we™re doing, but they feel more confident when they know that we™re acting. 
Some around the table have argued that our tools are not very effective and the core 
problems lie el
sewhere
Šin fiscal, the household balance sheet, housing problemsŠand so we 
shouldn™t act because by acting we™re somehow removing responsibility from others where the 

responsibility more rightly sits, and I think there is some truth to 
that argument. 
In an ideal 
world, other things that are outside our purview would happen that would help the economy.  But 

I don™t think that argument carries the day for arguing against action for two reasons. 
First, nothing in our mandate says that if our tools aren™t powerful, don™t use them; defer 
to others.  There™s nothing in our mandate that says that.  It just says this is your mandate.  Use 

your tools to try to achieve your mandate the best you can.  And second, if we don™t act, it™s not 

as if
 that somehow is going to cause others to act. I really don™t accept the premise that 
somehow our inaction would spur action by others.  If you really believe that, then maybe you 

could actually advance this argument.  But I don™t think many people around the table believe 

that our inaction will somehow spur action by others that will improve the economic outlook. 
On the agency MBS, I strongly favor the $40 billion per month over the $30 billion.  
Being more forceful makes sense. 
At the end of the day the staff has concluded that we have the 
room to do $40 billion rather than $30 billion without i
mpairing market function
, so I don™t 
really see the reason for holding back.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thank you, and thank you all very much, as always, 
for your good advice. 
Let me make a couple
 of comments.  I think that action is needed.  I don™t think we™re 
being precipitous.  We extended the guidance in January.  In June, we extended the MEP.  Both 
       
                     
     
              
    of those things were viewed essentially as temporizing moves and were discussed in that way 
around 
this table.
  The evidence is that while we are not necessarily facing recession or crisis, it™s 
also true that we seem to have stalled
, and that very serious problems with unemployment are not 
improving.  Given our mandate, I think that requires at least a consideration of action. 
The action that
 is proposed here, and it should be very clear, is a cautious action.  
Governor Duke was very helpful in helping me think about this.  What this a
lternative B actually 
does is make a down payment of X per month of MBS for the rest of the year, and then three or 

four job market reports from now we will consider at that point what the job market outlook 

looks like, and then respond appropriately.  
So it is
, in that respect, emphasizing the 
conditionality of the progra
m and the fact that we will be looking
Šin a way that wasn™t 
conveyed adequately by our fixed-
size LSAP programs
Šat what™s happening in the data and 
what™s happening in the economy.  But I do think there is a basis for expressing our support for 

the economy at this point, to help support confidence and to help give the economy a bit more 

strength in case we do face shocks from Europe or from the fiscal cliff. 
So, again, obviously I propose a
lternative B. I™ll come back to the body of it in a 
moment.
  On 5 v
ersus 5
, there was a pretty clear consensus around the table that there™s a lot of 
hunger for moving away from the date toward some kind of state-contingent guidance.  I think 

one of the lessons of the paper whose author™s name will not be mentioned was t
hat clarity about 
future rate policy is a very powerful tool and one that we should make use of.  I would advocate 

that we continue to work on this because the other part of the consensus today was that we™re not 

quite ready for prime time on this issue. 
So I would propose for now that we retain paragraph 5, 
but with a very strong injunction to the staff and to colleagues that we work to figure out how we 

can put language like 5
 in soon. 
        
              
       
              
              In paragraph 3, I™d like to make the following proposal.  I™d like to propose that we do 
$40 billion a month, but I™d like to add the words ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ 
where it says 
$85 billion a month three lines from the bottom.  T
he 
$85 billion, which is the MEP plus the 
$40 billion
Šof course the MEP runs out at the end of the year, and that™s about the time we™ll be 
looking at how we™re going to proceed from here. The advantage of doing $40 
billion
 is, 
first of 
all, that 
$30 billion 
feels a little underwhelming to me in terms of what we announce today, but 
also it s
eems to me that one of the options we might have in January, 
if we are looking at it
, would be just to continue the $40 
billion
.  To me, $40 
billion 
seems like a more plausible number 
there.
  And we have talked about it with the D
esk
, and the
ir view is that it™s consistent with both 
our operational capacity and with market functioning even if extended for a long period, longer 
than I expect 
that
 we would actually do it. 
In paragraph 4, I would proposeŠand there were views on different sid
es here
Šwe use 
the 
second language, ﬁundertake additional asset purchases and employ its other policy tools.ﬂ 

Governor Duke spoke against this because she mentioned IOER and discount window lending.  

Of course, those are Board tools, but the other tools 
that the FOMC has 
are the statement 
language and the guidance, and certainly that could be part of additional steps that we take in 

January or whenever it is that we begin to review the situation.  If no one has too strong an 

objection, I™d like to use that second phrase 
with
 the understanding, which I will make clear if 
asked, that what we mean by that is communicationŠwhich is the other topic I talked about in 

Jackson Hole.  I don™t want to make any other changes.  We do have the phrase ﬁas appropriate.ﬂ 

That already convey
s the notion of conditionality, the fact that we may or may not take action.  It 
depends on what the economic outlook is, and I think that™s very important. 
           
                
          
         I forgot to say, by the way, on 5Ša point that Governor Raskin madeŠ
that I think the 
reason that there has been in the SEP, as well as in th
e guidance, a fairly sharp movement into 
the future of the expected takeoff date is not really because there™s been a massive deterioration 
in the outlook, but 
that 
the Committee has come to the view that a somewhat 
more extended 
period of low ratesŠfor reasons articulated by the artist formerly known as Michael Woodford 

[l
aughter]
Šcan be helpful in a zero lower bound situation, and I will try to make that point also 
in the press conference. 
To summarize
Šand I look 
around the table, if there are any voters who are extremely 
bothered, please let me knowŠI would propose to choose $40 billion and $85 billion from the 

third line from the bottom, propose to insert the phrase ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ after ﬁeach 

month,ﬂ and then in paragraph 4, I propose to take the second option, ﬁunder
take additional asset 
purchases, 
and employ its other policy tools as appropriate.ﬂ 
Are there any comments? 
President Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  May I just ask a question? When we say ﬁin a 
context of price stability,
ﬂ we also mean well
-anchored inflation expectations
, is that correct? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We do.  That™s the phrase.  I recognize it™s not completely 
grammatical as President Lacker pointed out, but the implication is that, of course, at all times 

we™ll maintain that conditionality as we undertake our policy. 
MR. FISHER.  And you will work that into your press conference if it™s appropriate. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes, yes.  Absolutely. 

MR. FISHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  P
resident Lockhart. 
                      
   
                          
         MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
In paragraph 4, just a thought to throw 
on the table, and that is take the last sentence of 5
, inject it after the word
s ﬁprice stability,ﬂ so 
that the effect of the last two sentences would be t
o frame this whole question of continuing 
accommodation
Šin effect, framing the way we™re going to deliberate over this over the next few 
weeks. 
It seems to me comprehensive.  It refers to improvement in labor market conditions 
generally, and also of cours
e, efficacy and cost and all of that.  I can see combining those two 
sentences.  Each begins, for what it™s worth, with ﬁIn determining, –
ﬂ and that might make that 
paragraph a good set-up. I
™ll
 also point out that in all likelihood, the 
minutes 
are going
 to portray 
that we have given some consideration to threshold thinking, and so this would serve to frame 

that for the market reaction over the next few weeks.
  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Because 
it refers to the time horizon, wouldn™t th
at kind of 
language be more appropriate as we look toward the language of 
5?  In other words, I thought for 
a moment you were suggesting taking that and putting it at the end of 5. 
MR. LOCKHART. I™m actually thinking it might fit in 
4.  I put this on the 
table a little 
bit off the top of my head.  T
he Committee will continue its purchases, undertake additional asset 
purchases
, and employ its other tools until such improvement is achieved in the context of price 
stability.  In determining how long we™re going to do that, we™d take into account the pace of 

labor market conditions and so forth.  In determining the size, pace, and composition, as always, 

we™d 
take into account efficacy and cost.  I just saw that as a boxing of all of the things we would 
take in
to consideration if we go to essentially an open-ended kind of approach. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
In my press conference I™m going to be very clear that 
obviously this is not a numeric objective, and we™ll be looking at a range of employment and 

output indicato
rs, which all bear on the outlook for sustained improvement in labor market 
       
         
  
           
     
     
        conditions and declining unemployment, and I™d rather convey that breadth verbally.  I™m afraid 
we™re getting a little complicated. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Fair enough. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Ye
s, I had the same reaction that you had. I didn™t see 
how it would fit in 4 because you hadn™t really explained the forward guidance yet.  One could 

take the last sentence 
of 
4 and the last sentence
 of 5
 and make a new 
paragraph 6 and sum up.  
Then you™d have the statement about asset purchases, the statement about forward guidance, and 

a summary paragraph that said
, ﬁin determining both these things.ﬂ  That would be more logical. 
MR. LACKER.  A paragraph full of escape clauses, in other words. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Essentially. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Yes.  I was going to ask a question about something else. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Go ahead. 

MR. LACKER. 
In the forward
-guidance lan
guage, we deleted the economic conditions 
clause there.  We™ve had a lot of discussion of Professor Woodford™s paper.  We™ve talked  a lot 

about that in the context of 5
 and that language, but I™m thinking that what you had in mind by 
deleting the economi
c conditions clause was in part motivated by his critique as well, the idea 
that by saying it™s conditions that are pushing the time horizon out, we were focusing on how bad 

things 
are
.  The intention, as I read you, is for us to be communicating more about our reaction 
function. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s right. 
      
    
      
          
         
        
    
     MR. LACKER.  I want to re-
ask a question I asked earlier this year.  When
 we adopted 
this 
language
, we never really got clear on whether it™s a commitment or not.  W
e wrestled with 
different versio
ns of what that meant.  Is this signaling that we™re going to pursue an action that 
later on we would not want to pursue then? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I think it™s still conditional because it obviously depends on 
the timing of the recovery and so on. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  So it™s contingent. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I mentioned the SEP changes and so on
.  I think we 
around this table have moved to the view that communicating low rates for longer 
in a way that 
may require some credibility is an approach to dealing with the zero lower bound, not in an 

extreme way, but I think there is some of that now in the statement. 
MR. LACKER. 
We have a statement
, and we can walk away from this and each interpret 
it in our own way, 
or we can have a Committee sense of what 
we™re doing. Is policy in the 
future to be conditioned on this?  In other words, as Woodford suggests, is policy going to be 

history-dependent? 
Is t
he fact that we said 
this going to alter future policy
? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In my Jackson Hole remarks, 
I talked about the guidance.  I 
said it was conditional, dependent on the state of the economy.  B
ut in explaining the time, I said 
we look at rules and optimal control and those sorts of things, but we also take into account some 
other factors such as downs
ide risks, the effects of the 
zero lower bound, and implicitly I said the 
possibility that the equilibrium real rate of interest is lower than normal
Šthat is,
 headwinds.  So 
I am conveying, I think, some sense that in order to achieve more stimulus today, 
there™s a bit of 

a commitment element there
ŠI don™t think we™ve gone too far out on a limb on this. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 
              
   
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    
    
    
                      
                                                              CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Can we go ahead? 
MS. DANKER.  This vote is on alternative B, as amended by the Chairman, and the 
associated 
directive. 
Chairman Bernanke 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
Governor Duke 
Yes 
President Lacker 
No President Lockhart 
Yes 
President Pianalto 
Yes 
Governor Powell 
Yes 
Governor Raskin 
Yes 
Governor Stein 
Yes 
Governor Tarullo 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
Governor Yellen 
Yes 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
We have a few other items
.  We™re going to 
hear a little bit about the implementation
, we™re going to do very quickly the forecast, but if 
everybody is okay, why don™t we just go ahead and tak
e a 15 minute coffee break? 
[Coffee 
break] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Why don™t we 
recommence
? Let me turn the floor 
over to L
orie 
Logan, who will talk a bit about the operational aspect. 
MS. LOGAN.
8  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  
I will offer a brief descrip
tion of how 
the Desk plans to implement the Committee™s decision regarding the 
SOMA 
portfolio.  
Consistent with recent practices, the Desk intends to release a statement 
with operational details on this initiative at the same time as the release of the FOM
C statement.  A draft of the Desk statement is provided in the handout for your 

reference, with the exception that we will add the clause ﬁthrough the end of the yearﬂ 

into the second sentence of the second paragraph. 
Based on the directive, the Desk inten
ds to expand the SOMA™s holdings of 
agency MBS by 
$40 billion per month and maintain the existing policy for 

reinvesting agency principal payments.  Our current projections indicate that through 

the end of the year, paydowns on the agency debt and MBS port
folios will result in 
average monthly reinvestment purchases of roughly $30 billion.  Thus, combined 
8 The materials used by Ms. 
Logan are appended to this transcript (appendix 8). 
                                   
  
       
    
        purchases will initially total around 
$70 billion per month and constitute about three-
fourths of monthly TBA gross issuance. 
Should the purchases extend for 10 months, as was considered in Tealbook B, we 
anticipate that the SOMA™s ownership share of the outstanding fixed-
rate agency 
MBS market would grow from about 18 percent to 27 percent, and that™s over a 

10-month horizon. 
In line with the current practice for reinvestment operations, the Desk plans to 
conduct the additional purchases 
in the newly issued securities in the to
-be-announced market, or TBA market.  These securities represent the most liquid sector 

of the MBS market, allowing purchases to be made in large size and are most closely 

tied with the primary mortgage rate. 
The Desk may purchase other agency MBS if 
market conditions warrant. 
The Desk intends to conduct these additional purchases internally as we™ve been 
doing for some time rather than relying on an investment manager to conduct the 

trades on our behalf.  We expect to be active almost every day
, and purchase 
operations will continue to be conducted in a competitive auction format with the 

primary dealers.
  Further, the Desk will continue the practice established at the end of 
last year of margining the unsettled MBS transactions with the primary dealers. 
Given the substantial portion of issuance being purchased and the uncertainty 
associated with MBS supply, the Desk will continue to conduct dollar roll 

transactions when necessary to facilitate the settlement of our purchases. 
Dollar rolls 
can be used to postpone or accelerate the delivery of purchases based on indications 

of the availability of agency MBS for settlement. 
In the reinvestment operations to 
date, the size of dollar rolls needed to postpone settlement have been fairly small, at 

about 5 percent of purchases, though this amount is likely to increase with the 

additional asset purchases. 
We will al
so use coupon swaps, 
if needed
, to facilitate settlement, as was the case 
in 2010.  A coupon swap would allow the Desk to exchange unsettled purchases in a 

given agency MBS coupon for other coupons more readily available for settlement.  

However, we do not envision needing to conduct such transactions, except in very 

rare cases where persistent supply problems suggest that settlement of purchases
, even over several months, is unlikely. 
The purchases of agency MBS securities under this new asset purchase pro
gram 
will begin tomorrow.  We plan to have two separate announcements for MBS 

operations going forward, one for the new purchases and one for the continued 

reinvestments.  The Desk will publish the monthly asset purchase amounts along with 

the announcement of the Treasury MEP operations around the last business day of 

each month.  Given there are only 17 calendar days remaining in September, we will 

purchase a pro rata share of the monthly pace in September of about $23 billion. 
           
   
                    
      
          In addition, we will continue to publish around the eighth business day of each 
month the planned amount of reinvestment purchases for the next month.  Thus, there 

will also be a new reinvestment purchase amount target posted today at the same time 

as the Desk™s operating statement is released.
  That concludes my comments.  Thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Thank you.  
Any questions?  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. 
Help us interpret financial market data going forward.  What do you 
expect?  Because
 our purchases don™t include TIPS, should we factor something in about TIPS 

yields?
  Are they in the habitat, out of the habitat? 
MS. LOGAN.  In our MEP purchases, we purchase TIPS today. 

MR. LACKER.  You do? 

MS. LOGAN.  Yes. 

MR. LACKER.  O
kay. 
MR. POTTER.  The MEP is still ongoing. 

MR. LACKER.  But we weren™t proposing to do it in the overall asset purchase program, 
were we? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Sorry? 
MR. LACKER.  Include TIPS. 

MS. LOGAN. If we 
had added purchases under a new asset purchase 
program for 
Treasuries, we would have done so. 
MR. LACKER. 
Okay.  You would.  Sorry.  I misread something then.  I apologize.  
Let 
me ask another question.  How linked is the private-
label MBS market to agency MBS yields? 
Do you anticipate this pushing that spread apart? 
MS. LOGAN.  I think 
the way we™ve been estimating these effects is that the MBS 
purchases would affect the Treasury term premium, and to the extent that the 
pass
-through from 
the lowering of interest rates moves other asset markets, equities
, or the private-
label market
Š                
      
   
                  
  we t
alked about what that pass-through is.  There™s some uncertainty, but we would expect the 
channel to be through that form.  I guess there could be some other form because it is MBS, and 
private label is a little bit more closely connected than maybe from T
reasuries to private label, 
but overall we have been expecting the pass
-through to happen through lowering interest rates 
more broadly. 
MR. LACKER.  All right.  R
elative to buying Treasuries, we™re tilting credit from the 
private-
label market to the agency market.  Thanks. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Duke. 

MS. DUKE.  I™d just like to say something about the private label 
because there has been 
almost no issuance of private label in a number of years because there™s just not much supply out 

there.  There is 
a little bit of jumbo issuance.
  Again, in the spirit of things that are cooking out 
there, the Federal Home 
Loan Banks, particularly I think the H
ome 
Loan Bank of Chicago 
is 
now looking at consolidating jumbo securities from banks across the country, not 
just that are in 
the Chicago 
district
, and feeding them through Redwood to try to generate some more broader 
private-
label issuance
, for
 jumbo and more broadly. 
I would expect that to the extent that that 
happens, it certainly wouldn™t be unhelpful.  It 
might be helpful. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, but what they™re saying is that compared 
with 
buying Treasuries 
only, this is reducing agency MBS yields by moreŠTreasury yields will fall, but not as much as 

what they would fall if we bought Treasuries only.  T
hey™re 
tilting the playing field away from 
everything priced on Treasuries toward agency MBS. 
MR. POTTER.  President Lacker, we™re still buying $45 billion of long-
term Treasuries 
in the MEP right now. 
                                                                                                     MR. LACKER.  Ye
s, I know that, but the apples-
to-apples thing 
is 
$40 billion agency 
MBS versus 
$40 billion Treasuries in this setting, and comparing those two, private-
label MBS 
yields are going to be higher, given that we™re buying agency MBS, than they would be if we 
were buying Treasuries only. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDL
EY.  They™re not going to be higher.  They™re not going to 
drop as much, presumably. 
MR. LACKER.  Exactly.  They™re going to be higher than they would in the alternative. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. In that respect we don™t care because they™re not being 
created. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, they would be even less created now. 

MR. ENGLISH.  I don™t actually think we know very much about what would happen to 
private-
label MBS yields because there™s so little issuance; there™s so little pricing information. 
It™s conceivable 
that pushing down agency MBS would also push down private-
label MBS 
yields, but I don™t think we know because there hasn™t been much issuance there and we don™t 

have information. 
MR. POTTER.  The stronger the housing market is, the more it should support t
he 
private-
label market coming back and having more capacity. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
9 Let™s go on to the consensus forecast.  This, of course, is 
still an exercise.  We™re still working to figure out what we™re going to do. 
You have in front of 
you the consensus forecast.  If you turn to page 3, and we look at the forecast inclusive of the 

policy action today, that would be best approximated, I guess, by the line 
that 
says, ﬁPlus 
$750 billion LSAP program.ﬂ  That™s the post-
action
 policy forecast, and note th
at it includes the 
jointly determined federal funds rate at the bottom.  What I™d like to do is ask each person to say 
9 The materials used by Chairman Bernanke are appended to this transcript (appendix 
6).       
   
                           
            one of three things.  Either you broadly agree with the forecast as given or you agree with 
reservations
Šlet me go back a second.
  As part of our exercise 
the staff, I believe, is intending to 
write up our discussion as if it were a quarterly monetary policy report, and what they will do is 

if you agree but with reservations, they will write up your reservations in minutes 
style 
descri
bing without attribution what the concerns were that people raised about the forecast.  
The 
other possibility is if you just disagree with the forecast, you should say so and explain why, and 

then they™ll write up the monetary policy report with attributio
nŠthat™s the plan
Šand say, 
again, what it is that you disagree about.  Y
es, President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  I don™t understand.  Are these two different plans or are these two 
different options for us? 
MR. ENGLISH.  Two different options. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.
  You have three choices.  When I go around the table, you 
have three choices. 
MR. LACKER.  Right.  We 
can disagree anonymously or 
with attribution? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree modestly and anonymously. 

MR. LACKER. 
Mod
estly and anonymously. 
CHAIR
MAN BERNANKE.  You can disagree violently and for attribution.  [Laughter] 
MR. 
LACKER
.  And there™s a threshold.  
[Laughter] 
Or is it a 
trigger? 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Can I bring up just one more thing? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  For those people who strongly disagree, we™re also asking 
them to submit in the next few daysŠby MondayŠa paragraph or so explaining why, and we 

will eventually put this into a document and then circulate it back to the Committee. 
                           
  
      
  
     CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is everybody o
kay? 
MS. DUKE.  Can I just ask one question about agreeing with reservation?  I
f we™re 
comparing it with 
the 
$750 billion 
LSAP program
, and in voting for alternative B, I didn™t 
assume that the purchases went past the
 end of the year, w
ould that be a reser
vation? 
I just want 
to know how to characterize 
it.  What does ﬁwith reservationﬂ mean? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
I think you assume
 that you should take the Tealbook 
assumption here, the $750 billion, and say:  Would the economic path shown here be a 
reasonabl
e approximation of what you would anticipate, given the policy action taken?  And if 
not, why not? 
MS. DUKE.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay?
  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Am I agreeing that this is a consensus forecast or am I agreeing that 
this is ac
tually my forecast?  Because I submitted my forecast
. And you can see point for point, 
you know, where they™re different and where they™re not. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We™re trying to determine if it is a consensus, and therefore, 
we™re asking if you yourself find itŠ 
MR. EVANS
.  Is it close enough? 
MR. BULLARD.  I think it™s a good consensus.  It™s not as accurate asŠ 

MR. 
FISHER
.  I™m trying to remember my specific numbers.  All I remember is that 
I was in the central tendency. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So why don™t 
you just report what you reported and say if 
you think it™s broadly consistent with this or not? 
            
            
             
     MR. WILCOX.  This is an effort to ascertain the extent to which participants can affiliate 
themselves with the consensus forecast. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Preside
nt Fisher. 
MR. TARULLO.  Mr. Chairman. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sorry. 

MR. TARULLO.  I think it™s not unlike what we do with policy statements, which is to 
say everybody would have written it somewhat differently, but in the end can you kind of go 

along with 
it? CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Ye
s, that™s what it is.  That™s right. 
MR. FISHER.  You said there were three questions.  Do we agree with the forecast?  Do 
we have reservations?  If so, what are they?
  What™s the third? 
MS. 
DUKE.  Do you disagree? 
MS. YELLEN. Do 
you have a fundamentally different view? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Do you fundamentally disagree with the forecast?  And 
remember it™s not about whether you agree with the policy action or not.  This is conditional on 

the policy action.  Conditional on the policy action, do you agree more or less with the forecast 

that™s been presented? 
MR. FISHER.  And if we have reservations, we should submit them.  Is that what you 
were saying earlier? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, Janet, would you like to 
comment? 

MS. YELLEN. I
f you broadly agree but have some reservationŠyou™re slightly more 
optimistic about the forecast
, you have a different view on oil prices, but aside from that you 

basically agree this is a reasonable forecast contingent on the policy path
Šthen say you agre
e                  
                   
         with reservations.  And 
the write
-up, as in the minutes, 
will say 
people have expressed some 
reservations, but nevertheless associate themselves overall with the view. 
The staff will write up 
the discussion of what the reservations were.  But those who 
just have a basically different view 
of the forecast should say so, and then there will be a few paragraphs they™ll submit, 
and that will 

be included in the document 
with attribution
.  This would be a portion of a monetary policy 
report where there would be a discussion of the diversity of views.  Think of this as a diversity of 

views and say 10 people supported the forecast without reservation.  Several people had 

reservations of the following sort, and four had essentially different views.  Here are the 

submissions.  In your paragraph, 
you™d describe 
and 
explain why your views are essentially 
different. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Let me just make sure I understand.  We™re assuming the 
policy path, this policy action? 
MS. YELLEN. Yes. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  Yes, tha
t™s what we are doing today. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  So we™re not having individual ﬁappropriate 
monetary policy.ﬂ 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
No.  It™s just given what we passed today, is this a reasonable 
forecast
? MR. LACKER.  Wait.  That™s different than a policy path. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I™m going to suggest something slightly different from what 
Chairman Bernanke said, which is:  Given the policy decision today, if you look at the numbers 

that go along with that 
$750 billion LSAP programŠforget about whet
her the 
$750 billion is 
correct or not because you may think it will end up being $500 b
illion or 
some 
other numberŠ 
                              
     
    
              
 do you think that™s a reasonable forecast? I
s it close enough for talking purposes?  But if you 
think this is the wrong model of the world, the economy is just going to look a lot different, so 
much so that you want to, in effect, dissent, then you™re in the third category.  The middle 

category is a little tougher, but I think the two ends are very clear. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
Everybody, this is a trial run.  [Laughter]  W
e™re trying to 
find out what works and what doesn™t work.  We may have already found out what doesn™t work. 

President Fisher, did you have a comment or question or you™re okay? 
MR. FISHER.  I™m fine. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  You™re 
fine.  Vice Chairman. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
My question was would it be better to try to have a little 
bit better understanding about what ﬁclose toﬂ is or would 
it be everyone™s personal view of what 

ﬁclose toﬂ is? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  It™s your judgment of whether you 
sufficiently disagree that 
you want to have your name 
identified. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it does matter if people disagree
 or have different 
parameters in terms of how close is ﬁclose to.ﬂ  
We can do it either way, but you could argue th
at 
if you think the standard error is more than X, then you should disagree, or you could be a 

perfectionist and you disagree for very minute changes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  So all of this is about reporting.  We™re trying to report the 
sense of the Committee
, and so how you would 
like the sense of the Committee reported 
is 
basically the question. 
MS. YELLEN. 
Right.  I
f we were really doing this
, the Chairman would be 
wal
king out 
into a press conference
 with these numbers, explaining the policy action, and pu
tting these 
      
     
                        
             
   
      numbers out to the public and saying, ﬁThis gives you a description of how we envision the 
economy unfolding with the policy decisions.
ﬂ  And the question is:  Would you be comfortable 

with these numbers as what he walks out into a press confer
ence 
with
? VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I understand all of that, but let™s imagine that there™s half 
the people on the Committee who disagree for very small tolerances and
 half the people 
have 
very large tolerances. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Then no.  It should be 
meaningful tolerances. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It would be better if we had a more common metric 
about what 
the tolerances are. 
MR. LACKER.  Well, put it this way
:  Are you willing to write two paragraphs for Dave 
Reifschneider?  [Laughter]  That™s it, right? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No, no, that™s different.  That™s 
a fundamental 
dis
agreement. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
The way I would put it is this.  I
f the consensus forecast came 
out like this
, and you were the sort of person who 
in a speech 
would say, ﬁI want to make an 
important point that my 
personal 
unemployment rate forecast at the end of 2015 would be one-
tenth lower,ﬂ then you should say you have reservations.  [Laughter]  But if you perhaps feel 

uncomfortable about making a big distinction abou
t one-tenth or so, thenŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  There™s a standard error
, though, 
implicit in that. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I think there 
are
 two things.  One, there™s obviously a huge 
confidence interval around this, and so one way to look at 
it is 
that 
many 
differences just blur. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Of course. 
There will 
always b
e fan 
charts
.          
   
      
             
             
   
  MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  But does it make it a material difference f
or monetary policy, 
and the question might be if it™s 
one-tenth or so off on inflation or unemployment, you would say 
probably not. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s a good way of phrasing it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans, did you have a comment? 

MR. EVANS.  I was just thinking we should probably start [l
aughter]
, and then we™ll 
figure outŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNAN
KE.  Excellent suggestion.  All right.  Who would like to go 
first?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART. I endorse it.
  [Laughter and applause] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Very good.
  Anyone? President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. 
Is it a good consensus?  I do think it™s a good consensus.  T
here are 
issues here about the mix between the forecast and the policy assumptions.  The way I did it was 

I had more inflation coming in the out years, and then I applied the outcome-based policy rule, 

which would then have the funds rate moving in a different way from here, and so the policy 

assumption then starts to also look different.  So I™m not quite sure what to make of this exercise.  

It™s fine as a statement of where the Committee is, and I would endorse it in that sense
.  As a general rule on this whole process, I don™t think 
that it
™s a good thing to get into 
the 
business of 

trying to dissent on a forecast because there are
 zillions of points here and a lot of subtleties here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
This is why we™re having a tr
ial run. 
MR. BULLARD.  Mildly different, I guess. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Broadly endorse. 
       
   
          
    
  
           
      
    CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Conditional on the policy path, I broadly endorse. 

CHAIRMAN 
BERNANKE.  Okay.  Governor Duk
e. 
MS. DUKE.  I actually normally would endorse, except that the reservation I would 
express at this point is that I think 2013 will be significantly lower because of the fiscal cliff. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MS. DUKE. 
That would be a reservation. 
CHAIR
MAN BERNANKE.  That™s a good example of a reservation.  Very good.  
Anyone else?  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Broadly endorse, but I have a weaker outlook.  So that™s my only 
reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Governor 
Yellen
. MS. YELLEN.  Broadly endorse. 

CHAIRMAN BE
RNANKE.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA. I see what I would term modestly more inflationary pressures 
than what are in this forecast, maybe one-tenth or two-tenths or three-
tenths more in inflation. 
With that said
, it comes 
back to what the Vice Chairman
 was talking about, that the choices of 
the Committee seem to be averse to those kinds of upticks in inflation.  For my own view, I think 

I would say I see modestly more inflationary pressures than what are in this. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Fine.
  Governor Stein. 
MR. STEIN.  
I broadly endorse the baseline.  I™m not sure if I would be a weak deviator 
on the conditional effect of policy in the sense that I think that the incremental effect of the 
          
   
           
               LSAP is going to be roughly half of what it™s projected to be.  I™m not quite sure where that puts 
me. 
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER.  You sound like a ﬁ
two
ﬂ to me. 
MR. STEIN.  That feels like a 
ﬁtwo
ﬂ to you? 
PARTICIPANT
.  Do you want to write two paragraphs? 
MR. 
STEIN
.  No, I don™t want to write 
any para
graphs.  I want to hide in the weeds.  
[Laughter] 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Rosengren said he broadly endorses.  President 
Fisher. 
MR. FISHER.  I modestly endorse it.  It might scare people in terms of my forecasting.  I 
was within the central tendency.  They might want to change their forecast based on where I 

would be, with the exception of the funds rate, and I™d have to think about that.  But generally, 
I endorse.  
I will say this, Mr. Chairman
: Fiscal cliff, no fiscal cliff, et cetera
Šand I said this in 
my write
-upŠgoing beyond the first part of 2013 is largely pure guesswork. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  In some positive sense, that™s true.  In a normative sense, 
we do need to find some kind of plan. 
MR. FISHER.  I understand that. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  We h
ave to have some kind of projection to base our 
thinking on. 
MR. FISHER.  With that caveat, it™s a wonderful exercise. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Obviously, yes.  O
ne of the benefits of this exercise
, I hope, 
is that we will be able to show fan charts that will g
ive some sense of the uncertainty. 
President 
Pianalto. 
        
             
  
       
   
  
               
   MS. PIANALTO.  I broadly endorse the forecast, although my forecast is slightly weaker 
for 
GDP growth and unemployment in the later years 
partly because
, like Governor Stein, 
the 
effectiveness of poli
cy is just a little weaker in my forecast. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Good.  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  I broadly endorse, but two things about the process as opposed to th
e substance
.  One, the issue that arose at the outset that Betsy mentioned is somethin
g that people 
are going to have to think about, which is, what if we emerge from a meeting with a policy 

action that really isn™t any of the ones that are listed there?
  And, secondly, this 
category 
two
ŠI have a feeling
Šis going to be problematic in the fo
llowing respect. I have heard several people 
already who might have fit themselves into 
category 
two, a
nd if you end up saying, ﬁWe™ve got a 
consensus forecast
Š14 of the 17 members of the FOMC had qualifications on it,ﬂ I™m not sure 
how powerful 
it becomes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, the interesting question is whether or not a number of 
them had the same qualification. If they™re all nitpicks, 
that™s one thing, but if everybody said, 
ﬁThis doesn™t take enough account of the fiscal cliff,ﬂ then that would be something that should 

be communicated I think. 
MR. TARULLO.  Fair enough.  T
here may be some utility in thinking about moving to a 
binary 
system 
as we do with the statement.  You are either endorsing or you are not, but giving 
people a chance 
to comment, so if they say something like Betsy said a minute ago, it could be 

included in the explanation of the consensus. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  That™s fine. 

MR. TARULLO.  But that™s just something to think about. 
                 
    
     
                  
  CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  No.  Thank you.  We are looking for suggestions.  Anyone 
else?  Vice Chairman
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I agree with Governor Tarullo.  You don™t have to frame 
it as a reservation.  You can just frame it as where people would prefer to tilt the forecast.  I™m 
with Betsy on the f
iscal restraint. I am assuming that 
we will get some fiscal restraint 
next year
, and it will be more problematic to the outlook, so we have somewhat weaker growth in 2013.  

That said, I think this is a pretty good forecast.  T
hat is why I was getting at t
he point of, how 
much do you disagree? I am pretty confident that the economy will be weaker in 2013 than this 

forecast, but if I take this whole thing in its entirety, I wouldn™t really quibble about it. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. I 
have a tiny reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Again, the question is, would you object to my 
hypothetically taking this, putting this on the screen, and saying, ﬁThis is the Committee™s 

consensus forecast of what the economy is going to look likeﬂ? 
VICE CH
AIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it would also be good, though, to say, ﬁA few people 
thought that 2013 could be a little weaker becauseﬂ blah, blah, blah.  But I would do it in 

Governor Tarullo™s two-
bucket camp
 rather than three-
bucket camp. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I agr
ee. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  Thanks.  Anyone else? 

MR. PLOSSER.  Mr. Chairman? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Plosser. 
               
  
    
             
       
               
     MR. PLOSSER.  I would say my forecast differs from this, obviously, and I think it is 
likely to show up 
in the assumption about current policy.  We are going to see more inflationary 
pressures and less positive outlooks on output and employment. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 
MR. LACKER.  I still don™t have a clear, coherent sense of what policy I am supposed to 
be conditioning on.  Am I foreca
sting the Committee?  I think I am.  So on that basis, I might 
provide a good test case here. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay. 

MR. LACKER.  First of all, coming into this, on appropriate policy, I was weaker in 
2013 by a couple of tenths.  And I saw inflation a couple of tenths stronger, closer to 2 
percent 

over the next 
year 
or two, getting to 2 
percent 
next year. 
So I would have put policy to 
rais
e rates earlier. 
Modifying that in terms of making it a forecast of the Committee™s action, I would 
mark up inflation in 2014. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Sounds right.  Anyone else? 

MR. FISHER.  Can I ask a question on that? 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  President Fisher. 

MR. FISHER.  Forgive me.  I™m slower than everybody else at the table.  In releasing 
this, we would be releasing the funds path? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Releasing what? 

MR. FISHER.  The funds path, 
the fed funds rate forecast as well
. CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes
. MR. BULLARD. If you are a year earlier, is that a significant reservation?  [Laughter] 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I™m sor
ry. 
                       
  
                
   
         MR. BULLARD.  A year earlier on the funds rate, is that a significant reservation? 
MS. DUKE.  But is that a difference in the policy path?  Because the policy path assumes 
2015 liftoff. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.
  You could have 
a different reaction functio
n. MR. 
BULLARD
.  But then you™ve got to do your presumably out
come
-based
Š MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. 
Based on the original line of comments where we asked you to 
condition on the forecast, and you submitted something 
that
 had higher inflation, I would have 
said t
hat you were a 
ﬁthree
ﬂ because you showed that, conditioned on sticking with the August 
statement
-type policy, you had much higher inflation than this forecast, and that should be 
exaggerated more based on the policy.  So I would have said that you™re a 
three. 
MR. BULLARD.  But I don™t think I am outside of these confidence bands. 

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I don™t think that is relevant.  It goes back to the question of, 
do you think that your forecast, from a policy perspective, would be materially different? 
MR. BULLARD. 
Again, I just don™t think getting into dissenting on a forecast is a 
sensible thing to do.  Has the Chairman done a good job of characterizing the center of the 

Committee?  Yes. I think yes. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  President Lockhart. 

MR. 
LOCKHART.  I want to make sure I understand.  The next step is to write up a 
mock quarterly monetary policy report or something like that? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  I™m sorry.  Just a description of this discussion. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Right.  But we see how 
it is going to be communicated, how it is 
going to be implemented, is that right? 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  That™s 
the purpose. 
                        
      
            MR. WILCOX.  Just the diversity of views portion. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Right.  Okay. 

MS. DUKE.  For the mock exercise, in addition to my own fiscal cliff reservation, can I 
sign up to Sandy and Jeremy™s reservation about the effectiveness? 
MR. 
REIFSCHNEIDER
.  Oh, sure. 
MS. DUKE.  Okay. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Anyone else?  [No response]  All right.  Yes? 

MR. POWELL.  I™m on that line b
etween the one and the two for exactly the same 
reason
.  I went with the one, but of course I do have the same reservation. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. 
A question to be thinking about here is
:  What would 
Governor Powell do if he thought that the policy action is 
weaker than we anticipate, but the 
underlying economy is stronger, so that the outlook looks okay for him? 
MR. POWELL.  Right. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Because we are not showing a comparison, right?  We are 
just showing the ex post. 
MR.
STEIN
.  Oh, you™re just showing the ex post. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Well, that™s the question.  T
hat™s what we™re discussing 
here.  We haven™t asked the question whether or not you think the baseline is adequate. 
MR. FISHER.  You might 
have to prepare for your press conference. 
CHAI
RMAN BERNANKE.  Yes.  Do you have a question or a comment? 
MR. FISHER.  Well, the plan is, once we get this nailed down, that you would then refer 
to it in your press conference. Is that correct? 
                             
   
     
            CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  And then, we are hoping at some point t
o have a monetary 
policy report. 
MR. FISHER.  Which you would still refer to the consensus forecast in. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Nothing is nailed down.  One possibility, which Governor 
Tarullo alluded to, is that we can™t do this in a timely way because we don™t know what the 

policy action is going to be soon enough, in which case it might be something that only appears 

in publication with the minutes, for example, three weeks later. 
MR. FISHER.  I agree with Governor Tarullo, by the way.  H
e makes an excellent
 point.  
My next question would be:  Could you summarize what we just discussed as though we were at 

a press conference? It probably would be difficult at this juncture. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I would say that this is the forecast 
of the Committee.
 A few 
people disagreed, thinking that these policies would lead to higher inflation.  Most people 
agreed with the broad contours, except they pointed out a few issues related to the fiscal cliff and 

the efficacy of policy.  
President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER. I™m a lit
tle confused.  Someone used the phrase ﬁa diversity section.ﬂ 
But you, at the beginning, describedŠI think you did in this contextŠ
a minutes
-like document, 
and in the minutes, of course, when they discuss participants™ views, the different views are sort 

of woven into the main narrative.  I wasn™t quite clear on what you guysŠ 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  I just learned about this five minutes ago myself. 

MR. LACKER.  Okay. Great. 

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  But I think the plan is to have a document that describes the 
consensus forecast, gives its main feature, 
and shows 
it in 
a minutes
-type discussion: ﬁ
The 
Committee discussed it. Most agreed with it
 but raised the following points anonymously.  
            
          
 President Lacker thought that it was
 a bunch of garbage.ﬂ  [Laughter]  And that would be the 
content. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay
, we will just have to start. 
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE.  Okay.  I hope this was helpful to you 
all
.  [Laughter]  Just 
so you have something to look forward to, our current plan is to talk about this exercise in 
October, so be sure and make your plane reservations now.  [Laughter] 
The next meeting is 
TuesdayŒWednesday, October 23Œ24.  
The press conference 
is 
at 2:15.  There will be a 
TV in 
the Special Library
, and lunch is available if you would like to stay.  No presentations are 
planned.  Thank you very much. 
END OF MEETING 
