      
                                                                
    
 ________________ Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
April 28
Œ29, 2015 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 28, 2015, at 

1:00 p.m. 
and continued on Wednesda
y, April 29, 2015, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the 
following: 
Janet L. Yellen, Chair 

William 
C. 
Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Lael Brainard 

Charles L. Evans 

Stanley Fischer 

Jeffrey M. Lacker 

Dennis P. Lockhart 

Jerome H. Powell 

Danie
l K. Tarullo 
John C. Williams 
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, and Eric 
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Helen E. Holcomb and Blake Prichard, First Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Dallas and Philadelphia, respectively 

Thomas Laubach, Secretary and Economist 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 

David 
W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle 
A. Smith, 
Assistant Secretary 
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Eric M. Engen, Michael P. Leahy, and William 
Wascher, Associate Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account 

Robert deV. Frierson,
1 Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market Committee and t
he Board of Governors. 
                             
                           
  
       
         
   
 ________________ Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of 

Governors 
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Governors 
James A. Clouse and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 
William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, 
Board of Governors 
Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider, and Stacey Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board, 
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Michael T. Kiley, Senior Adviser, 
Division of Research and Statistics, and Senior 
Associate Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 

Governors 
Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Joshua Gallin, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci,
2 Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 
of Governors; Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, 

Board of Governors 
Jane E. Ihrig
1 and David López
-Salido, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Edward Nelson, Assistant Director, Division
 of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Eric 
C. Engstrom, Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Penelope A. Beattie,
1 Assistant to the Secretary, Of
fice of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
2 Attended the portion of the meeting following the joint session of the Federal Open Market Committee 
and the Board of Governors. 
                                    Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Katie Ross,
1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
Jonathan E. Goldberg, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

James M. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

James J. McAndrews, Executive Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 
Troy Davig, Michael Dotsey, Evan F. Koenig, and Spencer Krane, Senior 
Vice 
Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Todd E. Clark, Sylvain Leduc, Giovanni Olivei, Douglas Tillett, and David C. Wheelock, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, San Francisco, Boston, Chicago, 

and St. Louis, respectively 
Kei
-Mu Yi, 
Special Policy Advisor to the President, Federal 
Reserve Ba
nk of 
Minneapolis 

Matthew D. Raskin, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Jame
s M. Egelhof,
1 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 
                   
             
  
      Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
April 28
Œ29, 2015 April 28 Session 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Good afternoon, everyone.  I™d like to welcome back First Vice 
President
s Holcomb and Prichard, who will again be representing Dallas and Philadelphia, 
respectively. 
On a sad note, my understanding is that this is the last FOMC meeting for New York 
First Vice President Chris Cumming.  Chris has attended 92 FOMC meetings, 70 of which she 
attended as an alternate voter
.  And, as all of you know, Chris has been involved in a wide array 
of 
System work over many years in all facets of what we do and has been a very wonderful 

colleague.  Chris, I really thank you for your service and want you to know that you will be very 

much missed.
  [Applause] 
Next, I™m pleased to let you know that Brian Madigan has agreed to return to the Board™s 
Division of Monetary Affairs as 
deputy d
irector
, reporting to Thomas, effective June 1.  I think 
all of
 you know that Brian served as d
irector 
of the 
division 
and as FOMC 
secretary
 from 2007 
to 2010.  
Since he retired from the Board, Brian has been a visiting professor in the Department 

of Economics at Georgetown 
University
. Now, as I think many of you know
, in recent years
, the job of 
director 
of 
the Division of 
Monetary Affairs has become increasingly burdensome.  It has entailed serving as the 

Committee™s chief monetary policy advisor, as s
ecretary of the FOMC, and as leader of a large 
organization with c
ritical responsibilities.
  As part of a strategy to create a more sustainable 
situation, Brian will have oversight responsibility for the FOMC Secretariat and will play a key 

role in the production of the minutes and transcripts of FOMC meetings.  Obviously, 
these are 
things he has done superbly well in the past and for which he is eminently well qualified. 
                           
                               
                                                           
  Accordingly, I intend to propose that Brian be appointed by the FOMC as its s
ecretary
.  Unless there are objections, I will 
ask the 
FOMC 
Secretariat to send out a request 
in early June 
for notation 
votes to select Brian 
as our 
secretary
.  Under this 
arrangement, Thomas will 
continue 
to serve as 
the 
Committee™s primary advisor on monetary policy and will also be able 
to 
dedicate more of his 
energy to ensuring that 
the Division of 
Monetary Affairs fulfills its critical 
role 
in supporting our monetary policy and other responsibilities. 
Okay.  Now, 
the first two items 
on our agenda 
today will be 
considered in a joint meeting 
of the FOMC and the Board of Governors, and, accordingly, I need a motion to close the Board 
meeting. 
MR. FISCHER.  So moved. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  O
ur first item is financial 
developments and open market operations, and let me call on Simon to delive
r the 
Desk report. 
MR. POTTER.
1  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Lorie and I will split the briefing into 
three parts. 
First, I will review financial market developments. Next, Lorie will 
review Desk operations.
 Finally, I will discuss staff work on enhancing 
the 
calculation methodology for the federal funds effective rate. 
Over the intermeeting period, domestic financial conditions eased following 
more
-accommodative-
than
-expected U.S. monetary policy communications and 
weaker
-than-
expected
 economic data, including the March employment report.  
On net, nominal Treasury rates declined by as many as 25 basis points, the S&P 500 
index gained 2 percent, and the DXY dollar index decreased nearly 3 percent. 
A substantial portion of these changes came around 
the time o
f the March FOMC 
events, which were characterized as 
being 
more
 accommodative than expected 
despite the removal of ﬁpatientﬂ language from the statement. 
Investors pointed, in 
particular, to the large downward shift in the target 
federal funds 
rate projections 
in 
the SEP 
and, to a lesser extent, the downward revisions to Committee participants
™ projections of inflation, GDP growth, and the longer-run unemployment rate.  
The 

left column of your top-
left panel shows 
that nominal and real interest 
rates declined 
in the one-hour window around the statement and SEP releases
, while measures of 
inflation compensation rose, equity prices increased, and the dollar weakened. 
As shown in the right column of the table, the absolute magnitudes of these moves 
were 
1 The materials used by Mr. Potter and Ms. Logan are appended to this tran
script (appendix 1). 
             
            
    
         
           
     
         
     very large relative to changes in one-hour windows around FOMC statement releases 

over the past decade. 
One hypothesis for seeing moves of this magnitude could be decreased market 
liquidity. Indeed
, late in the trading session outside the window use
d to measure 
these FOMC announcement effects, there was a very large move in the euro
dollar 
currency pair.  The move pushed the intraday trading range for the currency pair to 

over 4 percent, a 5 standard deviation move over the period since 2004, as shown in 

the top-right panel.  The size of the move is comparable to the 6 standard deviation 

range in the 10
-year Treasury yield on October 15, both of which took place amid 

very high volumes.  
The March FOMC events shifted out expectations for the timing of 
liftoff 
according to the Desk surveys, as shown in the middle-left panel.  
The ﬁflashﬂ survey, 

taken 
three 
business days after the March FOMC meeting
, suggests that most of the 
shift occurred in response to the meeting and the large price moves in the hou
r 
following the March FOMC 
statement release
, therefore likely reflect
ing shifting 
policy expectations as opposed to outsized liquidity 
effects
.  Since the flash survey, 

soft domestic economic data and speeches from Federal Reserve officials appear to 

have further solidified this shift in policy expectations. 
The April surveys also showed a notably slower expected pace of policy 
normalization after liftoff. 
The middle
-right panel shows that the probability 
distribution for the pace of tightening in the fir
st year after liftoff, assuming no return 
to the zero bound, shifted toward a slower pace over the period, the first notable shift 

in these views since 
the question was originally asked last September.  
A similar shift 
occurred in the distribution of the expected pace of tightening in the second year after 

liftoff. 
In considering when the Federal Reserve will begin to normalize monetary policy, 
market participants are particularly focused on the outlook for inflation and the 

Committee™s reasonable confidenc
e that inflation will move back to its 2 percent 

objective.  
We asked survey respondents to score the importance of various factors 
they believe the Committee will use in assessing whether reasonable confidence in 

the inflation outlook has been achieved.  As shown in the bottom-left panel, 

respondents assigned the most importance to a further improvement in the labor 

market and the absence of weakening in realized core inflation.  
Over the intermeeting period, market-
based measures of inflation compensation 
increased alongside higher energy prices and a weaker U.S. dollar, as shown in the 

bottom-right panel.  Forward measures of inflation compensation increased at both 

shorter-
and longer
-dated horizons but remain below levels at the end of 2013.  
The 
increa
ses over the period were attributed to the March FOMC communications, 
somewhat higher-
than
-expected 
realized inflation, the increase in oil prices, and 
positioning dynamics in the TIPS market.  Longer-
term inflation expectations from 
Desk surveys were little changed over the period.  Meanwhile, front-month Brent 

crude increased nearly 22 percent but remains more than 40 percent lower since the 
      
   
               
          
            
       
   
                        
  end of 2013.  
As I noted, the DXY dollar index declin
ed nearly 3 percent over the 
intermeeting 
period but is over 20 percent higher since the end of 2013. 
Despite the depreciation over the period, market participants expect the exchange 
value of the U.S. dollar to continue its broad appreciation amid ongoing monetary 

policy divergence across major economies.
 Desk dealer survey respondents reported 
that dollar appreciation seen since last summer has prompted them to revise lower 

their forecasts for 2015 growth and inflation, with the median markdowns to 2015 

GDP growth and core PCE inflation of roughly 40 basis points and 20 basis points, 

respectively. 
A key factor contributing to broad dollar strength has been widening global 
interest rate differentials, especially between the 
United States
 and the 
euro area. 
These interest rate differentials became more pronounced as 
euro-
area sovereign rates 
have traded increasingly negative and yield curves have flattened substantially. 
The 
top-left panel of your next exhibit shows the extent of 
negative rate trading
 by country and maturity. 
 Red indicates that 100 percent of the bonds in that category 
trade at a negative yield, while green indicates that none trade negative. 
Despite the continued decline in 
euro
-area rates and the increasing universe of 
securities trading at negative yields, there have been few market
-functioning issues, 
and the ECB has stated that it has had little trouble achieving its purchase targets thus 

far.
 Even so, it is possible that market functioning strains will emerge over time, and 
to help address such strains, the ECB unveiled details of an augmented 
securities
-lending program aimed at supporting bond and repo market liquidity. 
The declines in 
euro-area rates, coupled with the very large currency depreciation 
and increase in equities, have s
ubstantially eased European financial conditions since 

President Draghi™s remarks at 
the 
Jackson Hole symposium last August.  
It is interesting to compare the asset price reaction 
with
 recent LSAP programs.  Using the 
price changes from when asset purchase
 expectations began to form until three 

months after the purchase programs were announced, the 
ECB™s PSPP and B
OJ™s 
QQE, shown in the left and middle columns of the top-
right panel, 
respectively, 
contributed to significant currency depreciation and meaningful equity price 

increases. The ECB™s program resulted in large declines in German nominal forward 

rates, but 
it has not been accompanied by an increase in longer
-dated 
forward 
inflation measures
.  In comparison, Japanese policies supported a large rise in 
forward inflation compensation and a pronounced increase in equities, perhaps 

stemming from the focus on reaching the new higher inflation target.  By contrast, 

U.S. asset price reaction
s to 
LSAP3 
were
 more limited, as the right column showsŠ 
though it did have a large effect in the mortgage markets, which is not included in the 

panel. 
One potential flashpoint for 
financial markets is the highly fluid situation in 
Greece. While Greek asset prices
 have responded sharply to recent developments, the 

broader market reaction to perceived downside risks in Greece has been relatively 

muted and perhaps a bit complacent.  
Market participants attribute the lack of 
          
  
                  
               
    
     
                
       
  
             spillovers to institutional improvements in 
the euro area, reduced 
private
-sector 
exposure to Greece, and the effects of ECB asset purchases. 
Reflecting the mounting 
liquidity pressure from deposit flight and bank funding strains, Greek banks have also 

increased their borrowing via the emergency liquidity assistance program to 

•76 billion in April from •69 billion in March.  
As would be expected, Greece™s 

Target2 liability, which represents balances owed to others in the E
urosystem
, rose in 
March, shown in the middle-
left panel. This level is near Greece™s prior peak Target2 
liability in June 2012.  It is uncertain how long the Greek government will be able to 

meet its debt obligations. 
Some market participants still expect an agreement 
between Greece and its creditors to be reached but only after
 a high-
stakes game of 
brinkmanship.  
Steve will further discuss Greece in his briefing. 
Shifting to emerging markets, there has been a very sharp increase in Chinese 
equities over recent months, shown in the middle-
right panel. Over the intermeeting 
period, mainland Chinese and Hong Kong equities rose by 23 
percent 
and 16 percent, 
respectively, and, 
over the past year
, the Shanghai Composite has more than doubled.  
Mainland equity outperformance 
came despite a worsening domestic economic 
outlook and proba
bly involved some speculative dynamics, though it was supported 
by expected and actual monetary policy easing.  
During the intermeeting period
, the 
People™s Bank of China 
cut their reserve requirement ratio 
by a larger
-than
-expected 
100 basis points; most contacts expect additional cuts to reserve requirements or 

decreases in lending and deposit rates in the near 
term. 
Equity prices in other emerging markets also increased
, and, as shown in the 
bottom-
left panel, broader EM asset prices rose, partially retr
acing prior period 
declines.
 The moves were supported by the accommodative March FOMC 
communication as well as a moderate abatement of risks in a number of countries, 
including Brazil and Russia.  
This partial retracement of emerging market asset prices 
came despite continued markdowns of expected growth in several countries.  
These 

markdowns and recent U.S. dollar strength have contributed to a broader trend of 

emerging market currency depreciation since the May 2013 JEC testimony or 
so-called 
taper tantr
um. 
Some market participants are concerned that taper tantrum
Œlike volatility in 
emerging markets could materialize as the Federal Reserve approaches normalization. 

Recall that implied volatility in emerging market currencies rose sharply with U.S. 

interest rate implied volatility in spring 2013, shown in the bottom-
right panel, and 
has recently moved back to similar levels.  Decelerating emerging market growth and 

rising corporate leverage, as well as volatility in commodity prices may make 

emerging markets vulnerable as normalization nears. However, these risks are 

somewhat offset by lower emerging market asset valuations and reportedly more 

cautious positioning fro
m emerging market investors, as discussed in the special QS 
memo. 
Volatility in emerging markets is only one part of broader financial market 
volatility that some worry could ensue from expected Federal Reserve normalization.  

Indeed, a senior IMF official 
recently warned of a ﬁsuper taper tantrum,ﬂ 
in which 
              
     
                                        
     negative term premiums 
would be rapidly decompress
ed as domestic policy rates are 
increased; Thomas will comment more on this risk in his briefing.
 Given the 
punctuated bouts of recent realized volatility in the very deep and liquid markets I 

discussed earlier, financial market volatility during normalization could be even more 

challenging for relatively illiquid markets. 
I will now take questions before turning to 
Lorie. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  No questions? 
Lorie. 
MS. LOGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll start 
with
 exhibit 3 and provide an 
update on MBS reinvestments, discuss testing of normalization tools, and conclude 

with the staff recommendation to extend the existing central bank liquidity and swap 

arra
ngements. 
The Desk™s MBS reinvestment operations continue to go smoothly, 
and MBS 
market liquidity remains stable.  
The continued trend 
toward higher prepayment 
speeds in March was largely an ongoing result of the low mortgage rates witnessed 

earlier in th
e year and has pushed the current monthly reinvestment amount up to 
approximately $40 billion, as shown in the top-left panel of your third exhibit.  

Despite the increased size of reinvestments, we do not anticipate having any issues 

with the execution of MBS operations, but we have increased the frequency of our 

operations to accommodate their larger size. 
Testing of the Federal Reserve™s overnight and term RRP operations continued 
over the intermeeting period.  Patterns of total RRP demand remained broadly 

consistent with recent experience, as shown in the top
-right panel.  
The additional 
25 counterparties that began participating in operations on March 16 have only 

modestly 
affected
 overall RRP usage. 
For broader perspective on the Federal Reserve™s 
involvement in reverse repo 
activity, this panel also includes reverse repos conducted with foreign official 

institutions, known as the ﬁforeign RP pool,ﬂ shown in gray.  The size of the foreign 

RP pool is notably above its pre-
crisis levels, largely a ref
lection of central banks™ 
desire to hold greater dollar liquidity buffers, while at the same time they are 

tightening their counterparty 
risk
-management
 frameworks.  Increases in the foreign 
RP pool this period, and since the beginning of the year, have been primarily driven 

by a single customer who has sought to increase the liquidity profile of its FX 

reserves 
due to precautionary 
financial
-stability motivations, in part by raising its 
cash balance 
held 
at the Federal Reserve. 
The Desk conducted two term operations over March quarter-end, the first a 
$75 billion, 14
-day operation and the second a $125 billion, 7-day operation, 

summarized in your middle-left panel.  This $200 billion offering in term RRPs 

reduced the Federal Reserve™s overall RRP offered am
ount spanning quarter-
end to 
$500 billion, down from the $600 billion offered at year-end.  However, the reduction 

did not appear to have an adverse 
effect
 on markets or meaningfully change 
participation, likely because the amount offered was perceived to still provide ample 
           
      
   
    
                     
   
           
         headroom above expected demand.  The 14-day operation was modestly 

oversubscribed, with $81 billion in propositions and a stop-
out
 rate of 9 basis points, 
a slightly higher rate than was expected.  
The 7
-day operation conducted on March 30 
was undersubscribed
, with $101 billion in propositions submitted and a stop-
out rate 
at the max offering rate of 10 basis points, similar to the rates on the undersubscribed 

operations held closer to year
-end.  Substitution between overnight and term R
RPs 
and the breakdown of counterparty demand at the March term operations were 

broadly similar to behavior observed in December. 
As shown in your middle-right panel, the Desk™s RRP operations continued to 
provide a soft floor under short-
term interest rate
s, even around quarter-end.  
The 
federal funds effective rate averaged 12 basis points over the period and printed at 

6 basis points on quarter-end.  While rates and volumes in unsecured 
markets
 over 

quarter-end were broadly in line with expectations, temporary funding pressures in 

secured markets
 were much larger than expected, with the overnight GCF repo index 

for Treasury collateral, shown in the dark blue line, printing at 45 basis points. 
Further, the dispersion in repo rates increased notably.  For ex
ample, the spread 
between rates on overnight Treasury GCF repo and 
triparty 
repo widened 
considerably on quarter-end.  This spread, shown in your bottom-
left panel, reached 
30 basis points on quarter-end.  
While all the factors that drove the larger
-than
-expected widening between repo rates are not fully understood, institutions with 

stable access to triparty repo funding appeared to demand increased compensation to 

intermediate between triparty cash lenders, like money funds, and GCF borrowers, 

such as sma
ller or less creditworthy dealers. 
It should also be noted that the spread between GCF and triparty repo rates has 
been gradually widening over the past several months even outside quarter-end.  
This 
trend is likely partially driven by financial institutions modifying behavior in 
response to regulatory changes and associated higher costs to intermediate between 

triparty and GCF repo markets. 
Looking forward, pursuant to the resolution adopted at the March FOMC 
meeting, the staff proposes conductin
g term RRP tests over June quarter
-end. 
For the June quarter-end, we suggest a slightly different approach to 
the 
public 
communication about the term RRPs than was used in December and March.  As 

outlined in your bottom-right panel, the Desk proposes to re
lease a statement shortly 
after the April FOMC meeting minutes on May 20 that would note the tentative 

intention to offer at least $200 billion of term RRPs in addition to capacity 
of 
overnight 
RRPs for the June quarter-end.  Based on our experience with t
he March 
term operations, we believe that $200 billion in term RRP capacity over June quarter-

end, in combination with at least $300 billion capacity in overnight 
RRP, should 
provide sufficient headroom on total RRP availability, assuming no change in the 

target range.  Further, we would propose noting in the statement that the Desk would 

release the remaining details on Monday, June 22
Šthat is, after the June FOMC 
meeting. 
        
   
     
  
                   
   
  
       
       
     
       
            
        We would thus come back to the Committee with a recommendation of the exact 
size and
 maximum offering rate for each operation at or shortly after the June 
meeting.  This communication approach could be replicated in future quarter-ends 

and should provide the market 
with 
confidence in available supply around quarter-
ends, but, 
importantly
, retain some flexibility to adjust the specific parameters of the 
operations should the Committee decide to lift 
off. 
In order to maintain operational readiness with the TDF
Šboth within the Federal 
Reserve and 
among banksŠthe staff is developing plans to resume a routine, every-
other-month testing schedule that would be similar to that employed prior to the 

series of special larger test operations conducted over the 
past year. Offering rates, 
counterparty limits
, and other terms of these operations would b
e set so that the scale 
of such testing operations would be modest.  The tentative plan is to announce and 

resume the routine periodic testing beginning next month. 
Additionally, the work on implementing changes to the methodology for 
calculating interest 
payments is proceeding according to schedule.  Comments on the 
Federal Register 
notice 
are due by the middle of May.  
If there are no major issues 
raised by those comments, the staff should be in a position to implement the new 

methodology before the June 
FOMC meeting as planned. 
Your fourth exhibit begins with the focus of some market participants over the 
intermeeting period on the discussion of normalization tools 
that appeared 
in the 
March FOMC minutes.
 Contacts specifically highlighted the discussion concerning 
temporarily elevated capacity for the ON RRP facility. 
In the Desk™s April surveys, 
respondents were asked to provide their expectations for both the level of the daily 

aggregate cap and level of ON RRP demand around the time of liftoff. 
As sho
wn in the top-left panel of your final exhibit, 10 respondents expected there 
to be no cap on the ON RRP facility immediately following liftoff.  Among those 

respondents expecting a cap at liftoff, the median expectation was a cap of 

$500 billion, and all anticipated that ON RRP demand would be at or below the cap.  

Across all respondents, regardless of whether they expected a cap, the median 

expected level of ON RRP demand immediately after liftoff was $300 billion, 

unchanged from the March survey. 
However
, many respondents did update their expectations for ON RRP demand 
from the previous surveyŠ
both immediately after liftoff and 
one- and 
three
-years 
ahead.  Expectations shifted in both directions, with a number of participants moving 

their expectations by several hundred billion dollars, perhaps pointing to significant 

uncertainly about the likely level of 
take
-up. 
Respondents were also asked about 
their 
expectation
s for the variation in ON 
RRP demand over various time horizons.  They expected the variability of the ON 

RRP demand around the time of liftoff to be more elevated than recent experience, 

largely due to uncertainties over the mix of overnight and term RRPs 
as well as how 
      
    
   
    
    
    
                       
              
          
      
   
    regulatory reforms might 
affect money markets when rates rise from the zero lower 
bound. In terms of the expected levels of money market rates at liftoff, the median 
estimate across respondents for the level of the federal funds effective rate was 

35 basis pointsŠ
very close to the center of the expected target range. 
The April 
surveys also asked respondents for the probability 
they attach to the level of the 
effective rate averaging within certain ranges during the month following liftoff.  
As 
shown in the top-right panel, respondents assigned very high probabilities to the 

effective rate 
being within the target range and only a negligible probability to the 

effective 
rate 
being outside the range. 
Finally, as discussed in the memo sent to the
 Committee on April 15, we would 
like to ask the Committee to vote on the authorization to renew for another year the 

standing liquidity swap arrangements with foreign central banks and NAFA swap 

arrangements. 
While the liquidity arrangements were authori
zed for an indefinite 
period in October 2013, the FOMC has the ability to unilaterally terminate its 

participation with 
six months™ notice. 
This is similar to the NAFA swap 
arrangements with Mexico and Canada, which are renewable annually on or before 

Dec
ember 15 of each year and require 
six 
months™ notice to terminate. 
The use of liquidity swap lines recently has been sparse, as shown in the middle-
left panel, with demand limited to regularly scheduled 
seven
-day dollar auctions held 
by the 
Bank of Japan
 over year
-end and March quarter-end.  
While this is consistent 
with relatively calm conditions in 
dollar funding markets
, we believe the swap lines 
are an important liquidity backstop, helping to maintain stability and confidence in 

global funding markets.  Additionally, liquidity swap and NAFA swap arrangements 

are tangible and constructive signals of cooperation among central banks, and their 
attendant costs are minimal.
 Liquidity swap arrangements also support the approach 
that the Federal Reserve along 
with other major central banks have endorsed that 
there are ﬁno technical obstaclesﬂ to central banks™ capabilities to provide liquidity 
quickly to a systemically important financial market utility. 
Therefore, the staff 
recommends that the Committee vote to renew the liquidity swap lines and NAFA 

arrangements. 
I will now turn back to Simon to discuss the calculation methodology for the 
effective funds rate. 
MR. POTTER.  Thanks, Lorie.  As detailed in a memo circulated in advance of 
the meeting, the staff has assessed that there might be some merit in changing the 

calculation methodology underlying the federal funds effective rate concurrent with 

the change in data source to the 
FR 2420.  We are interested in the Committee™s 
initial feedback on this 
assessment. 
As you a
re aware, the federal funds effective rate is currently calculated as a 
volume-weighted mean.  That is, each observed transaction rate is weighted by the 

share of total volume transacted at this rate
, and the effective rate is the sum of these 
                         
    
             
                      
 weighted rates.
 The distribution of volume by rates for a particular day from the 
FR 2420 data is shown in the middle-
right panel. 
The 
staff
™s 
assessment is that it may be more appropriate to calculate the effective 
rate as the median (
that is
, the 50
th percentile) of the distribution rather than its mean. 
As shown in the bottom-left panel, the volume-
weighted median generates a statistic 
that is the same as
, or very close to, 
the mean at most times
 except for 
the crisis 
period.  However, on tho
se occasions 
when
 the mean and median do differ 
significantly, the 
staff
™s 
preliminary analysis shows that the median is typically a 
better measure of broad money market conditions across a wide range of situations.  

Moreover, the median is much more robus
t to invalid data.
 In general, for an invalid 
transaction to 
affect
 the median, it must have a large volume attached to it, while the 
mean can be moved by an invalid transaction that has a more typical volume and rate.  

The s
taff believes this characteris
tic of the median would enhance both the integrity 
of the effective federal funds rate as a reference rate as well its credibility as a 

monetary policy instrument. 
 We look forward to your views on this subject, and, 
based on your feedback, the 
staff may p
resent a plan to move forward at the June 
meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  T
hat concludes our remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Are there questions or comments
, particularly in 
response to Simon™s request for comments on the federal funds rate?  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I found 
that 
the staff memo and also the 
memo to Reserve Bank r
esearch 
directors
 made a pretty good case, 
to my min
d, for using the 
volume-weighted median.  I
t™s a better measure of financial conditions for all the reasons that 
you went through, Simon.  
In addition, it™s more difficult to manipulate. 
What 
I mean 
is, in 
theory, 
any trade moves a mean, whereas to move the median
, it either needs to be 
fu
rther 
away 
or bigger.  Anyway, I think it is a good case, and I guess I have two questions 
relating to 
when 
we do ﬁ
socialize
ﬂ this to the public, 
which we may not have the answers 
to today.  One is, 
will a 
median versus a mean have a differential effect on existing contracts
, of which there are many 
trillions?
  Two is, I™d be interested to hear how market participants react to this mean
Œmedian 
thing. 
I think that the potential cost that™s laid out in 
the memo is that of successfully 
communicating 
it to the public.  I don™t really see that as an insurmountable concern.  I mean, 
                       
       
   
  
    
    
                 
  
      very few people even know what the 
effective 
federal funds rate is in the first place, and the kind 
of people who know that ar
e probably able to tell the difference between a 
volume-weighted 
mean and a median if they want to and need to.  I don™t see that as a big thing, but I would 
certainly be sensitive to the views of market participants on that. 
MR. POTTER. 
In terms of the c
ontracts that are written on the 
effective 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate, if we were to pursue this, there would be a long lead time 
during which 
the market 

participants would know that the change is coming.  We would have to weigh the effect that that 

would have, an
d it would have some effect because the median is not always equal to the mean, 

but many of these contracts average over a long period of time.  
So occasions on particular days 
when 
we do see differences 
are
 probably not going to have a large 
effect
 on tho
se contracts. 
What they will be perhaps more interested in is the level of rates that you™ll be setting in 
the future.  If you think about a contract in 2016, that™s going to be very heavily influenced by 

where they think you™ll be setting the target rate. 
The
 kinds of issues to do with the gap between 
the mean and the median are very second-order, compared 
with
 that.  They also have to think of 
things 
like
, ﬁWhere would the 
effective 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate
 be trading in the range?,ﬂ and so on.  
I don™t believe this change is anything 
of 
first
-order importance for 
a contract, and it™s pretty 
typical for the uncertainty that market participants face overall in terms of trading in the fed
eral 
funds market
, which 
we know some large participants have 
left
 and s
ome other participants 
could leave in the future, 
affecting where the federal
 funds 
rate 
trades 
in the range. 
On the market participants™ knowledge of this, I agree that many people probably don™t 
know that much about the detailed calculation of 
the effective 
federal funds rate.  Those who do 
would find it pretty understandable, I believe, that we switch from a volume-weighted mean to a 

volume-weighted median, partly because one of the things that we do know is 
that 
the mean is 
       
                                    
        quite heavily influ
enced by a small transaction at a rate 
that 
is far away from where most of the 
volume is. 
MR. POWELL.  That™s helpful. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I
n the 
LIBOR 
case, the issue about really 
small changes in LIBOR from what was perceived to be a correct LIBOR pricing was considered 

a big issue. 
Here you™ve got a picture of 
a 20 or 40 basis point difference.  I
t gives me a little bit 
of pause that the people 
who
 are contracting on this might be upset by this change. 
MR. POTTER. 
In the crisis period, particularly as the balance sheet got larger, we didn™t 
have that much control over the fed
eral
 funds 
rate
, and that was an event that really was 
exogenous to the calculation method.  Whichever calculation method we would have used, there 

would have been more variance at that time.  If
, arbitrarily
, the Federal Reserve
 had turned up on 
one day and sa
id, ﬁWe are going to change that calculation method,ﬂ without any kind 
of 
forewarning, that would make payments flow differentially to what people expected.  The plan 

here is
, if there is support f
or moving forward 
with
 this, 
it will be clearly communicated well in 
advance, and it will be the type of consideration that all market participants should have to take 

into account when pricing contracts. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments?  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL. 
Well,
 I have a question now.  This 
refers 
to the expectations about the 
size of the 
ON RRP facility 
post-
liftoff. 
This is anecdotal, but it sounds like there™s a systematic 
difference between 
buy-side 
participants
, who tend to be predicting a larger facility, and primary 
                      
        
      
    
     
   dealers
, who are predicting something more in line with what the Committee has been thinking 
of saying.  
Is that accurate? 
MS. LOGAN. We do see some distinction between the two.  The median for the dealers 
is 
$190 billion at liftoff for demand.  For the buy side, 
it is 
$350 billion.  T
here is some variation, 
but there is variation within the dealer estimates as well.
  But I think you are correct that the buy 
side is skewed a bit higher. 
MR. POTTER. 
There is variation within the same 
firm
. MR. POWELL.  Are we incl
ined to attribute more or less weight to the buy side? 
MS. LOGAN.  I don™t think there™s anything in the commentary that would suggest the 
buy side has some better analytics of understanding that from what we™re reading in the 

commentary.  As Simon said, even within firms, we™re hearing the numbers to be quite different.  

In the survey, we did find that some firms had produced written reports that had different 

expectations than 
those 
who
 filled out the survey, 
so I don™t think there™s any additional 
knowledge or analytics that the buy side is drawing upon. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions or comments?  [No response]  Okay.  Then let™s turn 
to swap arrangements.  We have a proposal to renew both the NAFA swap arrangement with 

Canada and Mexico and a proposal to renew the liquidity swap arrangements.  L
et me first ask 
whether there are any questions or comments on these proposals.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d like to respectfully dissent again 
on the 
foreign swap arrangements.  
The 
Richmond 
Reserve Bank has dissented on these swap lines 
going back 20 years on the grounds that they facilitate inappropriate actions by 
the Fed
eral 
Reserve
.  One is sterilized foreign exchange operations, which are inappropriate for reasons I 
       
   
                
                     
   
    
                                                              spoke about in January.  The other is channeling intergovernmental assistance to our 
NAFA 
partners, among others, who may be well deserving of such assistance, but that constitutes fiscal 
policy that™s best left to fiscal authorities
, in our view.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments or questions?  [No response]  Okay.  Hearing 
none, seeing none, we need two separate votes
.  I™d like to first ask
Šand this is an FOMC 
voteŠon the renewal of the NAFA swap arrangements with Canada and Mexico.  All in favor? 

[Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed? 
MR. LACKER.  Opposed. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker is opposed. 
Okay.  I think that passes, and, second, 
I™d like to ask for a vote on the liquidity swap arrangements.  All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes] 

Any opposed? 
MR. LACKER.  Opposed. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Okay.  We need one more vote to ratify 
domestic open 
market operations
. Is there a motion? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Any opposed?
  [No response] 
Okay. 
We will consider those 
approved 
as well
.  Next, I think we™re going to move to our second topic, which is normalization 
procedures, and I™m going to call on Ellen Meade to provide 
a briefing. 
MS. MEADE.
2  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  I will be referring to the handout 
labeled ﬁMaterials for Briefing on Governance Issues Associated with Liftoff.ﬂ  
When you commence the normalization process, the Committee will set the 
stance of policy by announcing the new target range for the federal funds rate.  In 
addition, as you™ve discussed previously, the Committee and Board will set the 

administered rates
Šthe IOER rate will be set to the top of the new target range and 
the ON RRP rate will be set to the bottom of the new target range.  The Federal 

Reserve will also announce the details associated with the capacity of the ON RRP 
2 The 
materials 
used by 
Ms. Meade 
are 
appended 
to this 
transcript 
(appendix 2). 
            
                                      
    
          facility and the discount rate, which will be set at a spread above the top of the federal 

funds rate target range. 
Earlier this month, you received a memo outlining possible arrangements fo
r enhanced reporting of market developments and the governance of decisions on 

operational adjustments to the administered rates around the time of liftoff.  In the 

early days after the liftoff announcement, it may be somewhat difficult to get a clear 

pict
ure of how normalization is proceeding because it may take several days for some 
participants in money markets to adapt to the new market environment.  For example, 

money market participants may need to revise investment guidelines, counterparty 

limits, or other restrictions on their allocation of 
funds 
so that they are able to engage 
in the arbitrage opportun
ities available after liftoff. 
Even if the federal funds rate initially lies below the Committee™s new target 
range, you may judge that the prudent course is to monitor developments while giving 

money markets some time to adjust.  During these early days, you may find it useful 

to 
prearrange
 briefings during which the staff could provide updates on market 
developments and assess the effectiveness of pol
icy implementation, and you could 
ask questions.  For example, you could schedule daily briefings for perhaps the first 

two weeks following the liftoff announcement; such briefings could be held via audio 

or videoconference.  These briefings would not be F
OMC meetings
, so no transcripts 
or minutes would be prepared.  Should you wish to express your views about market 

developments or discuss whether to adjust the target range or the administered rates, 

the briefings could be readily converted into joint meetings of the Committee and 

Board.  If the liftoff process does not proceed as planned and the funds rate is 

persistently outside its new target range, then you would presumably wish to discuss 

the timing and course of possible policy actions, and the scheduled briefings would be 

replaced by joint videoconference meetings. 
As discussed in the memo we sent you, the FOMC and Board may also 
wish
 to 
establish decisionmaking procedures that would govern small operational adjustments 

to the administered rates after the first tw
o weeks or so following the liftoff 
announcement.  Adjustments to these administered rates could be helpful if the 

effective federal funds rate were persistently outside its new target range. The memo 

did not discuss the advantages or disadvantages associ
ated with adjusting the IOER 
and ON RRP rates, either separately or together, relative to the new target range for 

the federal funds rate.  The memo focused on the governance of any such 

adjustments, and we provided two approaches for you to consider. 
Under the first approach, each adjustment would be approved by a vote of the 
Committee or Board.  The Chair could convene a joint FOMC and Board meeting via 

videoconference at which you could discuss potential changes to the administered 

rates; all policymaker
s would be involved in the discussion of changes to the IOER 

and ON RRP rates.  Following that discussion, the FOMC would vote on any change 

to the ON RRP rate, while the Board would approve any change to the IOER rate.  A 

variation on this approach would involve policymakers using SDS to submit 

comments on proposed adjustments to one or both of the administered rates, with 
       
           
      
  
        
   
                      
   
    
          
           
 approvals for changes to the ON RRP rate and/or IOER rate recorded via notation 

votes by the FOMC and Board, respectively.  While this would be operationally less 

burdensome than holding a meeting, and would not require the preparation of 

transcripts and minutes, it would not allow for an interactive discussion and, as a 

result, might be most appropriate for relatively straightforward adj
ustments that the 
Committee had previously discussed. 
Under the second approach, you would delegate to the Chair authority to adjust 
the ON RRP and IOER rates, subject to limitations established by the FOMC and 

Board.  If the first couple of weeks of the normalization process had proceeded 

smoothly and you felt comfortable with the delegation approach, one of the staff 

briefings could be converted to a meeting at which you would formally take the 

decision to delegate authority.  You might prefer this approach to ensure that the 

Federal Reserve is able to respond quickly should market conditions warrant.  This 

delegation would allow the Chair to make small adjustments to the administered rates 

if deemed necessary to keep the federal funds rate trading in its 
new target range.  As 

an example, the memo suggested that the Chair could be authorized to make 

adjustments of perhaps 5 or 10 basis points in the administered rates and 
also 

indicated that policymakers could determine in advance whether they preferred to 

address such a situation by adjusting the IOER rate, the ON RRP rate, or both rates in 

parallel in order to maintain a constant spread between them. There may be some 

communications advantages associated with the delegation scenario in that it would 

clearly separate your decisions on the stance of policy
Šthe target range for the 
federal funds rate established by the FOMC
Šfrom small technical adjustments to the 
administered rates necessary to achieve that policy stance. 
The final page of your handout lists the questions that were distributed with the 
memo for today™s go-round on governance issues.  Another memo that was 

distributed at the same time concerned the setting of the primary credit rate.  The 

lending rate for primary credit was originally set in 20
03 at 100 basis points above the 
Committee™s target for the federal funds rate.  The spread was reduced twice during 

the financial crisis, and has stood 50 basis points above the top of the federal funds 

rate target range since February 2010.  The memo discussed two options for the 

setting of the 
primary credit rate spread:  maintaining that spread at 50 basis points 
above the top of the Committee™s new funds rate target range at the time of liftoff and 

for some period thereafter, or raising the spread to 1
00 basis points at the time of 
liftoff.  During the go-round, you may also wish to share any views you might have 

on that issue.  Thank you; this concludes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Before we turn to questions for Ellen and our go-round, I 
would like to just make a few remarks of my own.  
At the outset, I want to emphasize that 
although our policy tools, by law, have different governance structures, the overall conduct of 

monetary policy is obviously the purview of the FOMC.  The gov
ernance issues before us this 
                           
                   
       morning really don™t concern the determination of our intended stance of monetary policy.  
Rather, this discussion pertains to the narrow issue of how to make tactical adjustments to our 

policy tools to deliver the intended st
ance of policy. 
We have spent a great deal of time and effort in devising our framework for 
normalization, and I am highly confident that it will work. But it is clear that when the time 

comes to raise the federal funds rate, we will face unprecedented un
certainties, and we need to 
stand ready to make adjustments, if needed.  It is important that we agree on an approach for 

managing both the initial phase of liftoff and the process for subsequent adjustments that may 

conceivably be needed once that initial 
phase is complete. 
The staff memo proposed that, 
for the first two weeks or so after liftoff
, we set aside time 
on our calendars to receive frequent market updates and, if necessary, hold meetings to make 

adjustments to our tools through the Committee and Board votes.  During this time, the FOMC 

may need to reconsider the setting of our tools, including the administered rates, parameters of 
the overnight RRP facility, and the use of term tools.  I just want to make clear that
, in my own 
view, decisions during this initial period should not be delegated to me. 
The FOMC and Board should vote on adjustments that are deemed necessary after 
debating the relevant policy considerations and alternative approaches.  For example, if the funds 

rate is trading soft relative to the target range, the Committee should decide whether to raise both 

rates, keeping 
the 
IOER

 RRP 
spread
 constant, or to instead adjust only one of the rates.  
These decisions are not entirely tactical or routine.  My expectation, however, is tha
t after some 
initial period, which the memo is guessing might be two weeks, we will have a reasonably good 

sense 
regarding
 how our approach is working, and only minor adjustments, if any, might be 
subsequently needed to keep the federal funds rate in the t
arget range. 
              
   
         
  
    
         
   
Assuming that our approach works roughly as expected, such intensive monitoring on the 
part of the Committee shouldn™t be necessary beyond this initial phase.  We ought to be able to 
settle into an arrangement in which
, at most
, modest adjustm
ent to our tools, especially to the 
administered rates, will be called for to keep the federal funds rate in the target range.
  I hope 
that such adjustments, if they prove necessary at all, can be made in a simple and efficient 

manner.  From a practical pe
rspective, I tend to favor an approach in which authority is delegated 

to me as 
Chair to make modest adjustments, perhaps up to 5 or 10 basis points, to the IOER and 

overnight RRP rates to help maintain the federal funds rate 
in the Committee™s target range. 
These adjustments would be in accordance with a strategy pertaining, for example, to the spread 

that had been decided by the Committee.  In such circumstances, I would, of course, keep the 

Committee fully apprised of ongoing developments.  If any problems in implementing policy 

emerge
d, clearly we would need to convene a meeting. 
I would expect the Committee to decide on any such delegation only at a time when we 
feel we have a good sense for how our approach is working and n
ot at the time of liftoff. Of 

course, if many of you are not comfortable with such an arrangement, we will have to, as Ellen 

indicated, work out a method for holding Committee and Board votes, likely by notation voting, 

and possibly on short notice, to ma
ke these potential modest adjustments once the first couple of 
weeks after liftoff have passed.
  Regardless of the approach we agree on, it 
will be important that 
it serve
s to reinforce rather than undermine market confidence and our normalization approach.  
Let me stop there.  I very much look forward to hearing your views.  W
e have now scheduled a 
full go-round, soŠ
Vice Chairman
 Dudley. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
So I am going to make a forecast that we are all going to 
agree that
, at least for the first few 
weeks
, we are going to want to have some sort of 
a discussion 
            
        
             
  
        
       if the funds rate is trading outside the target range.
  If we are going to do that, I have a couple of 
questions of the staff.  
At w
hat time of day would it be most appropriate to have those meetings? 
How would it work in terms of having the meeting, making the decision, notifying the marketsŠ 

what would the timeline look like as you are carrying that forward?  Because the memo didn™t 

really get into the mechanics of how you would actually implem
ent this.  I was just curious if 
there is any thought given to that at this point. 
MS. MEADE.  I think that we were trying to be optimistic when writing the memo
.  So we were thinking about the first couple of weeks or so as being briefings and not being about 

decisionmaking. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let™s say they were 
about decisionmaking.  When will 
you know enough in the day to have a meeting, to have decided?  When would you have to 

announce it to the market? 
MR. POTTER. We are still looking at when some of the volume is transacted and also 
scheduling, because not everyone is in the same time zone.  I think 
we believe that 
later in the 
afternoon 
will work
.  And that will give us enough time to then announce to the market that 
evening what the changes would be. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay. 

MR. POTTER.  The other choice is to announce very early in the morning. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I guess I would say that
, if we agree on this, we should 
nail that down pretty soon, because, in principle, this could happen as early as June, and it would 

be helpful if people actually had the time blocked out on their calendar.  I think we need to figure 

out the time slot. 
MR. POTTER.  We are working on it. 
                             
       
               
    
  
      CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions before we begin the round?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Just to clarify your proposed approach, 
any adjustment in the first two weeks of the overnight reverse repo rate would be an FOMC 

meeting. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  I know the memo used two weeks.  I am thinking there is an 
initial period. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Until things settle down, basically. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. When we are figuring things out, and if we have to make 
adjustments, we need to meet, we need to discuss it, and during that phase, until 
we decide 
further things are
Šlet me just call them ﬁroutineﬂ
Šthere would be FOMC votes.  We would 
probably be having videoconference briefings that would be converted to meetings, and both 

groups would be voting. O
nly after whatever that initial period is 
when
 things have settled down 
would we agree 
that 
now we have fallen into a rhythm, and any adjustments, if they are needed 
at all
ŠI mean, I think 
in 
the most likely case, we are not going to need any further 
adjustmentsŠbut if we do, those things 
will be 
routine, and then we are talking about delegating. 
Let™s see.  First, President Lacker, then President Rosengren. 
MR. LACKER. 
In this initial period, would you envision all meetings, or a mix of 
briefings and meetings? 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
My understanding is 
the idea 
is that 
we are going to preschedule 
these times. 
When we start the video meeting, we will have some sense of whether things are 
going smoothly, and we really don™t have decisions to make, in which case the staff could be 

relieved of the burden of doing transcripts and so forth.  I would call that a briefing.  
But clearly, 
if things are not going very smoothly and we need to deliberate, we would convene that as a 
         
           
      
  
                  meeting 
right from the outset
.  And, I suppose, even in the middle, if something bega
n as a 
briefing, and we decided in the middle of that briefing, ﬁLook, we need to discuss something.ﬂ 
Is that fair 
to say? 
MS. MEADE.  Yes. 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
We could then say, ﬁLook, let™s convert this now to a joint Board and 
FOMC meeting.ﬂ 
MR. LACKER. 
Okay.  I ask because it has been a while since this group gathered in a 
briefing format.  I think we did it back during the crisis.  There are some rules about not saying 

something that matters, or has substance, orŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN. Well, we can™t deliberat
e. 
MR. LACKER.  That™s not quiteŠ 

CHAIR YELLEN. We can™t deliberate. 

MS. MEADE.  It is really a distinction, I believe, between asking questions and 
discussing among yourselves. 
MR. LACKER. 
If we have something to say
, like ﬁI think this means we should do 
X,ﬂ then we have to convert it to a meeting to say that? 
MR. 
POTTER
.  Well, you could pose it as a question. 
MR. ROSENGREN
.  Like in 
Jeopardy!
  You have to ask a question.  [Laughter] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I see Scott 
Alvarez is 
fretting
 back there. 
MR. 
ALVAR
EZ.  A briefing is an interaction with the staff, and you can ask questions, 
and it is for the purpose of disseminating information.  If the Committee wanted to have a 

discussion in which they are deliberating about a decision, that would be a meeting itse
lf. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 
      
          
          
                MR. ALVAREZ
.  We could set it up so that it could start as a briefing and be converted 
into a meeting, if that seemed to be the direction the Committee wanted to go in.  We can, 
as the 
Chair says
ŠI think the thought process is 
that 
we will have a pretty good idea before we set it up 
whether there is going to be a discussion, and we will just start from scratch as a meeting if that
™s the case. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Just a 
follow-
up to 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley™s question.  For how 
many of the short-term credit markets is it important to know about the closing in Europe?  A
s we think about the timing of the meetings, are there a bunch of short-
term instruments 
that
 would 
make it 
relevant to 
act
 in the morning, 
because of when Europe closes? 
MS. LOGAN. 
For the repo markets, most of that is going to be U.S. activity, and that is 
going to be early in the morning.  For unsecured fed
eral
 funds and E
urodollars
, there is going to 
be some very active trading in the ea
rly morning hours from Europe.  We saw this during the 
crisis when there was a lot of volume done early, and then there is some late-
day volume as well 
in the 
United States
.  It is going to be a mix.  We are going to do more analysis on the full pattern 
of volume data in the unsecured markets before we recommend a time of 3:30 or 4:00 or 4:30 in 

the late afternoon.  But you can think of the unsecured markets as having two trading periods, 

and the repo as being mostly very early in the morning. 
MR. ROSENGREN
.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  I was looking for a clarification.  In the context, the memo offers that 
both the 
IOER or ON RRP 
rates might be subject to these technical adjustments if we delegate 
them.  When I go back and look 
at the normalization principles, as they are described, they talk 
        
     
                 
              
          about IOER as being the primary mechanism by which we will move the funds rate into the 
target range. 
Let™s say we delegate on a technical adjustment basis 
the 
ON RRP rate
.  That 
seems to 
take care of itself.  But by delegating some adjustment to 
the 
IOER 
rate
, does that 
signal a change in policy stance in any way?  Or will it be understood that you are trying to move 

the spread in lockstep? 
MR. POTTER.  I have gotten this question quite a few times in public.  I use an idea that 
Jamie came up with, which is 
that 
everything we are doing in terms of the mechanics of lifting 

rates comes from interest on excess reserves.  We are trying to keep the overnight RRP as small 

as possible, and that me
ans it is just trying to get better trading in the arbitrage relationship 
in 
which 
you are getting interest on excess reserves. 
I view it as the primary way we are lifting 
rates.  But it is not really a measure of the stance of policy.  The stance of policy is the federal 

funds target range. 
MS. GEORGE.  Okay.  In the context of these basis points we have talked about, it 
would be understood these are technical moves, and thatŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN.  The Committee has set the target range and decided to make small 
adjustments to keep the funds rate there. 
MS. GEORGE.  All right.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Yes.  This is just a logistical question, Madam Chair.  Do I understand 
correctly that what you anticipate doing is, if we agree with the concept of having these 

prearranged 
briefings, that all of our calendars will need to be kept open for two weeks following 
each of the next I-don™t-know-how-
many FOMC meetings? 
       
     
         
                    
 MS. MEADE.  I think we were thinking initially about the liftoff 
meeting.  Oh, well, yes, 
of course. 
MR. TARULLO.  Unless you know something I don™t know.  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You™d have to prepare for the earliest meeting you might 
liftoff for, right? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I suppose
ŠI mean, people will have some conflicts,
 right? 
MR. TARULLO.  They have major ones. 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
We can™t for the next whatever meetings
ŠI mean, we can try to 
block out 
those times.  But
 some people will have trips presumably that they can™tŠI suppose if 
somebody can™t participateŠ 
MR. TARULL
O.  There are already a number of international meetings that several of us 
on the Board, 
I think
, are going to haveŠand 
Vice Chairman Dudley will have conflicts with as 
well. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s my point.  I™d prefer to get this nailed down 
sooner rather than later, so we can block out the time as efficiently as possible.  That would be 

my preference. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Maybe we can call in
ŠI mean, we normally have videoconferences, 
but conceivably we can 
call. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In the old days, 
we had telephone calls, right? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. 
Maybe we could have some telephone calls that people could 
take fromŠ 
MR. POTTER.  As long as they were secure.  That would be the 
issue. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Well, we need to work this out for sure.  Governor Brainard. 
             
               
             
      
  
  MS. BRAINARD. 
This is just 
from a communications point of view.  Would we 
communicate at the outset that the FOMC is going into the mode of daily briefings with the 
possibility that they could take intermeeting action?  Or would we simpl
y be silent on that until 
such time as we found it necessary to take an action? 
MS. MEADE.  The minutes of this discussion will reflect that you have discussed some 
of these issues. 
MR. POTTER.  I take your question as, 
ﬁLet™s be very careful,
ﬂ and I agree
 we should be 
very, very careful.  Maybe we want to think hard about how this is described, because we don™t 

want everyone thinking every day the FOMC is meeting at 4:00 p.m., and we are waiting for this 

thing to come over the wires 
about what the rates ar
e going to be the next day.  That is probably 
notŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  This is contingen
cy planning. 
MR. POTTER.  Yes.  This is a contingency plan. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
This is contingency planning for something that doesn™t 
work as well as we think i
t is going to work.  I think we want to present it in that manner. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. 
My question 
is in terms of contingenciesŠdo you anticipate that we could 
do this by notation vote?  Possibly, 
if there was a conflict
 and you 
were
 traveling, you missed the 
videoconference and 
maybe a staff member was sitting in
Šthey could give you a quick 
executive summary and then the notation vote could be done by a BlackBerry anywhere, right? 
MR. POTTER. 
Again, we would have to look at the timing exactly and tell you what that 
window is, because the meeting could go quite long.  Then we would still have to put out the 

announcement or switch to 7:00 a.m. in the morning or something. 
         
             
      
  
  
                  
     
  MR. EVANS. 
You anticipate making an adjustment in the middle of the dayŠI mean, 
for the market. 
MR. POTTER.  No, no.  After the meeting, it is probably pretty good practice to 
announce the decision.  I would feel more comfortable announcing quite soon after the 
conclusion of the meeting, rather than waiting, 
but
Š MR. EVANS.  That does put a premium on the turnaround. 

MR. POTTER. 
Šyou could have some time gap there and 
instead 
do it earl
y in the 
morning.  To 
Governor Brainard™s question, there 
are 
a lot of complications
Šif this is the way 
you want to goŠ
that w
e would need to describe to you, so you understood exactly which way 
you wanted to go. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Presumably, Simon, you would want to announce this 
the day before, because the money market trading starts very early they need to have this 

information, so they can digest it. 
MR. POTTER.  We are actively checking so you have the full information to 
make 
that 
choice. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let™s begin the go-
round.  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the first question, m
y answer 
is ﬁY
es.ﬂ It™s as simple as that. 
On the second question, regarding approaches, I actually think you laid 
out 
the approach we should take really well in your comments just a moment ago.  W
e hope we 
won™t need to do any of this, but having a 
serious meeting 
to 
discuss what is causing the 
funds 
rate to 
trad
e outside 
the target range, understanding what the effects of moving the two different 
administered rates would be, and having 
FOMC
/Board of Governors 
decisions seems like the 
right 
approach.  But once things haveŠ
I think ﬁsettled downﬂ is the phrase 
you usedŠ
I think it 
                
          
                  
      
       would be completely appropriate to delegate to you any further tweaks, plus or minus 10 basis 
points, say, to the two administered rates.  I fully support the approach that you laid out today.  
I do view this as representing prudent contingency planning more than something that I would 

expect to happen.  I am still pretty confident that we won™t have problems keeping the fed
eral 

funds rate within the range, but I think it is goo
d planning. 
I do think that one of the issues that came up 
in the questions 
asked 
in the 
past minute or 
two is really important, and that is about the communication
s in connection with 
this.  
One of the 
Committee™s long
-standing principles is that, to th
e extent possible, policy decisions regarding 
monetary policy really should be separated from technical issues associated with the 

implementation of policy.  
I™m thinking back to the good old days when the Desk had wide 
latitude to adjust the amount of 
reserves in the 
System
 in order to achieve the 
target fed
eral
 funds 
rate.  I think it would be very useful, if we canŠand this is going to be 
the 
challengeŠ
frame 
the 
communications regarding 
these adjustments t
o the administered rates so 
that 
we indicate t
hat 
these are just mostly technical decisions reflecting, of course, the decisions of the FOMC and the 

Board of Governors on the policy decisions, but really communicated as technical means to 

achieve the policy goals that we have agreed on.  
We really wan
t to avoid this perception that 
moving around these administered rates reflects some kind of shift in the stance of policy or 

creating some noise 
in connection with
 that.  I think we are doing prudent planning.  It is April 

now.  Thinking through these iss
ues now 
makes a lot of sense. 
Again, I support the approach 
that you laid out.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am in favor of delegating to the C
hair 
certain tactical decisions that en
sure that we attain the policy goals voted on by the FOMC.  This 
             
        
  
      
   
   
  
        
          is consistent with the FOMC setting strategy 
but delegating tactical implementation of monetary 
policy.  However, determining the scope and timing of that delegation should wait until we have 
a better understanding of how the constellation of short-
term interest rates will respond to our 
setting of IOER and overnight RRP 
rates 
at, and immediately following, liftoff.  I am still 
somewhat uncertain about how successfully we will be able to targe
t the federal funds rate and 
other short-
term rates at liftoff.  As a result, I could imagine a wide variety of adjustments that 
may be necessary following liftoff. 
While the federal funds rate and other short-term rates may be comfortably bounded by 
the IOER and overnight RRP 
rates
, I can easily imagine situations 
in which 
that is not the case. I 
can also imagine circumstances in which some market rates do not adjust as expected to changes 

in our policy rates. In addition, it is difficult to predict how variable policy or market rates will 

be at liftoff. 
My preferred approach, 
in light of
 my concerns, would be to have frequent briefings, 
initially following liftoff, 
along 
with the flexibility to turn those 
into 
joint FOMC
Board 
meetings, if necessary.  Once the relationship of the funds rate and other market rates to our 

tools, as well as the variability of those rates, 
is better understood, we could agree on the 
appropriate delegation of tactical decisions to the 
Chair.  
Predetermining 
our arrangements for 
delegation at this time serves little purpose
, if they are quite likely to change after liftoff. I 
recommend being humble about how much we know now about liftoff and plan appropriately to 

have significant consultation and adjustments as we develop a more practical understanding of 

the challenges of lifting interest rates from the zero lower bound. 
Similarly, it is probably premature to determine the normal relationship we expect for the 
primary credit rate.  The current spread of 50 b
asis points above the IOER rate seems an 
           
   
                  
             
  
    
    
     
appropriate spread at liftoff. We can decide to alter the spread once it is clear where the federal 

funds rate and other short-
term rates are likely to trade relative to our policy tools. 
In summary, I suggest a highly flexible policy that is highly consultative.  Once 
relationships are better understood after liftoff, we can discuss delegation of tactical decisions for 

achieving our goals.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank 
you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable with a governance 
approach that involves prescheduled staff briefings for a period 
of time after liftoff and then
, after the initial period when things appear to have settled down, delegating authority to the C
hair 
to ma
ke small technical adjustments to the ON RRP and IOER rates between FOMC meetings. 
These technical adjustments would be for the purpose of keeping the funds rate from moving 

persistently outside the FOMC™s target range.  If the Committee agrees on the del
egation 
governance structure, then this delegation of authority should be communicated at the time of 
liftoff. 
It is important that the Committee be aware of the developments in financial markets and 
the effectiveness of policy implementation after the li
ftoff announcement, and the briefings 
would be very useful in that regard.  Whether two weeks is the appropriate time for the initial 

period isn™t clear to me at this point.  If we opt to prearrange daily briefings for two weeks, we 

might also prearrange a weekly briefing for the remainder of the intermeeting period.  Of course, 

the briefings could be converted to meetings, if necessary. 
I do believe it is important that we demonstrate after liftoff that we have the tools to bring 
the fed
eral 
funds rate int
o our target range.  That may necessitate making modest changes in the 
ON RRP rate or IOER rate in a nimble way.  Delegating the decisions for these technical 

changes to the 
Chair seems appropriate. I believe we should treat the IOER rate and the ON 
      
        
   
    
   
     
         
   
   
                  
RRP r
ate symmetrically with respect to delegation.  That is, if we delegate to the 
Chair, we 
should delegate the authority to make technical changes in both rates. 
Changes that are strategic policy decisions should remain under the purview of the full 
Committee
.  These would include decisions to deploy the auxiliary policy tools, like term 
deposits and term RRPs, as well as making larger changes in the IOER and RRP rates and, of 
course, changes in the federal
 funds rate target.  
Particularly if liftoff doesn™t g
o as planned and 
the funds rate is trading persistently outside its target range, the full Committee needs to be 

responsible for making those hard choices and helping to communicate them to the public.  The 

Chair shouldn™t have to go it alone. 
The Committe
e hasn™t had a full discussion of what constitutes successful liftoff.  This 
will help inform whether a technical adjustment is needed.  Let me offer 
the view 
that liftoff will 
be successful if the federal 
funds rate is within the target range
 on most, but not necessarily all, 
days.  In my view, successful liftoff does not require that the funds rate be at the midpoint of the 
range.  
We plan to operate with a target range of 25 basis points because we don™t expect to have 
precise control over the funds rate.  Under those conditions, I don™t think we should require the 

funds rate to be close to the midpoint of the range. 
Communication of any technical adjustments is an issue.  We have indicated to the public 
that at liftoff we will continue to target a range 
for the funds rate that is 25 basis points wide and 
set the IOER and ON RRP rates at the upper and lower bounds of the funds rate target range, 

respectively. 
If we find that adjustments are necessary to keep the funds rate in the target range, 
we must 
depart from these plans in one way or another.  Presumably, this can better be handled 
if, at the time of liftoff
, we acknowledge to the public that technical adjustments to the two rates 
might be necessary and that
, as we proceed with liftoff and normaliz
ation
, the Board of 
             
       
    
                
     
 Governors and FOMC have delegated authority to the Chair to make those adjustments, and 
also 
that any technical adjustments would not constitute a change in policy.  Thank you, Madam 

Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE
 CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable 
prescheduling the staff briefings during the first few weeks following liftoff.  They can be 

canceled if they are not needed
Šall is working smoothly, for example, and the federal funds rate 
is tr
ading within 
its
 target rangeŠor they could be converted to 
joint 
FOMC
Board 
meetings 
if 
adjustments to the overnight RRP and IOER rates are needed to keep the federal funds rate in its 

target range.  Obviously, we have to retain some flexibility about how 
long this period lasts
, depending on what our experience is. 
Turning to the governance approach beyond this initial period, I very much favor 
distinguishing between changes that are tactical, such as small shifts in the overnight RRP rate 
and the IOER rat
e to achieve the federal funds rate target selected by the Committee 
and changes 
in policy, which 
are 
shifts in the target federal funds rate
Šthis 
goes to President George™s 
question. 
I think there is a long history that tactical changes needed to implement the monetary 
policy stance that has been selected by the Committee can and should be delegated either to the 
Chair or to the Desk.  If you consider how policy was implemented prior to the crisis, the Desk, 

in close consultation with Board staff, decided 
how much 
in reserves to add or drain each day in 
order to keep the federal funds rate close to its target.  For many years, presumably as a 

governance measure, there was also one FOMC member on the call
, essentially to keep an eye 
on the proceedings. 
             
               
  
        
         
          
     The d
ecision on the amount of intervention and the means of intervention was left during 
normal times to the staff, the New York Desk, and the Division of 
Monetary Affairs at the 
Board.  In unusual circumstancesŠfor example, August 2007Š
the staff consulted clos
ely with 
the Chair in making those reserve adjustment decisions.  The issue in my mind is whether 

changes in the overnight RRP and the IOER rates that are small and designed to keep the federal 

funds rate in its target range meet this tactical criteria, an
d I think they do. 
The changes contemplated would be to implement the monetary policy stance that had 
already been mandated by the Committee.  
So t
his argues for delegation.  One could even argue 
for delegation to the Desk and the Division of Monetary Affairs staff, but I don™t see any reason 

to go this far.  I would favor delegating it to the C
hair to make clear that it is receiving the 
attention it deserves by senior policymakers.
  Also, delegation to the Chair might be more 
appropriate in this particular 
case
, because such 
decisions are about the level of interest rates 
offered 
on our facilities rather than
 as in the past, on the amount of reserves we might add or 
drain. 
To implement this after the initial period, I would give the C
hair the discretion to 
move 
the overnight RRP rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points, so a range of 20 basis points, 

and the IOER rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points 
as needed to keep the funds rate 
within its target range.  The adjustments could either be in tandem to maintain a constant spread, 

or the spread could be widened or narrowed subject to those criteria. 
In contrast to the delegation of modest IOER and overnight RRP rate changes to the 
Chair, I think any other changesŠ
such as implementing 
the time depo
sit facilit
y and things like 
that or changing the size of the cap on 
the overnight RRP facility
Šshould be left to the full 
Committee. With respect to the overnight RRP 
cap, this is pretty consequential because it will 
                 
      
     
                 
         
affect
 the composition of money market flows, and also it is unlikely that changes in the 
overnight RRP cap are going to be needed on a day-by-
day basis. 
So having the Committee 
make
 these changes is not going to be particularly arduous
; they
 will probably be made on a 
much more irregular ba
sis, if at all.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Yes, I™m comfortable scheduling a bunch of 
briefings that can be converted at short notice to meetings.  I think that adjustment of the IOER 

or the overnight RRP rates 
in the first few weeks following liftoff should clearly require an 
FOMC meeting. 
I would point out that it took us almost a year to figure out how we wanted to set the 
IOER and the overnight RRP rates relative to the funds rate.  Committee members brought 

different considerations to the tradeoffs involved, and the initial settings involve a co
mpromise 
among different views about those tradeoffs.  New information about performance of thos
e settings after liftoff is likely to inform Committee members™ views about those tradeoffs and 

likely require recalibration of that compromise. 
For me
, it™s hard to imagine a routine adjustment. 
The analogy has been drawn to the 
Desk™s draining and adding reserves through open market operations
. I™d point out that it has 
taken decades for those to become as routine as they 
did.  A
nd at times 
when 
the FOMC has 
changed its operational regime, those things have been tricky at first, 
and the Committee has 

likely
, in many of those instances, been very involved.  I™m thinking about the early 1980s and 
times in the 
1970s, 
when
 the instructions to the D
esk were very different.  
It™s going to take a 
while for changes to the IOER or overnight RRP rates to be seen as routine or technical rather 

than something 
like: 
ﬁAll right, we™ve set up a new regime, w
e™re trying to calibrate the settings 
          
       
  
     
  
                        
   of these things,
ﬂ and
 the Committee needs to be involved.  W
hat I™d advocate is that we 
plan to 
make all the decisions at meetings until the first meeting at which a decision 
that is made 
appears
, in hindsight, 
to have been 
clearly 
routine; from then on we 
can delegate th
e routine of 
changing 
it. I don™t think routine changes are likely
, to my mind.  If you think about it, what™s at stake 
here is the spread
: the 
arbitra
ge margin between the funds market and 
the 
IOER 
rate
.  It seems 
like 20 basis points, 15 basis points, somewhere in there.  That doesn™t seem like something 
that™s likely to fluctuate the way the need for adding or draining reserves fluctuated on a daily 

basis.
  If it fluctuates, that™s big news if it goes to 30 or 40 basis points.  I™d be kind of surprised 
about that, and I think we™d want to get to the bottom of it.  I don™t think we have an 

understanding of those markets in which it looks like, 
yes
, they should routinely fluctuate by 10 
or 20 basis points.  I™d urge us just to plan on making these decisions at meetings.  I™m happy to 

delegate if it comes to pass that these turn out to be routine decisions that the Committee feels 
like 
delegating.  Let™s go and make one of those decisions at a time like that and then delegate 
thereafter. 
I also wanted to talk about the discount rate spread.  The discount rate spread is 50 basis 
points, and it™s irrelevant to monetary policy right now in the sense that it doesn™t limit spikes in 
the federal funds rate when reserve supply is unexpectedly shortened.  It™s not going to be 

relevant to monetary policy implementation in that sense until
Š2020, I think
, is the latest staff 
projection.  I
ts relevance now is basically for small banks that come 
up short on reserves due to 
poor planning or some unforeseeable contingency t
hat they could claim is outside their control 
but probably isn™t.  Now, large banks have 
a ton 
of reserves 
that i
nsulate them against shocks, 
and they don™t come to the window.  Right now, in our current situation of 
large reserve 
             
             
      
     
         
  
     balances, this is basical
ly about giving the incentive to small banks to manage their accounts 
sensibly. 
I think our old normal spread of 100 basis points would provide a more appropriate 
incentive, given the amounts of money involved if you actually do the overnight calculation.  
I think we should move back to 100 when we lift off.  I would favor that.  It was there.  We set 

that in 2002. We did some analysis.  There was some thought given to the tradeoff involved.  I 

think it makes sense. 
It would also signal normalization in a 
way that would be useful.   
When you talk about discount window borrowing, the word ﬁstigmaﬂ inevitably comes 
up, and the idea is advanced that, well, keeping 
the primary credit rate 
low helps reduce stigma.  
That is certainly true in the only model we have of stigma and discount window lending, but the 

survey research we™ve done as part of the a group looking at discount window issuesŠthey did 

some survey work on stigma, and what they found is that it is not a relevant consideration for 

small banks. Small banks don™t feel stigmatized. Maybe they feel stigmatized already, but they 
don™t feel as if stigma inhibits their borrowing from the window.  It™s just a big bank or 
a too-
big-
to-fail 
bank 
kind of issue, and large banks don™t borrow now.  In the 
last 
crisis
, we lowered 
the primary credit rate
 when it looked as if there was a rationale for big banks borrowing at the 
window.  It turned out they were getting all of the money they needed from 
Federal Home Loan 
Banks anyway, s
o it didn™t seem to be particularly relevant to large banks either. I don™t think 
stigma is a reason to keep the discount rate spread at 50 basis point rather than 100.  That™s the 

import of that.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank
 you.  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My reaction to the questions posed is that 
they™re really matters of pragmatism.  I agree that planning for daily briefings with the option of 
                  
          
            
         
  
         
   invoking an FOMC meeting is sensible and 
worka
ble.  I™m certainly fine with that. 
I™m a
lso 
comfortable with the approach that you laid out
, with
 the Committee and Board making the 
decisions 
the first two weeks
, and then after that
, the delegation of small adjustments. 
So I™m comfortable in both 
cases
.  There are some details yet to be worked out, and under certain 
scenarios
, we may have time to work them out.  We could hear a second version of this possibly 
down the road. 
I haven™t given a lot of thought to the discount rate question, but I™m gla
d that President 
Lacker raised it and talked about it a little bit. 
With regard to
 trying to figure out what that 
spread should be, I want to throw out one thought, 
and that is a recollection that during the crisis, 

the Federal Home Loan Banks became a so
rt of surrogate discount window.  And the 
relationship of our setting of the rates to their operations and their settings may be relevant for us 

to consider. Those are my thoughts.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
First Vice President P
richard
. MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m entirely comfortable with the 
approach described by 
the
 staff and yourself to be used for informing the FOMC on the 
effectiveness of policy implementation during the initial period after liftoff.  
I™m al
so entirely 
comfortable with the approach 
described as that
 to be used for delegating authority to the C
hair 
on tactical matters once we have declared victory on a successful liftoff. 
As it concerns the spread between 
the 
IOER 
rate 
and the discount rate, I think it™s 
actually probably best to 
quiesce 
and minimize the variability at
, and immediately after
, liftoff. 
My preference would be to stay with the 50 basis point spread until we have some separation of 

these events.
  I think the number of moving parts 
at the 
time of liftoff could work against us, 
            
   
      
           
          
       
        especially as we try to understand all of the different things that could be happening, and one 
more change, I think, that isn™t 
necessary might best be saved for later. 
I will add to the earlier discussion on 
the median and midpointŠ
a behavioral issue that I 
would just like 
the staff to consider to the extent that we talk about changing the definition of the 
fed
eral
 funds rate.  I don™t know what the behavioral reaction to that would be
.  It seems like 
when we 
whisper
, people think we shout.  I just don™t know whether people would make more of 
that than is needed, again, at the time of liftoff.  I understand we™re not contemplating the 

definitional change then, but even announcing the plan of a change could have a behavioral 

effect.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  F
irst
, with respect to the meetings and 
briefings, I guess I™m having trouble seeing what the utility of daily briefings for a couple of 

weeks would be in the circumstance 
that 
we think is likely to obtain, which is that 
there™s a 
reasonably successful liftoff. 
It seems to me more likely that 
we would want a briefing or a 
meeting on the Friday following liftoff.  T
hereafter
, I™m just not sure how much there will be to 
say unless things are going wrong, in which case, as everybody says, we™re going to actually 

need meetings and not just briefings.  
But I just note that in passing.  I know this Committee can 

fill up virtually any
 meeting that is set with questions and conversation, but I™m just not sure how 
much there will be to say other than getting emails from Simon and Lorie telling us what has 

happened on day three. 
With respect to governance, like everybody, I think, who™s spoken on this point, I favor 
giving discretion to the Chair, but actually I think I would go further than the staff though.  

Indeed, I™m going to disagree with the Chair in the interest of giving her more discretion than she 
         
   
     
                     
      
     
          
  asked for.  I guess I don™t quite understand why we wouldn™t give her discretion for this kind of 
modest change in the IOER 
rate 
or the 
ON RRP 
rate
 or both, even in the immediate post-
liftoff 
period.  It is new, but we have spent most of the p
ast year talking about how important it is to 
have a smooth and credible liftoff.  And, notwithstanding my substantial uneasiness with the 

potential medium-
term effects of a large ON
 RRP facility, I™ve joined the consensus that our 
dominant goal should be that smooth and credible liftoff, and presumably that smoothness and 

credibility are going to be most importa
nt in the immediate post
-liftoff period, which is to say the 
first couple of days.  I
t seems to me that if we regard the adjustments as 
fine
-tuning 
in pursuit of 
a particular federal funds target rate range, it would be useful to give her the discretion in that 

first couple of days to make such adjustments in an effort to get, as Loretta says, to at least the 

bottom of that range. 
If there™s a major pro
blem with liftoff, we™re going to need another full FOMC meeting.  
But suppose, for example, there™s a little bit of softness in the floor on the first day or two after 
the announced liftoff, and that softness might be firmed by a modest adjustment in the 
IOER 
rate. 
A quick action of that sort might actually buttress the credibility of our tools and intentions 
right from the outset and thereby make the whole process smoother.  
I don™t think
, in any case, 
it represents a policy change, 
because we can talk a
bout it beforehand.  Now, it™s possible that 
markets might read such a quick adjustment as indicating that we lack confidence in the efficacy 
of the decision we had just made a day or two before.  But that™s a judgment that the Chair could 

make in consultation with those best able to discern what market sentiment and intentions may 

be. 
Just by indicating that nimbleness is a 
desideratum
, I think I™ve already explained 
why an 
FOMC decisionmaking process 
won™t 
do the trick.  I just think the logic of what we™re talking 
            
    
    
                 
           
              
     
     about here argues for giving the C
hair this kind of very limited discretion to adjust those two 
rates that we™ve been talking about and 
we will set at the time of liftoff in the period 
in which 
they might be most efficacious in changing or shaping perceptions of how this whole process is 
going to go. 
As to communication, it does seem to me proper to indicate in advance that small, 
operational adjustments might be made in the IOER and ON 
RRP rates between meetings. 
Characterizing those as op
erational adjustments beforehand and contemplating them
, I think
, helps reinforce the sense 
that 
these are technical changes rather than policy changes. 
The 
suggestion that any actual changes be noted by the D
esk, as opposed to 
the Chair or 
the 
Committee 
as a whole, also seems to me a good idea since it would reinforce the fact that these 
rates are more or less operational changes rather than policy changes. 
On the primary credit rate spread, I thought 
President Lacker
™s comments were very 
interesting.  No
twithstanding the fact that they are interesting and we should think about them, 
particularly this difference between 
small
 and large bank stigma when we do discuss this, I 
personally would prefer to wait until the staff thinking about stigma effects and perhaps other 
elements of the discount window are done and maybe a more fulsome memo 
has been 
produced 
and circulated so 
that 
we can have a discussion of that.  It seems to me we™ve got plenty on our 

plate right now, and we might usefully put that conversation off just a bit. 
I want to end by saying I hadn™t thought about it this way, but I fully endorse what 
Loretta said about the criteria for success in how we regard the meeting of the target range post
-liftoff, and I think if we all subscribe to that, it 
would be useful for us, through appropriate 

mechanisms
, to get that expectation out as well so that we™re being evaluated by commentators 
and markets in a manner consistent with what our actual intentions and aims are.
  Like 
President 
      
                    
       
  
      
          
       
    Mester
, again, this is another reason why I think 
these little adjustments even right after liftoff 
are fine for the 
Chair to make
.  And, 
like 
President Mester
, I think using any of the other tools is 
something that should involve the entire Committee.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Did I see a two
-hander?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Like Governor Tarullo, I came to the 
meeting prepared to support delegation in the first two weeks.  I interpreted your earlier 
suggestion as, 
one, respect for governance in a critical period and, 
two
, maybe a desire to have 
more of a group decision than an individual decision.  Could you maybe speak more for another 

moment or two on what your thinking is regarding that? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I feel 
that 
in the days after liftoff, if things are not going exactly as 
we intend, and the funds rate is drifting outside the range, I do really think it™s appropriate for the 

entire Committee to meet, discuss what is happening, try to get 
to the bottom of what the 
problem is, and decide on what the approach is. 
Now, we 
could make the decision 
that
 this is no big deal, the funds rate 
is just fluctuating 
around relative to the target range 
by 
more than we had anticipated and this is the ﬁnew normal.ﬂ 
If we 
want
ed 
to address it 
not by moving the band or changing the spread, but by moving one or 
more rates around to deal with this when we see persistent movements outside the range, and 

early on the Committee says, ﬁLet™s just do this. It™s not that big 
of 
a deal
.  That™s the way to 
address this
ﬂŠand at that point you regard those adjustments as essentially routine, and 
it™s early
, and then you want to delegate it along the lines of what Governor Tarullo said, 
I am 
perfectly comfortable with that, and
, of course, 
that makes life easier.  But I think the Committee 
needs to feel comfortable that we have established procedures that have been determined by the 

Committee that we think are workable and appropriate. First Vice President Holcomb. 
             
        
       
                
MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the staff briefings issue, I say by all 
means they should be useful and perhaps important.  If it should turn out that between the 
regularly scheduled FOMC meetings the funds rate begins to trade frequently below the 

overnight reverse repo r
ate for a reasonably sized ON RRP facility, I support the 
Chair having 
limited discretionary authority to restore 
funds rate control by raising both the IOER and the ON 
RRP rates while maintaining the spread between the two rates.  I agree with Governor Ta
rullo 
that this could be within the first days as well. 
That these rate changes are not to be subject to a 
vote would signal that they are technical adjustments designed simply to implement previously-

agreed
-upon policy.  The main focus would stay on the 
target band for the federal funds rate set 
by the FOMC. 
The simplicity of a system in which the IOER and the ON RRP rates are set equal to the 
top and bottom of the target funds rate band, respectively, is appealing and easily communicated.  

Deviations from that simple system should be temporary with 
reserve
-draining tools
, like term 
deposits and term RRPs, being brought to bear 
whe
n systematically greater interest rate control 
is required. 
I understand that we are entering uncharted territory and may need to act nimbly.  
Therefore, a good solution is for the FOMC and the Board to give the C
hair discretionary 
authority to adjust the IOER
ŒON RRP band relative to the funds rate target range between 
meetings while maintaining the width of the band at 25 basis points.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The staff has laid out a perfectly reasonable 
plan for prescheduled briefings during 
the first two weeks after liftoff.  I expect the process will 

go smoothly and these will end up like routine morning calls.  
If problems arise, I am 
                             
      
          
   
              comfortable with turning the briefings into formal teleconference meetings to handle any policy 
decisions we may have to make. 
After the initial burn
-in period
Šperhaps two weeksŠI also favor the Board and the 
Committee delegating a
uthority to the 
Chair to adjust the IOER and ON RRP rates by up to 5 to 
10 basis points, if necessary, to keep the funds rate within the target range.  I am comfortable 

delegating this authority as early as you™d like.  Even at the outset would be all righ
t with me. 
Basically, these are efficient ways to tweak the dials as necessary, and I see a communications 
advantage to this approach, 
as it reduces the odds of small technical adjustments to 
the 
IOER or 
the ON RRP 
rates being misread as changes in the st
ance of policy.  I completely trust that if any 
major issues arise
, the Chair will not hesitate to bring us in on the decisionmaking process. 
I did have a question.  I can™t remember if this was in the documents or other people have 
mentioned this, but at the time of the first liftoff, would we be comfortable preannouncing that 

we have no intention of adjusting the stance of monetary policy before the next policy meeting 
so that any intermeeting adjustments would be seen as nimble adjustments, just technica
lly to get 
the funds rate in the range? I mean, I can™t imagine that we would really think that we are going 
to have to have a policy tightening in between the first and the second meeting.  But it would be 

unusual, I understand that. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Certainly
, we should make clear that we have an intended target 
range that reflects policy and stand prepared to make adjustments in the administered rates
, and 

that we 
may need to do that. 
MR. EVANS. 
You can say that in your press conference rather than 
it finding its way 
into the statement. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
           
   
              
    
                   
     
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m not entirely comfortable 
with the 
pre
-commitment
 approach that President Evans outlined.  As the Vice Ch
air
man
 talked 
about in some of the remarks he made 
publicly in the intermeeting period, we don™t know 
exactly what is going to happen to financial market conditions necessarily at the time of liftoff.  

If we saw a 
very abrupt tightening in broader financial market conditions, there might be a 
reason for the Committee to think about retracing the steps they have taken, even 
within
 the 
intermeeting period.
  I thought it was an interesting idea, but I, myself, wouldn™t be comfortable 
with that.
  Thanks. 
CHAIR 
YELLEN.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would be happy to set my calendar for 
prescheduled staff briefings during the first two weeks to offer some insight, and I would be 

equally happy to remove them [laughter] 
if the staff judg
es that everything is going smoothly and 
there is nothing to report.  I am also comfortable delegating to the Chair a degree of authority to 
make technical adjustments, and I think we will know whether those are technical or more 
substantive as we go along
. On the issue of the 
discount rate spread, my comments here really are along the lines of 
President Lacker™s
ŠI think this issue doesn™t have much effect right now on overall financial 

market conditions.  But we did make changes to the discount rate during 
the crisis to narrow the 
spread and then widened it to its current 50 basis points.  
Smaller banks do regularly use this 

facility, and Boards of D
irectors 
of the 
Federal 
Reserve 
Banks 
are required to make 
recommendations about the rate. 
It seems worthwhi
le to me to clarify how this rate is going to 
work as we contemplate normalization so that we minimize confusion and perhaps even mixed 

signals at the time of liftoff. 
Thank you. 
              
           
       
       
    
       CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank 
you, Madam Chair.  I appreciate the thoughtful 
analysis and the memos that discuss the intermeeting governance of the IOER 
rate
, ON RRP 
rate, and other policy tools during the early weeks of liftoff.  I thought that the approach 

described of scheduling dai
ly staff 
briefings during those first few weeks is prudent and should 
meet our needs initially, given that we could convert them to official meetings as needed. 
One thing I would note is that it might not always be clear what it would mean to ﬁ
settle 
down,ﬂ so if liftoff takes place, say, in mid-
June or mid
-September, things might settle down 
after the passage of 
quarter-end and then you might have this issue of whether that is really 
settling down from the point of view of being able to deal with quarter-e
nd.
  You might want to 
have staff briefings, again, scheduled for the end of the following quarter, which I guess, 
if we 

raised in September, would be at the end of December.  
I think just the passage of time is not 

necessarily going to tell you 
that this 
is going to be working and working fine.  I think that is 
something to keep in mind as we go forward. 
The staff memo noted that there are quorum rules for the Committee.  Those might be 
useful in the context of these staff briefings.  Not everyone needs to be here for every meeting, 

and the Committee still can operate. 
That might come up in this situation.  I didn™t say this at the 
very beginning, but I should say that I am very confident that this is all about contingency 

planning.  
I am confident the too
ls are going to work.  I think these 
meetings 
are going to 
become
 boring very quickly.  It is going to be like the call.  Not to say that™s boring, butŠ 
[laughter]Š
I misspoke.  But it will become routine
, at least
.  T
hat™s our base
line 
scenario, but I 
do think it™s useful to engage in this contingency planning. 
      
                 
   
      
            
              
   
  I think I am going to be in the minority on my next point, which is, can we trans
ition 
to a 
situation 
in which 
we simply delegate so
-called technical decisions to the 
Chair? 
Here I am not 
supportive of that delegation, and my answer there is shaped by three considerations. First, when 
my staff and I thought about the context in which increases in the ON RRP rate would be 

considered, we weren™t sure that those situations would be that technical 
per se 
or tactical.  It 
seemed like those would be situations 
in which the effective fed
eral
 funds rate would be below 
the bottom of the target range, and that seemed likely to occur in conjunction with the cap on the 

ON RRP volume being binding.  Then there would be some interaction, 
at least
, in your 
discussion about raising the ON RRP rate, and also discussion about raising the cap.  Now, the 

cap is a big deal.  We have talked about that at length.  The Committee certainly has strong 

views about that.  I
t just 
immediately seemed to bring substantive issues into play. 
The second con
sideration is that, a
s I listen to people talk about analogies with the past, if 
we were talking about delegating to the staff, I would almost be more comfortable 
with that 
than 
delegating to the C
hair.  
[Laughter] 
I say that because 
I think 
if 
it is routine enough to be 
delegated to staff, we can delegate it to the staff.  This is clearly not routine enough to delegate to 

the 
staff.
  This is about the Committee deciding tha
t a decision
, which is not sufficiently routine 
to delegate to the staff
, is being delegated to the Chair instead.  T
hat is not something I feel as 
comfortable with. 
Third, basically, there is an issue here of precedent.  This is not about this C
hair.  I f
eel 
perfectly comfortable with you, Madam Chair, and your 
discretion in this matter.  But future 
Committees may not have that level of comfort with future 
Chair
s in related situations.
  Getting 
together for meetings is hard and challenging.  It is always easy to delegate, and I think we want 
             
    
    
                      to fight that tendency, especially in view of how easy modern technology makes it to pull 
together a quorum of the Committee for substantive discussion and deliberations. 
For these reasons, Madam Chair, I recommend that 
the Committee not delegate authority 
for intermeeting adjustments to the 
Chair.  Again, this is all about contingency planning, but I 
think the Committee could make contingency plans to vote, as needed, between scheduled 

meetings, be it by telephone, vide
oconference, telepresence, secure lines
Šall of the other 
suggestions that are out there. 
A quick comment on the primary credit spread.  I thought the idea of doing more research 
and work on this was a very interesting one.  At liftoff, especially if we are going to be doing 

liftoff in the near term, 
the JuneŒ
September 
time frame
, I would favor keeping the 50 basis point 
primary credit spread at that time, then continuing 
to do work on the issue before we decide.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President 
Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I just want to mention 
that 
there has been some loose talk about 
comparing the timing of th
ese briefings
 to the morning call, and I am not in favor of tying them 

to the morning call.  Let me be clear on that. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Notice 
when I was faced with that
, I devised a way to end the 
requirement thatŠ 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I call that leadership by
Š CHAIR YELLEN. 
Thank you.  [Laughter] 
MR. EVANS.  So it can be done?  That™s what you™re saying? 

CHAIR YELLEN.  It can be done.  It only took 50 years, butŠ 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It can be done. 
       
    
                
          
  
  
        CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Generally speaking, I™m comfortable with 
the 
prescheduled
 staff meetings.  Based on the discussion here, I™m wondering whether we need 
one every day.  Maybe twice a week
ŠI™m picking up on some of the comments of Governor 
Tarullo.  I™m not sure how much information you™re going to get from Tuesday to Wednesday.  

You could probably review this a couple of times a week. 
Also, picking up a little bit on themes 
Vice Chairman 
Dudley was talking about, could 
you do this with a subcommittee of the FOMC? Do you really have to have the entire 

Committee reviewing what is s
upposed to be a technical issue?  You could bring the whole 
Committee in
, if necessary, but if everything™s going okay, 
it seems that it
 could be done by 
subcommittee.  That™s something to think about. 
On the governance approach, the 
first part 
was
, should 
we have a vote of the FOMC to 
adjust ranges
? I view this as pretty cumbersome for something that™s supposed to be a technical 
issue.  It sounds nontechnical
. It makes it sound like it™s a policy change regardless of what we 
say, and so I see that
 as a difficult way to go. 
Now, for the C
hair™s authority o
f 5 
or 10 basis points, first of all, I think that moving 
these ranges should be subject to a high bar.  That™s one of my main comments.  
You 
really don™t 
want to do this unless you really have to 
because of
 the communications issues that we™re going 
to encounter.  The payoff to doing this is ultimately pretty low.  
For instance
, maybe the 
fed
eral 
funds 
rate is trading a few basis points below the range
, and now you make this move.  Now the 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate 
moves into the bottom part of the range.  So you™ve 
gained a few basis points, 
but at the expense of markets asking, ﬁWhat are you guys doing?  Are you changing policy?ﬂ 
      
             
  
    
         
     
      
  
   
   
                
 Another question I have that has not come up yet is the authority to go 5 to 10 
basis 
points over what time horizon.  Would you be able to go 5 basis points and then the next week 
another 5 
basis points
, and the next week another 5 basis points? 
I don™t think that™s the intent, 
but that™s something you™ve got to think about here.  And if you went the full 10 basis points and 

it didn™t work
, then I guess the whole Committee would have to come in at that point. 
I see a core problem here
, which we™ve talked about before in our discussions.  The 
Committee insists o
n saying that the f
ederal funds rate is the policy rate, but relatively few trades 
are occurring at that particular rate. 
According to the Committee, 
the IOER rate 
is not the policy 
rate, but, on the other hand
, that is the rate that affects the largest banks in the country
, and it 
affects their funding costs.  And, in other contexts, we have said IOER is our workhorse rate. 
And then you™ve got overnight RRP, which we™re also saying is not a policy rate, but 
which 
is for a market that 
has many traders and 
that 
is potentially 
large at the time of liftoff.  So 
we might say that the 
policy rate is the federal funds rate, but what does 
that 
mean to markets? 
It™s really the markets that are saying what the policy rate is, and if they think moving these other 

rates is more importa
nt than where the fed
eral 
fund
s rate is trading, then we
™ve changed 
policy in 
a macroeconomic sense. 
So, I think this is a conflict, but that is part of the situation we™re in
, given the way we™ve 
decided to do this.  I think it does have potential to sound like a policy move to people inside 

financial markets even though we™re saying, well, the federal funds rate range has not changed 

and so we haven™t done anything different.  The bottom line is 
that I am worried about 
communications issues. Because of t
hat, I don™t think you want to do this unless it™s absolutely 
necessary.  You know, overall I would say 5 to 10 basis points 
per inter
meeting period is okay 
             
             
                           
  
 with me.
  I would agree with President Rosengren that 
it might be premature to decide on this 
today.  You could make the delegation decision later around the time of liftoff, 
if necessary. 
Let me finish with one story that 
old-
timers
 here around the Fed
eral Reserve 
will 
remember from the early 1990s.  I am going to mention ﬁHe-Who-Must-Not-Be-N
amed
,ﬂ who 
is 
former Chairman Alan Greenspan.  At the time, 
it was considered that the 
Chair
man
 had 25 basis 
points on the federal funds rate target and that the 
Chair
man
 could make that adjustment during 
an inter
meeting period without consulting the Committee.  And the Chair
man 
at that time made a 
bunch of those moves and then came into the meeting and said, ﬁNow that I™ve made the move, 
now we don™t have to move at the meeting.ﬂ  This was extremely hot and divisive on the 

Committee in the early 1990s.  We don™t want to get into any kind of situation like that, and I 

know that™s not your intention, but it is a bit of a slippery slope:  What™s going to be delegated? 

Who™s agreed to it?  How much have you agreed to?  Under what circumstances? 
It is a very 
tricky issue
, and it has been a situation in the past on this Committee that has been problematic 
from a collegiality perspective. 
I know we™re not really thinking about anything like that, but I think 
it is a bit of a 
slippery slope.  You™ve got this issu
e about what rates really matter versus what rates 
we are 
calling the policy rate, and you™ve got this precedent in the past 
whe
n it didn™t go so well.
  Thank 
you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 
MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Cha
ir.  I™m comfortable with the governance 
approach in the first two weeks of scheduling daily staff briefings, but I assume that we™ll 

quickly work out whether we need them every day and we can probably unschedule a few of 

them within a day or two.  S
o I th
ink there™s some flexibility the
re.                 
          
           
    
   
  With regard to the governance approach for technical adjustments in the IOER or ON 
RRP rate
s, I don™t know about previous Chair
men
.  I™ve only had one Chair in my life on the 
Board, and my experience with th
at Chair is t
hat if there is going to be any question about a need 
for discussion, she will call for it.  I haven™t detected her trying to get around the FOMC or the 
Board, and I think we can rely on that.  So I™d be perfectly willing to give the C
hair 
an 
adjustment up to 10 basis points.  I agree that 
we need to specify that 
the discretion would be 
granted 
between meetings. 
I™m not sure about the wisdom of constraining the gap between the 
ON RRP and IOER 
rates to 25 basis points. We may find reasons 
why
 we need to move one without moving the 
other, and my general approach is, don™t constrain yourself if there™s no need to constrain 

yourself, because the law of unintended consequences is very powerful. 
On the primary credit rate, I agree with those who think we should t
ry to minimize the 
number of adjustments we make at the time of liftoff, and that this issue is sufficiently important 
for banks to which we give a lot more 
attention than their size would imply.  I™m not sure why 
we would want to start by raising the cost of borrowing by 50 basis points for the smaller banks 
who do borrow at that rate, and we™d need to look at what would happen when we raise the rate.  

And so, for both reasons, 
I favor examining that after liftoff. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  T
hank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m very well aligned with the 
Chair™s 
original comments and additional comments and response to Governor Tarullo™s and 
President 
Lockhart™s points, and with many others around the table as 
well. 
As for the briefings, I think it is fine to schedule them, and if we have them I™ll attend 
them, but I think the only case in which we would actually want to have them is if things are 
         
    
      
              
                 
    
    really not going well.  A
nd I don™t expect that that is likely at
 all in a world in which 
we have 
taken the cap off the overnight RRP or, for that matter, put a very high cap on. 
As far as delegation is concerned, if 
the test is adjustments that are 
routine or 
technical 
in nature
, I completely trust the 
Chair™s instincts on that. I will say that 
if what we™re dealing with 
is a very difficult and failed liftoff situation, I don™t think
, in real time
, that™s going to feel either 
routine or technical.  I think it™s going to feel like something that all of us ought to be involved in 
and accountable for.  I also would not constrain ourselves by holding this space between the 

IOER and 
the 
ON RRP rates
 at 25 basis points.  It might make sense to do something different, 
again, in real time. 
So, for all of that
, I think it™s essentially impossible to anticipate all of these 
things, and I would just say 
that 
I will do what is reasonable at the time. 
In terms of the primary credit facility, it is 
an interesting subject on which 
we can have a 
lot of debate.  I would
n™t touch it until well after liftoff. 
In my view, it™s just not a complication 
that we
, in my view
, need to be taking on right now.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 

MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
the proposal. I think it™s very 
important for us as Committee members to take responsibility for actively being engaged in 

assessing the effectiveness of monetary control and the relative roles of the IOER and the ON 

RRP rates 
in maintaining the federal 
funds rate in the target range for some initial period.  The 
length of that period, I think, should be determined by events.  My guess is 
that 
if the decision to 
lift off is made coincident with a meeting with 
a press conference, as seems very likely, I wo
uld 
expect that period of active involvement to span that quarter-end, but beyond that, 
I think it 
would be unwise to be too prescriptive at this point. 
         
   
  
             
                 
  
    
   
  
  
       
                                                         
  
 When market functioning has settled down, it will be appropriate to delegate to the C
hair 
the authority 
to make the necessary changes to the levels of the IOER and the ON 
RRP 
rates
, or possibly to the spread between them, 
in order to maintain effective monetary control.  I think the 
Committee can make that decision once it judges that the frequent briefings
 and meetings no 

long serve 
the
ir purpose, along with the parameters of the delegation.  
It™s very important that we 
carefully manage communications 
regarding the heightened vigilance and possible activity of the 

Committee and the Board during those initial weeks so that 
our 
communications bolster 
confidence in the normalization process and contribute to smooth market functioning. 
With regard to the appropriate level of the primary credit spread, I would be open to a 
recommendation from the 
staff as to retu
rning it to 
pre-
crisis levels
.  But like many others around 
the table, I would want to put some distance between the timing of liftoff and the 
timing of 
possibly changing that spread so as not to further complicate our 
already challenging 
communications around the time of liftoff.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
I think this has been a very useful discussion.  Let me 
say the Board meeting is now adjourned.  We™re ready to go on to item 3, and I suggest 
we have 
the economic briefings and then 
we™ll 
take a coffee break before going into our round.  L
et me 
turn things over to Bill Wascher
. MR. WASCHER.
3  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll be referring to the top exhibit 
on your pile, which is labeled ﬁMaterial for the U.S. Outlook.ﬂ  The data on spending, 
production, and hiring that we received since the March Tealbook were all weaker 

than we expected.  On the spending side, the February PCE data and March retail 

sales report led us to make a sizable reduction in our estimate of first
-quarter real 
PCE growth.  This downward revision to consumer spending accounts for much of 

the downward revision to first-quarter real GDP growth shown in panel 1 of your 

forecast summary exhibit.  In addition, a number of other categories of spendingŠ 

particularly business investment and residential construction
Šhave also surprised us 
to the downside in recent months, as have the incoming data on factory output.  I 

would note that after the April Tealbook was closed, 
we received the advance report 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
         
        
     
     
   
              
   
  
                
          on capital goods orders and shipments for March, which was also weak but broadly in 

line with our expectations. 
One of the crucial questions that we faced
Šand that you face as well
Šwas how 
to interpret this batch of disappointing news, and wheth
er, in particular, it is best seen 

as just another 
hicc
up in a recovery that fundamentally remains on track toward 
achievement of your policy objectives, or the leading edge of a more serious 

slackening in the pace of recovery.  For the most part, we have 
leaned toward the 
former interpretation.  Accordingly, our projection calls for near-
term real GDP 
growth to return to a pace that is not too different from our March forecast.  In 

particular, although it is difficult to quantify their influence precisely, 
we believe that 
several transitory special factors
Šincluding unusually severe winter weather and 

production disruptions related to labor disputes at West Coast portsŠ
were a small 

drag on first-quarter real activity.  In addition, we think that measured fi
rst
-quarter 
GDP growth will be held down a bit by seasonal adjustment issues that affected 

estimates of state and local construction spending and by a distortion in the BEA™s 

translation of retail sales to PCE associated with the steep decline in gasoline prices 

and the increased share of gasoline sales at large retail establishments such as Wal
-Mart.  We do not judge any of these factors to be exerting a large influence on their 

own, but as a group, our 
back
-of-the-envelope calculations 
put the effect at a
bout ¾ percentage point. 
That said, we have not completely discounted the weaker-
than
-expected incoming 
data.  Specifically, we trimmed our estimate of consumption growth in the second 

quarter a bit as a result of the weaker
-than-
expected March retail sale
s report, and we 
made a noticeable downward revision to our projection 
of 
near
-term residential 
construction activity in response to the lack of a significant pickup in starts and 
permits in March.  We also lowered our forecast for nonresidential structures 
spending, as the latest data on drilling activity suggest that the recent drop in oil 

prices is having a larger effect on drilling and mining investment than we had 

previously anticipated.  Because we believe that the fundamentals underpinning 

household spending remain solid, we continue to expect that real GDP will rise at a 

pace that exceeds our estimate of potential output growth over the remainder of the 

year.  Even so, the 
level 
of real output at the end of this year is almost ½ 
percent 
lower than in our March forecast. 
As a way of providing another perspective on the near-term outlook, panel 2 
presents the results from the Board staff™s dynamic factor model.  This model uses the 

information from a large number of activity and price indi
cators to generate forecasts 

of near-term real GDP growth, and it was among the specifications we showed you in 

the April Tealbook box on nowcasting models.  As you can see, using the data that 

we had available when the April Tealbook was closed, the model 
also predicts a very 
low GDP growth figure for the first quarter followed by a modest pickup in the 

current quarter.  Of course, the model does not know about any of the special factors 

that we think will unwind and provide an additional boost to growth this quarter.  And 

I would note that the range of predictions for first-quarter growth coming from the 
                  
      
              
              
           
         various nowcasting efforts across the System is quite wide, underscoring the 

uncertainty surrounding the interpretation of the pace of activity last quart
er. 
To wrap up the discussion of the near-term spending data, I would remind you 
that we will receive the BEA™s advance estimate of first
-quarter real GDP tomorrow 
morning.  Given how low our current point estimate isŠ
and in light of the relatively 

large degree of uncertainty that surrounds these estimates
, even on the eve of a 

release
Šit would not be especially surprising from a statistical point of view if we 

were to see either a small decline tomorrow or a noticeably stronger increase than we 

have pencil
ed in.  And, of course, the BEA™s initial estimate is itself subject to 
substantial revision over time. 
Moving to the middle panels, the labor market has continued to improve, but here, 
too, the data point to somewhat less momentum than we had anticipated in our 

previous forecast.  In the establishment survey, March total nonfarm payroll 

employment growth was considerably weaker than the very strong pace that we had 

expected
.  I
ncorporating revisions to previous months, the average monthly change in 
payroll employment over the first quarter now stands at about 200,000, which is 

70,000 less than we had written down in the March Tealbook.  The news from the 

household survey also came in a little weaker than we had anticipated:  The 

unemployment rate held steady at 5.5 
percent in March
Šwe had expected it to tick 
down one-
tenth
Šwhile the participation rate, which we had expected to hold steady, 
edged lower. 
To summarize the information from the various pieces of labor market data that 
we have received, panel 3 shows our labor market conditions index, or LMCI.  As 

you can see from the inset box, the LMCI was basically flat last month
.  For the first 
quarter as a wholeŠthe rightmost 
bar in the main chart
Šthe index did increase, but 
at a slower pace than what we have seen in recent quarters.  Just as we did with the 

spending data, we took a modest signal from the incoming labor market news and 

reduced our projected pace of monthly payroll job growth by about 40,000 over the 

current quarter.  We also nudged up our forecast for the unemployment rate in 

coming months. 
Over the remainder of the medium term, our projection 
of 
real GDP growth is 
little revised 
from
 March.  The main conditioning factors that we built into the 
baseline forecast this round
Šparticularly
, the low
er projected path for the exchange 
value of the dollarŠare, on net, expected to be slightly more supportive of real 

activity.  By the end of the medium term, the effects of these changes offset roughly 

half of the downward revisions we put through to the near term, leaving the level of 

real GDP just a little lower relative to our March projection. 
Although it had only a small effect on our projection regarding 
real activity, I 
would point out that we now assume that the federal funds rate will lift off from 
its effective lower bound in September, one quarter later than in our previous forecast.  

Our revised liftoff assumption is broadly consistent with both the ﬁflashﬂ primary 

dealer survey that was taken after the March FOMC meeting and the latest dealer 
        
   
    
  
     
                     
                                      
                                                           
 survey, and 
it is more consistent with the timing suggested by financial markets. In 
addition, as best we can tell, a September liftoff date does not appear to be sharply at 

odds with FOMC participants™ March SEP submissions, in which the median 

participant 
pointed to the third quarter as the most likely quarter for liftoff.  After 
liftoff
Šand consistent with our usual practiceŠthe projected path for the funds rate 
is set by mechanically applying an inertial version of the Taylor (1999) 
policy rule. 
Panel
 4 gives our projected path for the unemployment rate.  With the level of real 
GDP at the end of the medium term only a little lower relative to March
Šand with no 
change to our supply-side assumptions this roundŠthe unemployment rate is 

expected to be 5.1
 percent at the end of 2017.  T
his is 
one-
tenth 
higher than its level 
in the March Tealbook and one-
tenth 
below our estimate of its natural rate.  The slow 
pace of decline in the unemployment rate reflects both the modest pace of GDP 

growth projected over the medium term and our assumption that the strengthening 

labor market will draw more individuals back into the labor force. 
Panels
 5 and 6 summarize the inflation outlook.  The incoming data on price 
inflation have been a touch above our expectations and supp
ort our projection that 
both total and core inflation will step up in the second quarter.  Further out, the 

inflation projection is little revised
.  A
s in previous Tealbooks, we expect 
that 
inflation 
will 
gradually move higher as resource slack diminishes, 
energy prices rise, 
and prices for imported goods turn up again. 
Finally, I wanted to call 
your attention to a change we 
made this round to how we 
characterize forecast uncertainty 
in the Tealbook.
 Specifically, we have revamped 
the methodology that we use to compute confidence intervals 
based on our historical 
projection errors and have also reworked our presentation of these intervals to include 

a comparison with the historical 
range of key forecast variables.  The new intervals 
are typically a little w
ider than the ones we reported previously, and they tend to 
show 
more asymmetry, which is most notice
able in the prediction 
interval 
surrounding the unemployment forecast.  When we 
miss big on unemployment, it 
tends to be because unemployment turns out to have been much higher 
than expected, 
not much lower.  Additional details 
on this new 
methodology were presented in a box 
and associated technical 
appendix in 
the Risks and Uncertainty section of the 
Tealbook and in Jeremy Nalewaik™s pre
-FOMC briefing.  The
se new intervals 
complement our other methodology of using stochastic simulations from the FRB/US 

model to produce confidence intervals around our projection, and we intend to show 

both sets of 
uncertainty measures in future Tealbooks.  I would note 
that 
the 
confidence 
bands shown in my exhibit today continue 
to use the FRB/US 
measures, 
but our intention is 
to eventually extend the new 
methodology to compute confidence 
intervals 
around our quarterly forecasts as well.  Steve will continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.
4  Thank you, Bill.  The harsh weather we endured last winter left 
many potholes in U.S. roads and, as Bill 
Wascher has described, helped create one 
large pothole in U.S. GDP growth.  Interestingly, as shown in panel 1 
of my 
4 The materials used by Mr. Kamin are appended to this transcript (append
ix 4). 
                
    
        
         
          
  
    
                      
    presentation on the international outlook, a pothole also appears in the path of foreign 

growth in the first quarter.  Incoming data have been surprisingly weak in countries as 

diverse as Canada, which shared our harsh winter
; China, which was 
actually 
warmer 
than usual
; and Malaysia, which arguably has no winter at all.  As shown in panel 2, 
the downturn was also evident in global trade, suggesting some underlying malaise 

that was sweeping the globe. 
As indicated by the yellow bars in panels 1 and 2, we faced a very similar p
icture 
exactly a year ago, with U.S. growth, foreign growth, and global trade all turning 

down in the first quarter of 2014.  Accordingly, I went back and looked at my 

remarks for the April 2014 FOMC meeting for lessons that we might apply here.  

First, I 
found that I used the same tired pothole metaphor a year ago.  [Laughter] 
Second, at that time, I also predicted that foreign economic activity would clamber 

out of its pothole and resume moving along the path to recovery, just as Bill 
Wascher 
did for the United States.  Unusually enough, we both turned out to be right, and we 

are making the same call today. 
Certainly, the fundamentals favor a return to solid growth abroad:  Monetary 
policy is generally very accommodative, oil prices remain low, and most c
urrencies 
have weakened considerably against the dollar since last summer.  Moreover, many 

of the factors that pushed down global growth in the first quarter appear to be 

transitory.  Canada™s economy is estimated to have flatlined on account of unusually 

harsh winter weather and a step
-down in oil investment, but with oil prices bottoming 
out, growth should bounce back in the coming quarters.  Mexican output is estimated 

to have decelerated sharply in the first quarter along with U.S. manufacturing, and we 

anticipate that the projected rebound in U.S. activity will boost growth in Mexico as 

well. 
China also accounts for some of the pothole in foreign growth, but its situation is 
more complicated.  As shown in panel 3, GDP growth fell from 7 percent in the 

fourth quarter to only 5.3 percent in the first, well below expectations, as exports and 

industrial production dropped sharply.  It is difficult to parse out how much of the 

first
-quarter shortfall reflects reduced external demand, how much reflects the 
ongoing correction in the property sector, and how much reflects longer-
term 
developments such as the rebalancing of the economy and decline in potential output 

growth.  In any event, the authorities had been easing monetary policy even before 

the weak GDP 
reading
, and they
 have now stepped up this stimulus, including 
reducing the required reserve ratio 100 basis points.  In our projection, the 

combination of heightened policy stimulus and rising external demand pushes growth 

back up to over 7 percent later th
is year before it edges down thereafter. Like the 

booming Chinese stock market, however, this forecast is somewhat speculative, and 

we have revised down our projection a bit in response to the recent weakness. 
Ironically, nearly the only bright spot in the global economy has been the euro 
area, 
for which strengthening industrial production, retail sales, and PMIs point to a 
rise in first
-quarter GDP growth to 1¾ percent (panel 4).  Notably, financial 

conditions are becoming more of a positive for the econo
my, in part reflecting the 
                        
                          
  
  
     
                     ECB™s asset purchase program.  Bank lending standards are loosening, credit to 

nonfinancial corporations is finally picking up 
a bit
, interest rates are extremely low, 
and the real trade
-weighted euro is at its weakest level sinc
e 2001.  Accordingly, we 
see euro
-area growth firming to 2¼ percent in the next few years, provided that 
spillovers from Greece™s crisis remain contained, as we assume in our baseline. 
That, however, is a big ﬁ
if.
ﬂ  The Greek government is struggling in it
s efforts to 
negotiate additional financial assistance from European authorities and the IMF, even 

as it is running arrears to suppliers and raiding the accounts of local governments in 

order to stay afloat.  More than •10 billion in payments on its medium- and long-
term 
debt are coming due in the next four months.  Although the Greeks have reshuffled 

their negotiating team in an apparent effort to ease tensions with their creditors and 

strike a deal, there is still a good chance that the government could miss one or more 

of these payments.  Such an event could trigger a run on Greek banks, and unless the 

ECB stepped up its liquidity support by a substantial margin, the government would 

have to declare a bank holiday and impose capital controls, with a much-heightened 

chance of Greece eventually exiting the euro area altogether. Had such developments 

occurred at the height of the euro crisis in 2012, spillovers to the rest of the euro area 

would have been very destructive.  However, as Simon noted, the regio
n™s financial, 

institutional, and policy framework has strengthened in recent years.  Accordingly, 

we are building into our euro-
area forecast only a small drag 
due to 
spillovers from 
Greece™s intensifying crisis.  Nevertheless, we recognize that, as descr
ibed in the 
Tealbook, far more dire scenarios are possible, not just for the euro area but for the 

global economy more generally. 
While the pace of economic activity abroad remains quite unsettled, two key 
external drivers of U.S. economic prospects have been a bit more quiescent of late. 
First, oil markets have not yielded any big surprises.  To be sure, spot prices, shown 
in panel 5, are up more than $8 per barrel since the time of the March Tealbook, as 

falling rig counts and other signs of declining in
vestment have led markets to expect 
lower U.S. oil production.  However, prices for futures contracts further out on the 

curve are up by less, so that our projected path for Brent prices has been raised just a 

bit and remains well below 
levels prevailing l
ast summer. 
Second, for the first time since last July, the dollar has come down over the 
intermeeting period, as shown in panel 6.  This depreciation likely reflected weak 

data and the fall in expected policy rates here in the United States.  However, I would 

like to remind you that, starting with the March Tealbook, we decided to deviate from 

our standard random-
walk
-oriented model and project
ed a further rise in the dollar
.  That also must have contributed to the dollar™s subsequent decline.  [Laughter] 
In the 
event, from its lower starting point, we assume the broad real dollar will still move up 

some 2
¼ percent between now and the end of the year as the U.S. economy bounces 
back and markets refocus on the policy divergen
ces among major central banks. 
Your next exhibit puts movements in the dollar and their implications for 
economic growth into broader perspective.  As shown by the black solid line in 

panel 1, even at its projected peak early next year, the broad real dollar would be well 
                           
     
                                                                                                
 below its previous two peaks.  The black solid line in panel 2 shows the contribution 

of net exports to real U.S. 
GDP growth
.  We project it at negative ¾ percentage point 
this year and next.  This is the largest drag on growth since the early 2000s, and it 

almost entirely reflects the appreciation of the dollar.  It may seem strange that the 

dollar should depress the net export contribution to such an extent when it remains so 

far below its previous peaks.  However, what matters for the contribution of net 

exports to GDP
 growth is not the level of the dollar but how much it moves, and the 
dollar has appreciated sharply since last summer.  Additionally, the share of trade in 

the U.S. economy has grown over time, amplifying the effects of dollar movements 

on net exports and growth. 
Were the dollar to rise further than we are currently projecting, it would exert 
even stronger effects on the economy.  Returning to panel 1, the dashed line shows 

the 10 percent rise in the dollar described in the ﬁStronger D
ollar
ﬂ scenario in the 
Tealbook.  As shown below, the contribution of net exports to GDP would fall to its 

lowest level since the early 1980s.  Additionally, as indicated in panel 3, core 

inflation would fall below 1 percent on a four-quarter basis before rebounding.  Josh 

wil
l now continue our presentation. 
MR. GALLIN.
5  Thank you.  My material 
is titled ﬁFinancial Stability 
Developments.ﬂ 
My remarks draw on the recent QS financial stability report.  In sum, valuation 
pressures in asset markets have increased since the January assessment and remain 

notable.  In addition, vulnerabilities related to maturity and liquidity transformation 

remain moderate, but leverage in both the financial and the nonfinancial sectors, 

overall, remains relatively low.  Taken together, we think that 
conditions in the 
financial sector are moder
ately prone to amplify shocks. 
I begin with valuations in fixed-income markets.  The yield on the 10-
year 
Treasury noteŠ
the blue line 
in the upper-
left panel
Šand 
term premium measures
Š the red and black lines
Šhav
e remained quite low since the January 
financial 
stability 
briefing.  The possibility that term premiums will move up sharply remains a focus of 

staff analysis
.  I will return to this issue
 near the end of the briefing. 
In corporate bond markets, yield spr
eads to comparable Treasury securities have 
moved down a bit in recent months.  As shown by the red line in the panel to the 

right, the far
-term forward spread for high-yield corporate bondsŠone measure of 
risk premiumsŠ
remains near the middle of its histo
rical range, which suggests that 
valuations are reasonableŠ
relative, that is, to seemingly richly valued Treasury 

securities.  In addition, as shown by the light blue bars in the middle-left panel, 

issuance of high
-yield bonds, a nonprice measure of hot ma
rkets and thus valuation 
pressures, remained robust through the first quarter of the year.  Somewhat in 

contrast, issuance of leveraged loans
Šthe dark blue portion of the barsŠ
has 
declined
, on net, in recent quarters.  Although supervisory analysis of completed 
5 The materials used by Mr. Gallin are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
              
    
       
               
          
      
   
      
   
 deals suggests a modest improvement in underwriting quality, fairly lax nonprice 

terms were reportedly still prevalent in recent deals. 
Moving to the stock market, the expected real return on 
corporate equities
Šthe 
black line in the middle-right panelŠ
has fallen significantly since the 
previous 
stability briefing, as stock prices have advanced and expectations of corporate 

earnings have been revised down
.  The low expected return suggests that valuations 
are quite high.  The equity risk premium, which is the difference between the 

expected return on stocks and the expected real yield on the 10
-year Treasury note, 
shown in teal, has also moved down sharply, though it remains closer to the middle 
of 
its 30
-year range.  Our overall assessment is that equity valuations are somewhat 
more stretched now than they were just a few months ago. 
A variety of changes in the structure of fixed-income markets may add to the 
volatility of interest rates, and, perhaps, to the volatility of volatility.  FirstŠand I™m 

not referring to any panel quite yetŠ
increased electronification of the Treasury 
market could contribute to occasional and surprising spikes in volatility, such as that 

which occurred on October 15 of last year.  In addition, the continued decline in 

intermediation by dealersŠas illustrated by gross and net dealer borrowing, shown in 

the lower-left panelŠis consistent with anecdotes that new regulations have made 

dealers less willing to provide market
making liquidity, even in normal times.  A bond 

market selloff could also be temporarily amplified if investors in bond mutual funds 

rush for the exits, forcing funds to sell into an illiquid market.  The rapid growth in 

assets under management at such fun
dsŠshown in the lower-right panelŠincluding 
funds that hold less-
liquid assets, suggests that the scope for such an amplification has 
increased in recent years. 
The first panel of the next exhibit shows an estimate of the level of ﬁrunnableﬂ 
private money-
like instruments.  This measure of maturity and liquidity 
transformation includes cross
-holdings of money 
market instruments, such as when a 
money fund holds repo.  It is therefore an indicator of the vulnerability of the 

financial system through intermedi
ation chains that rely
Šat one link or more
Šon short-term funding.  The level of these runnables has been fairly stable at a relatively 

high level during the past two years, as growth in uninsured depositsŠ
the light blue 
regionŠ
has offset a decline in repo
Šin red
Šwhich suggests that the financial 
system remains moderately vulnerable to runs. 
A fairly bright
Šor should I say, 
green
Šspot on the financial-
stability map is 
leverage in the banking system.  As can be seen in the upper-
right panel, capital 
cushions at bank holding companies, as measured by both the Tier 1 common equity 

ratio
Šin blackŠ
and the leverage ratio
Šin red
Šhave increased notably.  This 
reflects both Basel III requirements and the resilience required in annual stress tests. 

As you know, no CCA
R bank fell below the stress test™s quantitative benchmarks in 
the most recent round, although three firms had to adjust their 
planned capital 
distributions. 
                  
    
    
      
        
    
                        
    As far as we can tell
Šwhich
, admittedly
, is not very farŠ
leverage in the 
nonbank financial sector continues to be a vulnerability.  As summarized in the 

middle-left panel, overall margin credit has moved down in recent months but 

remains quite elevated, and hedge funds appear to be using a fairly large amount of 

portfolio margining from prime brokerages to lever up in equity markets.  In addition, 

responses to the March SCOOS provided some evidence that counterparties have 

been demanding more leverage to fund non-agency RMBS, high-yield corporate 

bonds, and securitized CRE loans.  Unfortunately, leverage embedded in derivatives 

is hard to measure, so it remains difficult to assess the overall leverage of hedge 

funds, mutual funds, and other investment vehicles. 
Moving to the private nonfinancial sector, the middle
-right panel provides the big 
picture for
 households: Modest increases in household debt continue to be driven 

mostly by prime borrowersŠ
the orange line
Šthough debt of subprime borrowersŠ 
the black line
Šticked up in the fourth quarter.  Student loans and subprime auto 
lending have remained rapid 
even as 
delinquencies on these kinds of debt have 

moved up.  Although we do not currently consider student and subprime auto debt to 

be direct vulnerabilities for the financial system, we are alert for potential spillovers 

to other debt markets. 
As can be seen in the lower
-left panel, the debt
-to-assets ratio for all nonfinancial 
corporate businesses
Šthe black line
Šand for high-yield and unrated firmsŠthe red 
line
Šmoved up further in the fourth quarter, which suggests a continued buildup of 
the vu
lnerability of this sector. 
The lower-right panel provides a very brief roundup of the potential shocks to the 
financial system
 that appear most proximate.  A sharp rise in term premiums could 
precipitate a sudden drop in a variety of asset prices, especia
lly for those with 
stretched valuations.  Moreover, for reasons mentioned 
previously
, these shocks 
could be temporarily amplified if liquidity were to deteriorate just when it is needed 

most or if bond mutual funds were to experience large and disruptive outflows.  That 

said, the risk of a sustained amplification is mitigated by the apparently modest 

amount of leverage in the financial system.  We are also attuned to the possibility of 

damaging spillovers from a rate spike here to emerging market economies. 
As we 
concluded in a special memo, although blowback to the U
nited States 
through 
financial connections would likely be limited, a significant EME recession and a 

presumed increase in risk aversion would damage the U.S. 
economy as well. It is 

worth noting also that term premiums could, instead, stay low for longer than 

anticipated.  Such an outcome would be a shock to investors who have positioned 

themselves for rising yields and could also lead to a further buildup of vulnerabilities 

if investors are dr
iven to 
ﬁreach for yield
.ﬂ  Other potential shocks of note that have 
been around for 
a while
 include a disorderly Greek exit from the euro zone, 
significant geopolitical disruptions, or distress 
at a large global financial firm brought 
about by, say, 
legal penalties. 
I will conclude my prepared remarks by noting a few policy initiatives that the 
staff are pursuing related to specific financial vulnerabilities
, which appear at the top 
         
           
                       
      
       
     
    
    
       of the final exhibit.  
With regard to interest 
rate risk, 
the 
staff 
are in
dependently 
measuring the risks at banks and working with those banks to manage their 

exposures.  On market liquidity, the 
staff are undertaking a variety of projects to 
better understand changes in the structure of bond markets, including increased 

electr
onification, and are working with other agencies to prepare a public report on 
the Treasury market.
  Regarding 
asset managers, 
the staff have begun evaluating the 
potential for 
the growth of 
managers™ activities, perhaps through the use of leverage 
and 
liquidity transformation, to contribute meaningfully to systemic risk and 
whether 
reforms are needed. 
Finally, on leveraged loans, supervisors continue their 
monitoring efforts and will begin a more comprehensive Shared National Credit 

review in May.  
Tha
nks.  That concludes my remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.
  Questions for any of our presenters? 
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m look
ing 
at 
exhibit 2, 
ﬁAlternative 
Scenario
:  Stronger D
ollar.
ﬂ  What are the confidence bounds around these dotted lines? 
MR. KAMIN. Well, the simulations come from a DSGE model, but it™s not an estimated 
model.  So we don™t compute those, although I assure you that an estimated version of 
SIGMA 
that would allow us to compute those is on our long-
ter
m work agenda. 
The most tenuous thing is whether or not you will actually get a 10 percent additional rise 
in the dollar
.  As you can tell from the chart, that™s not a common occurrence.  That™s something 
that, broadly speaking, we think 
there 
might be a 1 in 10 chance of for a couple of years.  So that, 
in some sense
, is the most tenuous. 
In terms of thinking about the 
effects
 on net exports and then on U.S. 
real 
GDP, that™s 
actually a little bit more straightforward in the 
sense that the results from SIGM
AŠ
particularly 
for what I™m showing here, which is the 
net export 
contribution
Šare broadly consistent with our 
estimated trade models, and those don™t give you very different results.  So the 
effect 
of a higher 
dollar on exports and on imports is relatively straightforward, and obviously there are errors, but 
they™re probably not subject to huge errors. 
A larger area of uncertainty comes in 
when 
translating the effect of the change in net 
exports into GDP
, because there is some uncertainty there about the m
ultipliers
.  And there™s 
           
                       
   
          also some uncertainty about to what extent you want to build in a monetary policy response and 
what 
impact
 that has.  
So, for
 the net export contribution itself, I would guess that, 
relatively 
speaking, 
is 
not a huge confidence error.  The confidence errors would rise as you then translate 
that through 
to 
real 
GDP growth. 
MR. BULLARD.   Let me follow up with a 
slightly
 different question.  Over the p
ast 
25 years
, firms have become more globalized and 
have learned how to handle 
global currency 
fluctuations.  They adopt hedging strategies, and they put production in various countries and 

switch production in response to currency movements.  In light of those changes, should we be 

estimating effects of real exchange rate movements 
using 
data 
for the 1980s and 1990s? 
MR. KAMIN. Well, that™s an excellent question.  Let™s just say we periodically do revise 
our import equations, and we do look for signs of parameter instability.  So we™re alert to that 

issue, and we haven™t found any s
trong evidence of these changes in coefficients. There are 
other 
factor
s that, of course, are naturally parsed in.  They kind of correlate with what you 
mentioned, which is that, over time, 
the share of trad
e in the U.S. economy has grown, and that is 
ful
ly taken into account in our estimations because our models do incorporate the fact that, 
as the 
dollar changes exports and imports, those have a larger 
effect 
on GDP. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.
  Any other questions?  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you.  I have a question for Bill 
Wascher 
related to the Tealbook 
inflation outlook.  I think in your presentation you mentioned that the inflation outlook is 

trending up 
because
ŠI think you saidŠenergy prices are going to be going up, res
ource slack 
will be diminishing, and maybe imported goods pricesŠ
I can™t recall the entire list. 
Could you 
                
   
   
                       
      refresh my memory on the contribution of changes in longer-
term inflation expectations for 
delivering that increase in inflation? 
MR. WASCHER.  So
, over the medium-
term forecast
, our view is that the underlying 
rate of inflation is 1.8 percent, and that 
serves as an attractor for the inflation rate. 
MR. EVANS.  Inflation expectations, is thatŠ 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  We call it underlying inflation, but in some sense you may think 
of it as inflation expectations over the medium term. 
Over the longer run, 
that drifts up to 
2 percent because the FOMC says the target is 
2 percent, and 
because 
tightness in the labor 
market 
is pushing inflation up.  
So it doe
s serve as an attractor
, as one reason inflation moves 
back up toward 1.8 percent in the medium term and toward 2 percent in the longer run.  
But
, in 
addition, these other factors are important in getting there over the medium term. 
MR. EVANS.  All right. That™s helpful.  That is different 
from 
the way I was 
remembering it.  I thought that underlying inflation was pegged to your assessment of longer-
term inflation expectations
, and that they were still about 
1¾ percent
, but you™ve got aŠ 
MR. WASCHER.  That
™s right. I think that™s right.
  But maybe I™m not quite getting 
your question.  Over the longer run, we have those inflation expectations 
drifting
 up from 1¾ 
percent 
to 2 
percent. 
MR. EVANS.
    Right.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Yes, I want to compliment the staff on the new charts on uncertainty.  I 
think they are very helpful in thinking about the uncertainty 
associated with the forecast. 
Now, 
going on from what President Evans 
was asking
, maybe, the PCE inflation in Tealbook A, page 
69Šif I look at that, it looks, 
from
 the way the errors look on that forecast, 
like 
the staff has been 
                        
             
      
      underestimating PCE inflation.  Should I interpret this as being that we have upside risk to the 
staff™s inflation forecast? 
MR. WASC
HER. 
Which chart are you looking at?  The top one? 
MS. MESTER.  I™m looking at PCE inflation. 

MR. WASCHER.  That™s largely because of the energy price run-up in the mid-2000s.  I 
think we didn™t 
projec
t that, and I think that™s why the solid line, 
the median
, is above the data 
there. 
MS. MESTER.  But even the distribution looks likeŠ 

MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  Again, I think that™s because of the energy price shock.  
This is a 
relatively short sample with which 
we calculate standard errors around for PCE inflatio
n, for two 
reasons.  One is
, we don™t have data going back a long way, and two is, 
we think that this is 
a period over which inflation had different propertiesŠ
it was more stable recently 
than in previous 
periods.  
So, because of that, I think the influence of energy prices is more prominent here than 
it might be in the longer run. 
MR. ENGEN.  If I could add just one thing that amplifies that point, if you look in the 
middle right at core PCE, the median and the 
projected
 paths are virtually on top of each other, 
which is another way of showing that the total is being influenced by the run-up in energy prices 

and how it feeds into total inflation. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERL
AKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to follow up on 
President Evans™
s line of questioning.  During the 
intermeeting
 period, President Rosengren 
suggested the possibility 
of rais
ing 
the inflation target. 
If the FOMC were to introduce a new 
                 
           
       
              
     
  
        infla
tion target that was higher, would that have a higher gravitational pull 
in the staff™s model 
that we™d 
be pull
ed back to that higher target? 
MR. WASCHER.  In terms of modeling and the way we do it in 
the 
FRB
/US model, 
I think the answer 
is 
ﬁyes,ﬂ 
because we do have a small term that reflects the FOMC
™s stated target 
relative to current underlying inflation.  I think it would be gradual, but I think in 
the FRB
/US model, it would be a stronger attractor than a 
2 percent target. 
Also, i
f I used the Taylor ru
le, 
I think it would imply a much easier 
policy as well. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That™s true, 
a different
 reaction function.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Okay.  I suggest we take a break 
for 
15 minutes 
to get some 
coffee. 
When we return, we have a few 
people who would like to comment on financial 
stability
, and 
then we™ll go to the economic round. 
[Coffee break
] CHAIR YELLEN.  We now have an opportunity for people to comment on financial 
stability, and 
three
 people have indicated they would like to.  
President Rosengren, do you want 
to start 
us off? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank yo
u, Madam Chair. When I talk to asset managers in 
Boston, the biggest concern raised is the problem of liquidity in the secondary market 
for 
corporate bonds.  They worry that when we b
egin to raise rates
, a rush to sell positions in 
corporate bonds will occur, and a crowded exit with few buyers could lead to a rapid increase in 

the yield on corporate bonds.  At least some elements of this concern probably deserve greater 

attention. 
Firs
t, the average size of trades in corporate bonds has fallen significantly relative to the 
average size of trades prior to the financial crisis.  This may reflect an actual or perceived 
          
                            
   difficulty in transacting large trades 
due to
 weakened liquidity in the 
market.  This raises the 
concern that if a significant portfolio rebalancing were to occur, it may be difficult to sell large 
positions in a timely manner. 
Second, there has been a significant decline in the corporate bond holdings of broker-
dealers.  Acc
ording to the 
SEC™s FOCUS reports
, while J.P. Morgan held $29.5 billion in 
corporate securities in 2007, those holdings had plummeted to only $11.3 billion by the end of 

2014. Similarly, Credit Suisse held 
$30 billion in corporate securities in 2007, and their holdings 
collapsed to only 
$4.4 billion by the end of 2014.  
Such sizable declines in corporate securities 
holdings among these key liquidity providers lends some credence to the concern about potential 

liquidity problems in this market. 
Third, 
bond mutual funds
Šwhich were shown in the earlier charts on financial 
stability
Šand bond exchange-traded funds have grown significantly since the financial crisis.  
The exchange-traded funds pose a particular problem if investors view them as highly liquid.  
At the end of 2008, assets under management at exchange-traded bond funds totaled $57 billion.  
By the end of February this year, 
assets under management at 
exchange-traded bond funds had 
soared to $320 billion.  I
f investors assume that the corporate b
ond market is liquid and, more 
specifically, that their exchange
-traded fund shares will always be liquid
, and if they choose to 
sell as we tighten
, they may be surprised at the price at which they transact. 
In summary, the concerns with corporate bond market liquidity as we approach liftoff 
bear
 watching.  The degree of movement out of bonds is likely to be highly sensitive to the 
projected pace of tightening as well as 
to the timing of tightening.  An oversized reaction in this 
market could result in a bumpy exit from the zero lower bound.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you
.                   
  
        
     
           
   
          MR. TARULLO.  May I ask Eric a question? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sure. 

MR. TARULLO.  Eric, can you take it a step further and 
say what the implications of 
your concerns 
are 
for policy? Is it for monetary policy?  Are you advocating a relaxation of 
capital requirements? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  No, I am not advocating a relaxation of capital requirements.   

MR. TARULLO.  I didn™t think so. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I think it highlights that how we communicate around the time of 
liftoff actually is critically important for whether people decide that this is something they need 

to doŠ
to rebalance their 
portfolios quite quickly.  
I think the way that fi
nancial stability interacts 
with monetary policy is, 
it highlights 
that the communication issues become pretty important. 
MR. TARULLO.  That™s helpful.  Thanks. 

MR. LACKER.  Also, 
if it happens, we can say we talked about it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  All right.  Pre
sident Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to thank the staff for the 
excellent assessment of financial stability.  It™s my reading 
that 
the assessment again indicates 
that current policy has not produced any material signs 
of 
financial instability.
  Indeed, it appears 
that the main 
financial
-instability consideration for monetary policy at the moment is 
that a 
near
-term increase in the target range for the fed
eral
 funds rate could lead to financial instability.  
As the report says, 
ﬁTerm premiums
 in benchmark U.S. and other advanced economy bond yields 
are again near historical lows reached 
before the taper tantrum, raising the risk of similarly 
outsized market reactions at liftoff.
ﬂ             
                  
                        The s
taff also identified 
a vulnerability that could propagate this shock from the increase 
in rates.  Specifically
, page 4 of the assessment notes that changes in the structure of the 
Treasury market could amplify the effects of an initial rate move and lead to sudden swings in 
prices 
and liquidity. 
Now, how can we best mitigate this risk?  President Rosengren, I think, highlight
ed one way to think about this
, which
 is through communication, but I have a slightly different 
perspective on the answer to this question.  To answer this question, I think we have to 

understand why long
-term rates might rise dramatically in response to a small increase in short
-term rates. And here I believe that a key consideration is the policy signal associated with such a 

move in the near term.  Raising t
he fed
eral 
funds rate in the near term would mean 
they™re 
initiating liftoff when inflation is far below target and the growth outlook has been weakening.  

Liftoff in such an environment would indicate 
that the FOMC is considerably less willing to 
provide accommodation to respond to adverse shocks than financial market participants currently 
anticipate. 
As a result, they would expect less accommodation in general but especially so in bad 
times, and this expectation of higher interest rates and lower bond p
rices in bad times translates 
directly into higher term 
premiums
. Now, 
it™s tempting 
to conclude that we can somehow mitigate this potential financial 
instability only through 
reassuring verbal communication at the time of liftoff, but I think it™s 
difficu
lt for words to trump the communication content of our actions.  
So, in my view, 
we can 
best mitigate this financial stability risk by ensuring that our actions are always clearly connected 

to our pursued, 
declared objectives. 
In the current context, that
 would mean deferring liftoff 
until the economic data clearly indicate that raising interest rates is necessary for the FOMC to 

achieve its declared objectives of 
2 percent inflation and maximum employment over the 
       
  
                
    
       
               
  medium 
term. I™ll sa
y more about what this conclusion means for our policy deliberations 
tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I™m going to pick up on the same topic that President Rosengren 
introduced and President Kocherlakota discussed.  However, I will not be expressing my views 

on monetary policy at this time.  [Laughter] 
I think Governor Tarullo asked a great question:  
What do you do with this information? I™m going to go a slightly different direction based on 

something Josh said, which I found very interesting. 
I was struck by two sentences on page 17 of the QS report.  
The
y are 
right 
after each 
other.  O
ne is
 that large banks™ liquidity ratios continue to improve.  The next sentence is 
basically that there is less liqui
dity in markets.
  These two sentences are 
right next to each other, 
and immediately
, when I read this
, I said, ﬁWhat™s the connection here?  To what extent is the 
liquidity requirements or the capital requirements, for that matter, affecting the willingnes
s of 
broker-
dealers to basically make markets and provide market liquidity, especially in 
a stressed 
environment?ﬂ  But it also led me to what Josh pointed out, which 
is that this 
is apparently a 
longer-
term research project 
about market liquidity and understanding what™s happening there, 
and how much amplification we may see
, whether it™s in corporate bond or Treasury bond 

markets
, in response to shocks. 
My comment is that I think this is a really important subject not just for thinking about 
our policy decisions or policy communication, but more generally, to understand what™s 

happening in those markets and understand to what extent it is changes in regulation, changes in 

technology, 
or other things.
  Really
, my comment is wanting to see more on that sooner, 
because 
I think this is a key issue, 
as others have mentioned.
  Thank you. 
                   
         
                    CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Does anyone else want to comment?
  [No response]  Seeing 
no hands, let us begin the economic go-round 
with 
President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Fourth District economy continues to 
expand.  In April, the diffusion index of business contacts reporting better versus worse 
conditions was 23 percent, up from 18 percent in March.  Retail freight and both residential and 

commercial construct
ion firms reported improved conditions.  All manufacturers and energy 
firms reported worse conditions. 
Anecdotal reports suggest some slowing in the pace of growth in the first quarter.  
Factors cited by contacts reporting slower growth earlier this year i
nclude the harsh winter 
weather, spillovers from the 
West Coast port strikes, declining energy prices, and the 
appreciation of the dollar. 
The effects of weather and the strike are transitory.  Almost all of our contacts reported 
that the 
effects
 of the wi
nter weather 
have now passed, although I should note that it snowed in 
Cleveland last week
.  The effects of the port strike are expected to dissipate by the fourth quarter. 
The fall in oil prices continues to challenge firms engaged in energy development or 
extraction as well as their suppliers, like steel producers.  Suppliers of raw materials that use 

petroleum
-based products report a 
falloff
 in orders as customers run down 
their inventories in 
anticipation of further price reductions.  
My business contacts believe that oil prices have likely 

bottomed out, and that the effects of lower oil prices are likely to be temporary for most exposed 

sectors.  Of course
, that remains t
o be seen. 
Conditions in 
District 
labor markets continue 
to follow national trends.  The D
istrict™s 
unemployment rate, at 5.2 percent, 
is below the national rate 
of 5
½ percent and below the 
5.7 percent 
District average over 
the 2001Œ07 expansion.  Contacts 
in all 
sectors except energy 
                    
          
     
   
  
       reported increasing staffing in the previous six to eight weeks, although, except for construction, 
the additions were somewhat smaller than previously reported.  So far, 
wage pressures remain 

limited to occupations such as tr
ucking, skilled construction trades, and quantitative white collar 
jobs.  Prices of finished goods continue to be stable despite more businesses reporting declining 

costs for 
nonlabor inputs. 
Turning to the national economy, we have received a number of disappointing data 
reports since our previous 
meeting across several sectors, including manufacturing, business 
fixed investment, and consumer spending, and including the employment report for March.  
As 
was the case last year, there was very harsh winter we
ather, but this year we also had the port 

strike, the sharp drop in oil prices, and the sharp appreciation of the dollar.  Similar to last year, 

we have seen a growth slowdown in the first quarter, and we are trying to extract the signal about 

future growt
h from the incoming data.  This is difficult to do in real time. 
A good case can be made that this is a temporary setback
, just as it was last year
, and 
that 
is forecast in the Tealbook.  The effects of bad weather and the 
West Coast port strike are 
transi
tory.  Using a Bayesian VAR model augmented to include weather indicators, my staff 

estimates that the unusually cold weather reduced GDP growth by 0.9 percentage point, and 

there will be some rebound in the next couple of quarters. 
We have seen the negative effects of lower oil prices on energy
-related firms but not 
much positive effect on consumer spending, although that is likely to come, and oil prices appear 

to be stabilizing.  Dollar appreciation has been a drag on exports and the profitability of fir
ms with multinational operations.  But as the rate of appreciation slows, the drag can be expected to 

diminish as well.
  The slower growth seen in our trading partners might be a reflection of the 
slower growth in the United States
.  If our growth picks up
, it could be that theirs will as well. 
                     
             
            
      
    In addition, not all of the incoming data were negative.  The rate of job openings reached 
another cyclical high, and initial claims are very low, just below the trough reached in the last 
economic expansion.  
These 
indicators suggest that the weakness in payroll jobs in March could 

be temporary.  Although the Conference Board™s 
consumer confidence measure was down in 
April, consumer sentiment came in high, and underlying fundamentals for consumer spending, 

including improved balance sheets, remain quite good. 
The news on inflation was also a bit better over the intermeeting period. Core inflation is 
modestly firming.  Both headline CPI and core CPI increased 0.2 percent in March for the 

second month in a row, and core CPI inflation edged up to 1.8 percent on a year-
over
-year basis. 
The Cleveland Fed™s median CPI measure, which helps predict headline inflation over the 

medium term, has remained near 2
¼ percent since April of last year.  The Federal Reserve Bank 
ofCleveland™s measure of the 
10-year expected inflation rate was essentially unchanged in April. 
So t
his is the positive view of things.  Of course, there is also the possibility that the 
slower growth will be more persistent and inflation developments will 
worsen.  I don™t believe 

we have enough information right now to reach a firm conclusion today, and we don™t have to.  

We can remain agnostic until we see more data over the next couple of months.  Incoming data 

will help us determine whether the slowdown 
in the first quarter is proving to be temporary, like 

it was last year, or whether it is pointing to something more fundamental. In particular, we are 

going to get two employment reports before our June meeting.  These are going to be quite 

important in m
y own thinking about the economic outlook.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Recent economic data have had a 
distinctly weaker tone since our 
previous 
meeting.  The March emplo
yment report indicated little 
              
       
                      overall improvement in labor markets, the unemployment rate was unchanged, and payroll 
employment growth was surprisingly weak.  Similarly, wage and price data have yet to show a 

clear trend toward our 2 percent inflation goal
. While some of the weakness can be attributed to 
the severe weather in some parts of the country, many of the higher-frequency data before and 

after the harsh winter weather have also been on the soft side. 
As a result, in my view, neither of the conditi
ons for liftoff articulated in the March 
FOMC statement 
has 
been sufficiently met at this time.  The March 
Summary of 
Economic 
Projections reflected some significant changes in longer-
run variables.  The central tendency of 
the longer-run unemployment rate has slipped from a range of 5.2 to 6 percent in June 2012 

down to 5 to 5.2 percent in March.  
Similarly, participant estimates of the long
-run equilibrium 
federal funds rate have declined.  The central tendency in June 2012 ranged from 4 to 

4½ percent, bu
t now it is down to only 3½ to 3¾ 
percent.  Our assessment of these key variables 

has changed significantly, which, 
in retrospect
, is not surprising, 
considering changes in 
demographics and productivity since the financial crisis. 
While I and many other participants have lowered our estimates of one of our dual 
mandate goalsŠthe natural rate of unemploymentŠwe have not engaged in any comprehensive 
discussion of our other goal, the inflation target.  That target has remained unchanged at 

2 percent since it w
as adopted in 2012. 
We have learned a great deal about conducting monetary policy in a low-
inflation 
environment since 2012.  I am fully aware that we should have a high threshold for changing our 

inflation target, 
as frequent changes would undermine its usefulness.  But the accumulated 
weight of economic experience suggests, in my view, that a reexamination of our inflation target 

is warranted for several reasons. 
                          
     
                
         First, the choice of an inflation target was largely b
ased on research both here and abroad, 
indicating that the likelihood of reaching the zero lower bound and the cost of being at the zero 
lower bound was small.  This research suggested a relatively low probability of reaching the zero 

lower bound, typically below 5 percent, and relatively brief spells at the lower bound once 

reached, usually a couple of quarters. 
In part, this optimistic read could have been based on faith 
in the efficiency of alternative monetary policy tools.  However, the experience of 
the past 
decade has been less favorable.  Today most major developed countries are at the zero lower 

bound, and, despite employing alternative policy tools, none has yet exited, even though we are 

now more than six years past the financial crisis. 
In shor
t, the research on the expected cost of 
hitting the zero lower bound has not been consistent with the economic outcomes we have 

observed. 
Second, we have revised our assessment of variables that should affect 
the probability of 
hitting the zero lower bound.  The most obvious example is the lowering of the equilibrium 
federal funds rate.  With the same inflation target, a decline in the equilibrium federal funds rate 
should 
increase
 the probability of hitting the zero lower bound.  
The most recent SEP 
submissions, for example, report a decline in the equilibrium real rate of more than 50 basis 

points, a
nd this assessment is echoed among private forecasters and market participants.  If one 
of the rationales for setting a positive inflation target is to reduce 
the frequency of hitting the 
zero lower bound, a lower equilibrium real rate implies the need for a higher inflation target to 

reduce this probability. 
On a practical note, the fact that Japan, the 
United Kingdom, Europe, 
and the United States have each h
it the zero lower bound and have remained there for a very long 
time should make us wonder whether the global convergence to a value of 2 percent for the 

inflation target was misguided. 
       
  
              
                
      Third, we have learned more about the cost of being at the zero lower bound.  After more 
than six years, we have still not returned to the 5 to 5.2 percent unemployment rate range that the 
SEP central tendency currently indicates is consistent with longer
-run unemployment rates.  
While the new tools of quantitative easingŠpurchasing mortgage-
backed securities and 
lengthening the maturity of our holdingsŠhave resulted in growth faster than we otherwise 

would have experienced, we have missed both elements of our mandate for more than 
six years 

now. 
This is not an acceptable outcome.  The consequences of not being able to exit the zero 
lower bound more quickly have been a long period of underutilized resources and 
below
-target 
inflation that risks eroding the credibility of the central bank.  A higher inflation target would 

surel
y have given us more room to lower real interest rates 
using
 our conventional policy tools, 
likely saving hundreds of thousands of jobs. 
Despite our willingness to alter other variables, we have not recently had a 
comprehensive review of our choice for the 
inflation target.  In light of the accumulating 
evidence that inflation targets globally may have been set too low, this choice may have resulted 

in a great cost to the global economy in terms of lost economic output and employment.  Thus, 

we should have a fuller discussion of our choice for the inflation target before we set our longer-

run strategies at the beginning of next year. 
In addition to the longer-run implications of the inflation goal for monetary policy, a 
higher inflation goal would have more 
immediate policy implications.  Entertaining a higher 
inflation target would imply an even larger inflation shortfall, compelling us to wait even longer 

before lifting off. 
A weaker version of this proposition suggests both that we should delay liftoff 
until we see clear evidence that inflation is increasing, and that we should be willing to entertain 
      
          
      
       
             
      an inflation rate that exceeds our current target. This strategy would
, of course
, be akin to price-
level targeting, a notion that President Evans and other
s have previously discussed. 
In summary, we should recognize that the economy™s performance over the previous six 
years has a bearing not only on our estimates of full employment and the equilibrium federal 
funds rate, which many of us have adjusted in the SEP, but also on the inflation target.  I 

understand the concern with shifting an inflation target that we set after years of deliberation and 

following years of success in bringing inflation down.  
But our failure to hit either of our 

mandated goals for six years and running demonstrates the potential cost of an inflation target 

that is too low.  Recognizing the many complications that a change in the target would entail, I 

believe we should have a more fulsome discussion about what the 
previous 
decade of
 economic 
history has taught us about the optimal inflation rate.  Should we be willing to entertain an 

increase in the inflation goal, this would, of course, 
have implications for the timing of liftoff, 

which we will be discussing tomorrow.  Thank you, Ma
dam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would 
like
 to ask President Rosengren a question.  You 
are implying that the only margin for adjustment is on the inflation target rate.  Presumably there 

is another margin for adjustment, t
aking a lot of steps to make a future financial crisis of the type 
that we experienced in 2007, 2008, and 2009 less likely, right?  Because you could argue that 

one reason why we are in this position is because we had a really, really bad financial crisis.
  So, 
in principle, one could take steps to make the probability of a financial crisis l
ower
, and that 
would presumably lessen the need to change the inflation target.  How do you think about that? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If you think you can significantly change 
the probability or 
amplitude of those shocks, then you are right.  But the equilibrium federal funds rate has come 
              
            
    
   
      
         
         
   down quite a bit.  Our own internal estimates of what that implies for how frequently we will hit 
the zero lower bound are that it is substantially higher given that most of the time the equilibrium 

federal funds rate that many of those models were estimated on was 4
½ percent.  We are now at 
3½ percent
ŠI actually think you could make an argument that it is lower than 3½ percent.  
So if 
you have 
an equilibrium federal funds rate that is lower, the implication is that 
you hit the zero 
lower bound more frequently unless you think you can dramatically alter either the frequency or 

severity of having the kind of shocks that we experienced. 
CHAIR YELL
EN.  Isn™t it the case that some of the steps we would take to reduce the 
odds of a financial crisisŠ
strengthening capital and liquidity
Šmay actually
, by raising the cost 
of intermediation
, lower 
the 
equilibrium real rate? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, I 
think that™s right.  But my point is just that the 
room you need depends on the size of the shocks that you are dealing with.  And if you do other 

things and reduce the size of shocks, that also should be a factor.  
I don™t really disagree with 
a lot of th
e points that you made, but it seems to me that that™s not the only potential marginŠ 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I™d just raise one other countervailing argument 
that
, certainly
, the experience around October 15 of the very sharp movement in financial markets a
t a 
time when no real economic news was 
occurring makes me wonder
ŠI am not convinced yet that 
all of the actions we have taken have necessarily
, dramatically changed the probability or likely 
severity of shocks 
in the future from 
what we experienced before
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
In that shock, though, implications for the real economy 
were 
trivial. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  In that case. 

MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair? 
              
    
                
       
      
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  I appreciate you
r bringing this up, President Rosengren.  Just one 
comment
 about your rhetoric on this.  Missing the inflation target over six yearsŠif you look at 
headline inflation year over year, it was above target in 2011 and 2012, and it came back down.  

I know you like to think in terms of core inflation, but I think this is an issue for that piece of the 

puzzle.  When you 
evaluat
e the Committee over that kind of a 
time 
frame
, I think you have got 
to look at headline. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I would say 
that 
hitting an inflation target temporarily 
because 
of an oil price shock is a P
yrrhic victory.  You care more about the underlying rate of 
inflation. 
MR. BULLARD.  These are the prices people pay. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  No doubt we will return to this.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART. 
Moving right along.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the 
intermeeting
 cycle, my staff conducted 56 interviews separate from our board 
meetings. We 
focused the interviews on any indications in their businesses that would confirm the weakness 

indicated by first
-quarter data and, more to the point, suggest 
that 
first
-quarter weakness might 
persist. 
We found that overall business sentiment remains quite positive, somewhat at odds with 
our reading of the incoming data.  On balance, our contacts and directors portrayed demand a
s continuing to improve at a steady pace.  We noted, however, that compared 
with
 the previous 
cycle, their optimism is accompanied by a hint of caution.  We heard more reports of negative 

effects of the dollar.  Exporters, port operators, and firms with significant foreign operations all 

noted market or other challenges that they attributed to the 
dollar. 
         
  
            
           
           
        
   As expected, we heard reports 
of investment 
pullback and layoffs in oil and gas 
exploration and production firms as well as in 
oil services companies.  That drag is being 
partially offset by greater investment activity in business sectors benefiti
ng from low energy 

prices. 
We also continued to hear reports that firms are trying to hold on 
to margin improvement 
coming from fuel and other commodity cost declines. 
Declines in gasoline prices have yet to translate into a meaningful boost in consumer 
spending.  A director with knowledge of consumer markets commented that product categories 

that historically have been leading indicators of stronger consumer activity
Što wit, apparel, 
eating outside the home, and moviesŠhave not yet signaled an upturn. 
We received positive reports on real estate investment activity, both commercial and 
residential. Architects and contractors indicated improved pipelines.
  Our banking contacts 
report that new mortgage and investment activity is strong. 
Regarding employment, we heard continued concern about turnover and retention.  At the 
same time, we detected little change in reports this round regard
ing wage inflation.  On that 
subject, although most data indicate that the trend in nominal 
wage growth remains flat, a 
measu
re constructed by my staff from the C
urrent 
Population Survey 
does show an acceleration 
in 
year
-over-
year
 wage growth in the first quarter.  Wage growth increased to a 3 
percent pace in 
the first quarter, up from 2.8 percent in the fourth quarter and up fr
om 2.4 percent a year earlier. 
Continuing on employment, I™ll mention something we heard for the first time from three 
large employers in quite different businesses.  All said they have begun shifting their work forces 

away from part time toward full time.
  They all cited the high managerial and logistical cost and 
quality challenges of a large, part-
time workforce. 
              
               
                
             
  We™ve been struggling to reconcile these generally positive anecdotal reports with the 
hard data on the first quarter and early indications of 
second
-quarter performance.  Our tracking 
estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth is just marginally above zero, at the low end of the 
spectrum presented in the Tealbook. 
Our tracking model is a straight statistical model with no 
judgmental overrides.  We wo
uld not claim it™s the most accurate read of the first quarter, but it™s 
what the raw data are telling us, and we™ll have an official reading soon enoughŠtomorrow 

morning.  
At this point
, I™m holding to the view that weather and other factors played a 

sign
ificant role in first
-quarter weakness, and that significant payback can be anticipated in the 
current quarter. 
We also observed
Šand this is nothing more than an observationŠthat weak 
first
-quarter growth has been a pattern during the recovery, normally giving way to a stronger 

rest of the year. 
We™ve made a small adjustment to our full
-year GDP growth forecast to reflect a weaker 
first quarter, but otherwise 
we have kept our forecast for growth and inflation unchanged from 
the March meeting.  We made no m
aterial change to our outlook.  We have growth resuming a 
run rate between 
2½ and 3 
percent
, with second-quarter growth above 3 
percent. 
A strengthening of consumer activity from the first quarter is a key factor in our outlook.   
We currently judge the risk to our growth and inflation outlooks as tilted to the downside.  
With the greater uncertainty I perceive at this juncture, the Tealbook alternative scenario titled 

ﬁPersistent 
Slowdown in 
Economic A
ctivityﬂ captures my concern that my outlook may be 
overly optimistic.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As many have already noted, the recent 
data have been disappointing, but it is worth noting, 
as Preside
nt Lockhart just did, that over the 
                      
               
   
      
past four years, 
first
-quarter GDP growth has averaged more than 2 percentage points lower than 
growth during the rest of the year, and there is no single smoking gun that can explain this string 

of seasonal aberrations
. E
ach year
, the winter slowdowns have proved to be temporary. 
So, if past is prologue, I expect the same pattern will occur this year
, with an anemic Q1 
followed by above-trend growth for the rest of 2015.  
I™m confident that the underlying 

momentum in th
e economy once again will be more apparent as the first quarter fades in our 
rearview mirror. 
This is consistent with what I™ve been hearing from my business contacts.  In particular, 
the fundamentals of the economy remain quite positive.  Solid job growth should lift income and 

consumer confidence further, helping to pave the way for continued consumption growth.  In 

addition, highly accommodative monetary policy will continue to boost spending, and these 

factors are very evident in my 
District.  In fact, 
some sectors of the economy, 
the 12
th District 
economy, are red hot.  An executive in the tech sector recently mentioned that to retain talent, 
some tech firms are now offering 20 percent or more pay raises. 
And if that wasn™t enough, 
they™re also throwin
g in housing for good measure, and in the Bay Area, housing is something 
that is very hard to come by and obviously very dear.  The other thing that we heard was that you 

can be vested
 in stock options 
after 
one month.  So this is an amazing time in the Silicon Valley 
economy, and about half of my staff ran off to apply for jobs. 
In addition, I will mention that some of my contacts in different sectors, including 
commercial real estate
, have emphasized the abundance of financing that can be obtained at very 

generous terms.  It™s an issue that I noticed
 was highlighted in both the S
LOOS
 and the QS 
reports, and we™re hearing about that in our D
istrict, too.
  Of course, continued low inflation 
remains a key issue.  I view the recent low inflation readings as being consistent with an 
                                 
              economy still operating below potential and facing temporary disinflationary factors.  Important 
questions remain.
  In the remainder of my remarks, I™ll focus on two of these issues.  
The first 
is, what signal should we be taking from the market-
implied measures of inflation compensation
?  And, second, what™s the empirical relationship between wage growth and inflation? 
The softness 
in inflation of late would be a lot more troublesome to me if it was also 
accompanied by a clear decline in inflation expectations.  This kind of scenario is discussed in 

the Tealbook alternative scenario simulation.  But so far, the weight of evidence sug
gests that 
this isn™t happening.  Long-run survey expectations from households and professional forecasters 

remain well anchored. 
In addition, as I pointed out in the past, long-run inflation expectations 
implied by a Phillips curve model estimated over the past 15 years, a period during which our 

credibility was firmly established, were also 
well anchored 
at 2 percent. 
Now, of course, the one discordant note comes from the market
-implied measures of 
inflation compensation.  Inflation compensation has fall
en significantly since the middle of last 
year, and while much of the focus has been on longer-
horizon measures
, there™s also a question 
about what signal we should take about the nearer-term inflation outlook. 
My staff looked at this question, and they conducted a forecasting comparison between 
measures of inflation compensation and five other competing forecasts, among them a random 

walk forecast and also the survey from the Survey of Professional Forecasters.
  We wanted to 
avoid liquidity issues that are 
associated with shorter
-term TIPS
, so they looked at inflation 
compensation derived from inflation swap rates
.  T
hese typically move very closely together 
with inflation compensation derived from the 
Treasur
y market, but 
are 
based o
n trading in a 
deeper market.
  Here we™re looking at one- and 
two
-year
-ahead inflation forecasts 
for 
headline 
CPI inflation. 
             
       
  
  
               
    
  
      
         
The striking result, which is very robust in all of their experiments
, is that forecasts based 
on inflation compensation were the worst performers of all 
the measures.  Basically
, inflation 
compensation did not give useful information about where inflation was going relative to survey 
forecasts. 
So, 
really
, looking at inflation compensation for insights into the future path of 
inflation 
is not supported by 
the data. 
One problem with our analysis is 
that 
data limitations preclude doing a similar exercise 
for long-term inflation expectations.  I™m going to go out on a limb here 
and say 
that the results 
we have for one- and two-year inflation compensation not being a useful predictor for future 

inflation will apply 
also to
 longer-term inflation. We don™t have that much data right now, but in 
five years when the transcript come
s out, we™ll see whether I was right or wrong. We™ll wait for 
that. 
Again
, President Kocherlakota has highlighted the factŠin a memo that he co
-authoredŠ
that 
inflation compensation 
is not a 
reliable forecast for inflation because it reflects 
other aspects of risk associated with different inflation outcomes. 
But I want to mention another 
interesting 
finding in our work 
about inflation compensation, and that is that these one
- and two-
year
-ahead inflation compensation measures are 
very highly correlated with recent past inflation, 
especially with pa
st inflation associated with movements in oil prices.
  That 
puts into 
question 
how to interpret this. It is a very similar result that we™ve found in the past when we looked at 

household surveys.  Household surveys of inflation expectations tend to be ver
y sensitive to 
lagged inflation, especially with regard to oil price movements, and for this reason we have 

tended to discount movements in household inflation expectations when the movements are 

driven by energy prices.  M
y staff suggests using a similar 
caution when trying to interpret 
inflation compensation measures as an indicator of people™s views on future inflation. 
      
    
                     
          
       The second issue I™ll discuss briefly is that of 
nominal wage growth.  A
s has already been 
mentioned, wage growth has been stuck around 2 percent for most of the recovery.  And, 
as economic theory would tell us, employee compensation makes up a huge fraction of a firm™s 

cost
s.  Y
ou would expect 
there
 to be a pretty tight relationship between nominal 
wage 
growth 
and price inflation, b
ut thi
s connection has been remarkably hard to find.  Many papers and 

research projects have looked at this, and
, basically, if you look back at the history of the 
literature, in every business cycle there™s a whole bunch of papers written about the relationship 

of nominal 
wage 
growth and price inflation.  T
he consistent finding through this literature is that 
it™s really hard to find any relationship between nominal 
wage 
growth and future price inflation.  

Recent research by Jim Stock and Mark Watson, and also some really nice work done at the 

Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland and elsewhere
, has shown that the additional information on 
wages or labor compensation has 
done little to improve the accuracy of standard inflation 

forecast models.
  My understandin
g is that 
the 
staff™s inflation forecasting models tend to be 
these 

price Phillips curve 
model
s or models that don™t really emphasize 
nominal 
wage 
growth. 
The lack of a close empirical link between 
nominal wage growth and future inflation 
likely refl
ects several factors that have affected labor markets in recent decades
Šsome of which 

I™ve talked about in the past.  
One is that 
nominal 
wage 
growth is probably being held down by 
rigidities in wage setting
 that kept wages from falling during the downturn and have 
been 
restraining wage growth as the economy improvesŠ
that is, there is 
downward nominal wage 
rigidity. 
The second is 
that 
globalization
, changes 
in unionization, and 
changes in technology 
have affected the share of productivity gains that are go
ing to workers, and 
that distorts the 
            
      
   
      
      
      
     
  
      
       relationship between wage growth and price inflation.  Put another way, the labor share 
of 
income 
has fallen dramatically since the 1980s. 
To summarize, based on the evidence accumulated over the past several decades
 of extensive research on this topic, there™s little or no information 
to suggest that 
aggregate wage 
data should inform our medium-term inflation outlook.  Now I™m going to break my rule that I 
stated earlier
ŠI do not view a 
rise in 
nominal wage growth as a necessary condition to be 
confident in the return of inflation to 2 
percent. 
All told, our current low inflation rates, I think, 
are pretty easy to understand in the context of transitory factorsŠ
import prices, energy prices
Š and the fact that there is st
ill some considerabl
e slack in the labor market.  As the labor market 
moves back to maximum employment, and 
as these transitory factors dissipate, I expect inflation 

to move back to 2 
percent. 
President Bullard mentioned 2011.  I think we should learn a lesson from that.  We did 
see inflation rise quite a bit 
as a result of a rise in some special factors.  We were experiencing 
high inflationary pressures due to 
large increases 
in the price of oil and other import prices, and 
what we did then, 
I think
, is the right thing.  We looked past the transitory effects of those and 
looked more broadly 
at the long-term inflation outlook, and that is how I am viewing it, too.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank
 you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask an information question? 
The 
research 
that 
you mention
ed is 
very interesting, but 
I am not sure I followed the details.
  The inflation compensation measures 
were one-
to two
-year horizon expectation
sŠa
nd you also 
had survey measures of inflation 
expectations. 
       
    
  
        
                          
             
          MR. WILLIAMS.  The horse race 
was 
basically 
this:  W
e aligned the inflation swap rate 
one year ahead with 
the swaps of month
s 13 to 24 aheadŠo
ne year ahead
 with one year ahead.  
And then we looked at the 
Survey of Professional Forecasters 
and Blue Chip 
for each year. 
MR. EVANS.  At the same horizons? 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Same horizons. 

MR. EVANS.  I see, and those were helpful? Because
, if I understand some of the Board 
work, they use 
these 
long
-term inflation
 expectations for their modeling because, 
as attractive as 
it is theoretically to use a short
-term expectation, nobody can find a good measure of short-
term 
inflation expectation
s.  
Isn™t that right, Bill? 
MR. WASCHER. 
We use the longer
-term inflation exp
ectations in our models.  That™s 
right. 
MR. WILLIAMS. 
Yes
, but the question I™m asking is:  What do you think inflation is 
going to be over the next four quarters? 
The 
SPF is actually a very good forecast.  This is 
roughly as good as the Tealbook.  I
t™s
 asking what 
inflation 
is going to be over the nextŠ 
MR. EVANS.  Well, but the Tealbook won™t use any short-
term inflation 
measures, 
that™s 
my understanding. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  No, no, no.  I™m just looking at the forecast itself. 

MR. EVANS.  Oh, yes, but thos
e forecasts are lousy.  They might be better than the other 
ones, but they™re all lousy.  
MR. WILLIAMS. Well, I think the research says that the Tealbook is maybe a little bit 
better than the SPF and Blue Chip over the next year or twoŠ 
MR. WASCHER. 
Just 
in terms of forecasting? 
There™s probably not much difference. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  So it™s basically the same. 
                           
   
   
       
           MR. EVANS.  The
 Tealbook does something which is not in line with theory, to use 
long-term inflation expectations for a one-
year
-ahead inflation because, well, it kind of works, 
right? 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes
, we view the anchoring of inflation expectations as best 
approximat
ed by long-
term survey measures of inflation
 expectations. 
MR. 
EVANS
.  Yes
, that™s why I was asking the 
question about 
whether I understood you 
right, you™ve currently got it anchored at 1¾ percent and are hoping to goes up to 2 percent. 
MR. WASCHER.  Right. 
MR. 
EVANS
.  But at any rate, I™m done.  
Well, I mean, it™s interesting. I appreciate that. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Please proceed. 

MR. EVA
NS.  Okay.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  For the most part, my directors and 
business contacts expect that the recent spate of soft economic readings will be short
-lived.  The 
one report that seems to sum it up the best came from the 
chairman of Manpower who, when 
talking about soft first
-quarter numbers, said none of his clients are getting depressed about it.  
The view seems to be that there is enough momentum from last year that growth should pick up 
soon. 
Separately, I didn™t hear of any meaningful reports 
of wage or price pressures from my 
contacts.  My own outlook for the real economy continues to be for 
real 
GDP growth to run 
between 2
½ and 3 percent over the remainder of this year and next.  Our assumptions for 
potential output growth are somewhat strong
er than 
in the Tealbook, so our GDP path translates 
into a very similar reduction in resource gaps as the Tealbook™s.  By the end of 2016, we have 

the unemployment rate down to around 5 percent, which is my current assessment of the natural 

rate. 
           
      
               
                  
 My inflation forecast has not changed.  Like the Tealbook, I do not see inflation reaching 
target until sometime in 2018 or 2019.  I should again point out that my assessment of 
appropriate monetary policy underlying this forecast has lower rates than most people around the 

table. 
Now, I want to spend some time today talking about why this outlook leads me to favor a 
whites
-of-
their
-eyes approach for our policy response to rising inflation.  I have talked about risk 
management many times before.  Today I want to art
iculate three additional reasons the data lead 
me to prefer a cautious approach to raising rates. 
First, forecasting inflation is inherently 
difficult, and that™s the discussion that we were just having.  This implies a high burden of proof 

to say we are 
sufficiently confident that our currently low core inflation will move back to 

2 percent in a reasonable period of time. 
Second, despite near-
zero nominal rates and a large 
balance sheet, I am not convinced our current policy stance is all that accommodat
ive to begin 
with.  And, third, I actually see benefits to risking a modest overshooting of our 2 percent 
inflation target. 
Let me start with why it should take strong evidence to have confidence in an outlook of 
low inflation rising back to 2 percent.  Anyone who has looked at the forecasting performance of 
statistical inflation models knows that everyone™s abilities in this area are limited.  Indeed, there 

is a body of research that shows it is not that easy to be a random walk forecast
.  Even the best-
performing models seldom forecast a rapid change in inflation, and they always imply substantial 

forecast uncertainty.  That said, we do have many analytical reasons to think our current low 

inflation will rise at some point. 
Most of the commentary I hear at this table centers 
on the 
economy regaining traction, resource gaps closing, and the upward gravitational pull of high and 

stable inflation expectations, like in the Tealbook forecast. I also suspect that simple mean 
            
      
                 
  
       
   
          
         reversion probably plays a role in 
these forecasts as well. I agree that these forces will 
eventually deliver.  The question is, when?  Taking until 2019 to reach our target is not 

acceptable to me. 
Given all of these difficulties in forecasting inflation, my own preferred dashboard of 
indicators is mostly a list of factors coincident with rising inflation
.  While measures of labor 
market slack are important, I would not rely on them alone, 
as it is possible something has 

changed in the structure of the economy that makes those historical benchmarks less trustworthy.  

In addition, I will continue to look for increasing core inflation, faster wage growth, and firmer 

market
-based measures of inflation compensation to provide corroborating evidence of stronger 
inflationary pressures. 
As I sai
d, the absence of statistically strong leading indicators 
suggests 
that 
these observations are likely to be more coincident than predictive. But at least once we see 
them, we can have more confidence that inflation is moving up persistently.  Until then, 
I remain 

wary. 
Now, my second pointŠthat current policy is not as accommodative as we might thinkŠ 
comes out of the model analysis.  
A fundamental benchmark for thinking about the level of 
monetary accommodation and inflation pressures is the difference bet
ween the actual real rate of 
interest and the equilibrium
, or Wicks
ellian
, real rate of interest.
  As Milton Friedman said, low 
interest rates alone do not mean monetary policy is accommodat
ive.  The relevant question is 
whether, after adjusting for inflation, our current real federal funds rate is far enough below the 

equilibrium real rate to achieve our policy objectives in a reasonable amount of timeŠ
that is, for 

inflation to actually get up to 2 percent, 
as the forecasts embody. 
I think the answer to th
at question is ﬁno.ﬂ  There are a number of simple observations 
that suggest that the current equilibrium rate is quite low.  Namely, even with our interest rate 
         
        
       
     
  
    
    
       
      
         
and balance sheet policies in place, we still see the continued existence of resource gaps, a lack 
of any meaningful upward movement in inflation, and relatively low levels of capital spending 

despite piles of cash on corporate balance sheets. These cash stockpiles are an indication that 

expected real returns on physical investment are not very hi
gh. 
To put a number out, the Tealbook-
consistent equilibrium real rate shown in 
Book 
B, as 
circulated over the weekend, 
is negative 0.1 percent.  Some might look at the current real funds 
rate of minus 1.18 percent, as reported in the Tealbook, Book B, and 
say we have adequate 

accommodation in place.  I don™t agree.  
Recall that the Tealbook™s equilibrium real rate is 

calibrated to close the output gap in 12 quarters.  It says nothing about inflation.  In the Tealbook 

baseline, the inflation gap is still wi
th us until 2019.  That would mean that inflation would have 

to run below target for more than a decade 
and, t
o me
, that is simply too long to be considered 
the result of appropriate policy. 
I want to mention that President Bullard 
referred to the fact 
tha
t PCE 
inflation rose to 
2 percent in 2011 and 2012 on the strength of commodity price increases.  I think the reason we 

focus on core 
inflation is
 that 
core is a better indicator of what inflation is likely to be next year, 
because th
e shocks in headline PCE often are transitory.  T
he real test
, I would say
, is, when did 
the Tealbook ever forecast inflation two years out as being at 2 percent or above?  I think that 

has 
not been the case for quite some time. 
While we can 
all 
lament the 
fact that there are large uncertainties regarding the value of 
the equilibrium real rate of interest, uncertainty over inflation forecasting and the stance of 

monetary policy accommodation go hand in hand.  Logically, because the equilibrium rate has a 

str
ong bearing on the inflation outlook, uncertainty over it ought to translate into comparable 
uncertainty over inflation itself.
  In other words, how can we declare we are confident that 
         
      
    
   
                   current low inflation is headed back up to 2 percent unless we are also confident that our policy 
setting relative to 
the 
equilibrium real rate is able to return inflation to target
? This brings me to the third reason my outlook is premised on a whites-of-
their
-eyes 
policy approach.  I recognize that the usual policy lags mi
ght mean that a delay in tightening 
could cause inflation to modestly overshoot 2 percent sometime down the road.  But so what?  Is 

that such a big cost?
  No.  On the contrary, it could be a benefit.  Considering how long inflation 

has been below target, adopting a policy that allows the possibility of such an overshoot actually 

seems necessary to support the credibility of our symmetric inflation objective.  If we find 

ourselves with the federal funds rate at 1 percent or a little bit above that while infl
ation is still 
too low, we could easily regret the conservative credibility that we
™ve built up. 
I would 
also 
say that if we are not willing to allow an overshoot of our inflation objective, 
then I think we should definitely 
be having the conversation that
 President Rosengren was 
suggesting we have in terms of the appropriateness of the level of the inflation objective, if it is 
something that we are not allowed to overshoot with any reasonability.  I think that™s important.  
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR Y
ELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb. 

MS. HOLCOMB.  And now for something completely different.  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  The Texas economy has decelerated since I last reported to the Committee.  Continued 

low oil prices, the strong dollar, and a weaker national economy pushed state employment down 

by almost 12,000 jobs in March, the first decline in 40 months.  Over the first three months of the 

year, combined job growth averaged a positive but still dismal 0.7 percent, down from 4.2 

percent d
uring the fall of 2014.  Our forecast for December-over-December job growth, which is 
      
           
                           derived from the Texas Leading Index, now stands at 0.5 percent.  That™
s down from a forecast 
of 1 to 2 percent growth six months ago. 
Besides oil and gas, the manufacturing sector has seen the greatest slowing.  Companies 
in the computer and electronics industry say that they are losing opportunities as the appreciating 
dollar pushes up the relative price of U.S.-made capital equipment.  Chemical producers report 

lower se
lling prices and margins and lower exports.  Producers of primary metals have noted 

increasing import competition, too.  Companies in the professional and business services 

industry have been indirectly affected by both low energy prices and the strong dol
lar, 
particularly those with a significant fraction of their clientele in the energy and manufacturing 

sectors.  There have been some reports of adverse spillovers from energy to financial services as 

well. 
Our most up-
to-date information comes from our Te
xas 
Manufacturing and S
ervice 
Sector 
Outlook Surveys.  The latest manufacturing survey results, 
released only yesterday
, show 
production declining in April for the second straight monthŠ
the first consecutive two
-month 
decline since the recession. 
The 
New 
Orders 
Index, too, has registered its worst two-month 
performance since the recession, posting readings of minus 16.1 and minus 14.0 in March and 

April, respectively.  In contrast, our latest service sector survey 
results
, released this morning
, show the headline revenue index rising to 14.6 in April from 10.7 in March.  April™s reading is 

the highest reported so far this year, but 
it is considerably lower than levels reported through 
most of 2014. 
Despite slower job growth, the Texas unemploymen
t rat
e continues to fall, and at 
4.2 percent in March
, it reached its lowest level since July 2007. We have anecdotal reports of 
laid
-off energy workers shifting into construction, especially along the Gulf Coast, 
where skilled 
         
             
  
   
    
          
      
  
    construction workers remain
 in short supply.  The wage and benefit ind
exes from our 
manufacturing and service sector surveys indicate that upward wage pressures are somewhat less 
intense than they were last year.  Looking ahead, health-
care contacts are concerned about losing 
experienced workers in a coming wave of retirements.  In finance, our bankers report flat 

demand and unchanged standards across all major loan categories. 
Oil prices have moved irregularly upward since last month™s FOMC meeting, with WTI 
closing some of the gap 
with 
Brent.  Y
ear-to-date volatility has been driven by conflicting supply 
developments, including unexpected increases in OPEC output
Šname
ly, Saudi Arabia™s 
production was up 4 percent in MarchŠinventory buildups in the U
nited 
States
, and reports of 
slowe
r growth in U.S. oil production.  If the Iran negotiations successfully conclude in June, that 
country could ramp up its output by more than 700,000 barrels per dayŠ0.7 percentage point 
of 
world supplyŠby the end of 2016, which would be enough to lower the 
price of crude between 
$5 and $15 per barrel in 2016, all else staying constant.  The conflict in Yemen is another source 
of uncertainty.  Yemen itself is a negligible producer of crude oil.  However, the threat of wider 
conflict between Saudi Arabia and 
Iran
, and Yemen™s proximity to the fourth-
busiest ch
okepoint 
for crude oil flows in the world, have created fears of supply disruptions. 
Our energy industry contacts tell us that the number of drilled but uncompleted wells, or 
DUCs, has increased between 33 and 50 percent since the end of last year. These are wells that 

have been drilled but are kept out of production.  They are underground inventory.  
New capital 

projects are difficult to initiate, but spending continues on existing contracts.  U.S. oil production 

is expected to peak within the next two to three months.  We are also likely to hit above-ground 

storage constraints within that time 
frame.  Drilling costs are down 20 percent, partly as a result 
of real efficiency gains and partly as a result o
f cheaper labor and equipment.  
There is cautious 
                                       optimism that the worst is over, coupled with recognition that we
™re unlikely to see a return to 
$100-per-
barrel oil any
 time soon.  Repercussions and adjustments in the broader Texas 
economy are ongoing. 
We are a bit more sanguine about the national economic outlook today than we were a 
couple of meetings ago.  It appears considerably less likely now that we will blow through full 
employment at full throttle.  That revised assessment is based on predictions from a small suite 

of models we use to forecast real activity two to four quarters out.  Although each model relies 

on its own set of financial and policy indicators, all are now telling a consistent story
:  solid if 
unspectacular GDP growth, on average, in the second and third quarters of 2015 and a gradual 

deceleration in employment growth over the course of the year, with the unemployment rate 

leveling off in the neighborhood of 5 percent heading into 2016.  
We expect 
trimmed 
mean PCE 
inflation, our measure of the underlying trend in headline inflation, to average about 1¾ 
percent 

over the next four quarters.  As compared with the Tealbook, we are more optimistic on both 
halves of the dual mandate, b
ut we
™re certainly not only
 in the same ballpark as the Tealbook, 
but in the same outfield.  Hopefully, it™
s not left field. 
Although we are looking forward to tomorrow™s GDP report, we don™t expect to take a 
strong signal from it, whatever the number turns out to be.  The first est
imate relies on a lot of 
guesswork, and in any case, 
GDP growth is volatile from quarter to quarter.  As a result, we
™ve 
not found real-
time estimates of lag
ged GDP growth to be especially helpful for forecasting at 
the horizons that are of interest to us.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Data on economic conditions in the Eighth 
District have improved notably during the 
intermeeting
 period.  The pace of job creation was 
           
           
   
   
     
        revised up for 2014, and preliminary data for 2015 has generally been positive.  
The 
District 
unemployment rate continues to decline and stands at 5.7 percent today, according to the most 
recent reading
Šonly slightly higher than the national rate. 
According to the revised BLS d
ata, 
District job creation occurred at about twice the pace 
in 2014 as compared 
with
 2013, which was itself revised higher.  One of the largest revisions 
was in the Louisville MSA which was revised from an
 original estimated value of 2.3 percent 
growth to an updated value of 3.8 percent.  By sector, notable upward revisions occurred in 

transportation, manufacturing
, and professional and business services.
  Correspondingly, 
Louisville™s average hourly earnings growth is significantly faster than the national 
average. 
On the downside, one of the most notable developments in the local labor market was the 
announcement by U.S. Steel that they would temporarily idle their Granite City, Illinois, 
plant
, laying off over 2,000 employees effective in May.  Media repo
rts suggest that the layoffs are 

due, in part, 
to a rise in imports of relatively inexpensive Chinese steel
Šsteel that
, evidently, the 
Chinese do not need in their home market. 
On this dimension, 
my recent intermeeting visit to China
, combined with discussions 
with CEOs and my interpretation of some hard data, has suggested to me that trend growth in 

China may be notably slower than commonly appreciated.  I think this goes beyond the relatively 

weak reported growth rate 
in the first quarter 
to a trend rate 
of growth as low as 4½ percent.  
Chinese GDP statistics are notably opaque
Ša topic of macroeconomic discussion for the 
past 15 

years or moreŠbut corroborating data and anecdotes now seem to be diverging more sharply 

from official reports, suggesting that a 
Chin
ese slowdown is to be taken far more seriously this 
time.
  The proximate cause of the slowdown is likely the ongoing anticorruption campaign, 
                 
                       
       
     which is reportedly casting a very wide net and is likely creating a chilling effect on new 
business formatio
n and business expansion. 
Turning to the national outlook, I have five main areas for comments on the current 
narrative for the U
nited S
tates, 
as reported in the Tealbook, 
FOMC speeches
, and popular 
commentary.  The comments are in the following areas:
  one, potential over
-interpretation of the 
Q1 slowdown; two, an unemployment forecast that I think is not credible; 
three, assumptions 
about 
r* that may be suspect; four, over-interpretation of the likely effects of the value of the 
dollar on U.S. growth pros
pects;
 and, five, underappreciation of the risks of asset price bubbles 
during the next two to three years as rates remain exceptionally low.
  I™m going to comment on 
the first three of these today.  I™m not commenting directly on inflation because I think
 the 
situation in that dimension has not changed greatly during the inter
meet
ing period.  I continue to 
expect inflation to return to target and eventually overshoot 2 percent in 2016. 
On the first issue, potential over-interpretation of the Q1 slowdown, d
ata 
are 
clearly 
weaker on a tracking basis since our 
previous meeting.  GDP will be reported tomorrow 
morning, and the s
taff has penciled in an estimate close to zero. But suppose we take the median 
of the nowcasting table reported in the Tealbook, which 
is 
an 
approximately 1½ percent annual 

growth rate of GDP in the first quarter.  On that basis
, the year
-over-year growth rate would be 
3.3 percent.  I think this number gives a better sense of the underlying pace of growth in the U.S. 

economy and provides 
a better point of reference 
for 
shaping GDP expectations for the 
remainder of this year. 
In addition
, I think that seasonal factors for Q1 are being called into 
question.  We considered Q1 GDP growth averages versus averages for Q2 through Q4 over 

differe
nt time periods
, excluding recessions
, since the mid
-1990s.  Average Q1 real GDP growth 
        
                           has been notably lower in these subperiods.  This broad-
brush analysis suggest
s that low Q1 
growth rates are not occurring by accident, and that Q1 seasonals may need revamping. 
The second issue is unemployment projections balancing out at about 5 percent over the 
forecast horizon despite easy monetary policy
, by conventional definition.  I do not think that 
such a forecast is credible, and I continue to disagree with th
e labor force participation 
assumption behind it.  A key 
paper in the 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
Šby Aaronson 
and others
, published 
in 
2014Šsuggests that labor force participation has been dropping 
according to demographic factors since 2000, 
and, furthermore, that this downward trend will 
continue through the forecast horizon.  This suggests that, on balance, there will be no sustained 

upward improvement in labor force participation and, therefore, that unemployment will 

continue to drop into 
the 
4½ to 4 percent range over the forecast horizon, barring any major 

disruption in the U.S. economy.  This dynamic would be very similar to what was observed 

during the 1990s expansion and again during the 2000 expansion.  On both of those occasions, 
unemployment moved into the low 4 
percent range. 
Previous staff predictions in this area have emphasized increases in labor force 
participation but have turned out to be wrong.  Indeed, the predictions given in the S
ummary of 
Economic P
rojections have also re
lied
, in part, on this story and have also been wrong.  
The 
median SEP forecast as of September 2012 for unemployment at the end of 2014 was too high 
by more than 1 percentage point.  The same was true of the median SEP September 2013 

forecast for unemploy
ment. 
So what™s the bottom line?  We™re charting a course for very low interest rate monetary 
policy based on an unrealistic assessment of future labor market performance, and this will harm 

FOMC policymaking in the quarters and years ahead.  
We can, of co
urse, cite other labor market 
                         
  
   
  
    
        
         
         indicators and thereby bring to bear more information on overall labor market performance.  The 
Board of Governors™ l
abor 
market 
conditions index does exactly this, conveniently summarizing 
information on many different dimensions of labor market performance.  
The 
Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis calculated that the value of this index is comfortably above its long-run 

average since 1986.  This indicat
es that
, based on the totality of available information, labor 
markets are n
ot weak but instead are relatively strong viewed in historical perspective. 
I like this 
index because it brings all information
 together in one place and avoids cherry-
picking particular 
indicators that may or may not be indicative of overall labor market 
performance. 
The third issue is 
r*.  Some commentary has suggested that 
an r* parameter in a 
Taylor 
rule is 
low based on estimates of 
Laubach 
and Williams, which
, combined with relatively small 
inflation and unemployment gaps, would suggest, through a Taylor-
rule
-type calculation
, that 
current policy is approximately the policy recommended by the rule.  This argument could 

rationalize current policy settings, although it would suggest that polic
y is 
perhaps not as 
accommodative as people woul
d intuitively think. 
One comment is that the value of 
r* is highly 
uncertain
, either from a theoretical perspective or a measurement perspective.  Time
-varying 
r* Taylor rules are relatively untested and do not represent the empirical tradition behind Taylor 

rule estimation and recommended policy outcomes. For this reason
, I am skeptical of using 
time
-varying 
r* as a rationale for current policy settings. 
The value of 
r* from a broader perspective should represent the 
Wicksellian 
natural rate 
of interest
, which one might view as governed by the real rate of interest that would prevail in 
an economy without frictions and without monetary policy influence.  
In a wide class of models, we 

know what the 
real rate of interest would be.  It would be the sum of the rate of productivity 
growth and the rate of labor force growth.  These factors alone would drive the real output 
      
   
            
       
    
             
  growth rate in this class of models.  
My staff calculated an 
r* value based on such a view.  It 
turned out to be 2 percent today, and this seems like a good benchmark for 
r* from which to 
calibrate Taylor rule policy recommendations.  Such recommendations would suggest that policy 
is indeed accommodative today, which would match most people™s intuition about current policy 

settings. Interestin
gly, this value of 
r* has historically been somewhat lower than the 
Laubach
-Williams measure
.  It
 has been near zero in recent years, but as of today has moved above 
zero to 
a value of about 2 
percent. 
The bottom line is that there are many ways to look at this value of 
r*, but a sensible 
guess is that 
r* is 
2 percent or higher, meaning policy today is accommodative, 
as intuition 
suggests.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you. 

MR. TARULLO.  M
adam Chair, if I couldŠ
President Bullard
, I was a little bit confused 
by what you were saying about labor force participation, 
and particularly the staff™s assessment 
of it.  My understanding of what the staff has been saying is that while they project a downward 
trend in labor force participation because of demographics, they also assess the decline in the 

immediate post
-crisis years to have been substantially steeper than that
.  And what they were 
predicting
Šand continue, I think, to predict, 
unless Bill 
corrects me
Šis a less steep decline or a 
flattening
-out of current labor force participation
, which eventually has their projected 
demographic trendŒbased participation rate converging with the actual participation rate.  And 

that, I think, is what™s been
 happening over the p
ast year and a half or so
, during which, 
with a 
little bit of fluctuation up and down, 
the labor force participation rate 
has been 
roughly stable, 
which I think is bearing out the staff™s expectation of the convergence of their projected trend 

with actual labor force participation. 
       
        
         
                 
      MR. WASCHER.  Yes, I think that™s how I interpret it as well.  I don™t think what we 
have in the forecast is at all at odds with the 
Aaronson and others paper of 2014.  The gap we 
have in there is roughly what we estimated in that paper, and as Governor Tarullo indicated, we 
expect the downtrend in the participation rate to continue 
and the actual participation rate to 
close the gap by falling less than the downtrend we have. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  First Vice Presiden
t Prichard. 
MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Economic activity in the Third District 
slowed during the first quarter.  While still expanding, the rate of expansion has been below 

expectations.  However, it appears that the recent slowdown may be tem
porary, and that 
sentiment is widely held among contacts in our region.  Unemployment in the region ticked up to 

5.7percent in March
, with Pennsylvania experiencing a significant decline in employment, 
enough that the first-
quarter job growth in the state 
was actually negative.
  However, both our 
April 
Manufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey 
and 
Nonmanufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey 
indicate that the manufacturing and service sectors expanded employment in April and point to 

further job growth and capital expenditures over the second half of the year.  One prominent 

manufacturer in the region indicated that his businesses are poised to grow rather more robustly 

in the second half of the year once they have worked through the necessary inventory correction.  

Although he doesn™t anticipate 2015 to be as strong as last year, the second half of the year 

should see solid growth. 
In response to a special survey question on the effect of the dollar™s appreciation on the
ir manufacturing activity, respondents who ha
ve exchange rate exposure indicated that the 
appreciation negatively affected their operations. 
However, our District does not overly engage 
in foreign trade, 
with exports
 accounting for only 10 
percent of revenues and imports 
         
   
              
            representing about 5 
percent
 of nonlabor costs.  
Thus, the overall effect of the dollar™s rise was 
fairly small 
for 
Third District manufacturers. 
Both nonresidential and residential construction weakened in March.  We are also seeing 
a softening in multifamily housing.  Reflecting th
e overall weaknesses in this sector, house price 
appreciation is also slower than in the 
nation as a whole, 
with prices
 growing in the 3 
to 3½ percent range.
  Retailers in the region have been report
ing healthy sales over the inter
me
eting 
period and modera
te year
-over-
year sales growth. 
Contacts report th
at sales are starting to be 
bolstered by lower gasoline prices, and consumers in the region remain highly confident.  They 

are also paying down post-holiday debt, and debit and credit card lines are declining.  Bankers in 

the region indicate that the growth in the commercial loan segment of their portfolios has picked 

up substantially, while other loan activity has remained fairly flat. 
Thus, our D
istrict reflects 
fairly well what might be transpiring in ot
her regions 
nationally
Ša bit of a step back in labor markets, 
a falloff in manufacturing activity
, and a lack of 
any significant improvement in residential investment.  This slowdown is well reflected in one of 

the series we produce in our real
-time resear
ch center, the 
Aruoba-Diebold-
Scotti Business 
Conditions Index.  The ADS uses six high-frequency data series to construct an index of current 

economic activity.  Those series include
, one, initial jobless claims through the week ending 

April 11 of this year; two, payroll employment through March; t
hree, industrial production 
through March; four, real personal income through February; five, real manufacturing and trade 

sales through January; 
and, six, real GDP through the 
fourth quarter of last year.
  The index is 
centered on zero, which indicates normal growth rates, and the index has recently turned 

negative.  However, we are receiving indications that the somewhat slower growth we have 
              
      
       
   
   
             
  wit
nessed is a temporary phenomenon, and that economic activity is expected to bounce back to 
trend growth rates. 
As mentioned by President Bullard, we also find that, 
historically
, first
-quarter GDP 
growth may not be adequately adjusted for seasonal variation.  Over the past 30 years, 
seasonally 
adjusted growth 
in first
-quarter GDP has averaged significantly less than growth over the 
remaining three quarters
Š1.8 percent as opposed to 2.7 percent.  Additionally, if one examines 
the timing of the 10 
weakest qua
rters over that span, six occurred in the first quarter and
, 50 percent of the time
, the weakest quarter 
was the first quarter of the year.
  Observations like 
these may point us to placing more weight on GDIŠ
gross domestic income
Šor on GDPplus, 
which incorporates the income side of GDP, in interpreting current economic activity.  GDPplus 

has the advantage that, unlike GDI, it is available with the same timing as expenditure
-side data. 
With that as background, we continue to project that overall economic act
ivity will 
accelerate modestly
, that utilization gaps will continue to progressively narrow
, and that inflation 
will continue to firm. With 
a substantial amount of data forthcoming before our June meeting, I 
expect that we™ll have a clearer view of the em
erging trends and confirmationŠor notŠ
that 
first
-quarter economic performance was, indeed, a poor harbinger of the year to come.  Thank 

you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  
President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming national data suggest that the 
economy hit a soft patch in the first quarter, which is consistent with the recent information on 

economic activity in the Fifth Federal Reserve District. 
At the same time, our reports indicate 
that the weakness is widel
y viewed as temporary.  Our diffusion index of manufacturing activity, 
released this morning
, was slightly negative in April, and that followed a reading of negative 8 
            
  
                       
       
   for March
.  B
ut our index of expected shipments six months ahead was a robust plus 38, a 
level 
that has not been exceeded since 2011.  
Similarly, our 
index 
for nonretail service
-sector activity 
was also slightly negative in April, but the index of expected demand six months ahead held 
steady at a pretty positive rate.  And the indexes for employment remain positive across all 

sectors. Retail revenue rose 
5 points to plus 17. 
More broadly, commentary from our directors and industry roundtable participants was 
more positive this month than last, and we™ve heard numerous reports about transitory factors 

having affected recent activity.  An executive at an engineering firm in West Vir
ginia said that 
ﬁweather has been the primary factor in our business slowdown.ﬂ 
Several other reports cited 
production slowdowns attributable to the West Coast port strike.  For example, a manufacturer of 

industrial safety products stated that production 
was interrupted by delays in receiving shipments 
of just one critical part manufactured in China.  These reports suggest that it™s quite reasonable to 

expect a rebound in growth in Q2. 
As usual, any discussion of labor markets these days turns quickly to the subject of 
shortages of skilled workers.  It does seem as if these shortages are having noticeable effects. 

For example, the CEO of a large building materials company told of a trucking company 

refusing outgoing shipments due to a lack of drivers.  
We also continue to hear about markets 
experiencing wage pressures
, and, while not universal at this point, the scope of these 

observations appears to have broadened of late.  This was most apparent in the reports from 

representatives of several staffing firm
s, both national and regional, who serve on our 
roundtables, including a regional representative from Manpower.  
One large staffing firm is 

telling clients to expect upward wage pressure ﬁin all skill levelsﬂ later this year.  Two grocers in 

Richmond recently announced double-
digit starting
-wage increases, perhaps 
in response to Wal
-         
     
       
     
  
                 
    Mart™s announcement.  A large auto manufacturer plans to raise starting wages for assembly line 
workers at a plant in our District from $13.17 an hour to $15.85 an hourŠabout 20 
percent. 
A lumber company in West Virginia has responded to a shortage by bringing in entry-
level workers 
from Puerto Rico, renting houses for them, and hiring an interpreter, all of which raise the cost of 
labor by 10 to 15 percent.  
These reports suggest that broader wage pressures may be about to 

emerge, although I recognize that wage acceleration is not yet apparent in the monthly figures for 

average hourly earnings. 
Turning to the national economy, as I said, we™
ve clearly hit a soft patch recently. 
Some 
of that softness was due to well
-known temporary factors.  Combined, these transitory factors 
could well explain a large part, if not all, of the first
-quarter slowdown.  
Moreover, this wouldn™t 

be, as many have noted, the first flat quarter we™
ve se
en during this expansion.  So the question 
is how rapidly economic activity picks up again from here as the effect of these transitory factors 

fade. I share th
is Tealbook™s optimism on consumer spending, and that™s based on robust 
income growth, solid consumer sentiment readings, and continued improvement in labor market 

conditions.  The rebound in car sales last month was an important piece of evidence that 

consumers have the confidence to boost spending in the months ahead. 
Turning to inflation, the late
st readings have been a bit firmer than expected.  Core CPI 
inflation averaged 2.3 percent at an annual rate from December to March.  The staff™s translation 

into core PCE inflation is 1.4 percent over the same three months, and that implies that Q4 will 

be the low point for core PCE inflation.  Oil prices appear to have bottomed out and the run-up in 

the dollar seems to have lost steam, so the transitory downward pressures on headline inflation 

are waning. Thus, it seems fairly clear to me that we are eme
rging from this inflation dip
, and 
inflation will be moving towards 2 percent in coming quarters. 
                      
         
             Looking ahead, as several of you have mentioned, we will receive more than the usual 
amount of data over the upcoming intermeeting period, including, importan
tly,
 two employment 
reports and two reports on personal income and consumption.  
If the data come in consistent with 
the Tealbook forecast, we would have solid evidence in hand at our June meeting that consumer 

spending growth had rebounded and that inflation was moving up.  If so, I believe the case for 

raising rates would be strong, s
o it seems premature to make any statements at this meeting or in 
the days immediately ahead, I believe, that could be interpreted as taking June off the table.  

Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Unemployment in the 
Tenth 
District remains 
very low at 4.2 percent, and recent employment growth has been modest but is mixed across 

states and industries.  Several 
District 
states are seeing sizable oil and gas layoffs, and negative 
spillovers are showing up in regional factory and transportation activity as well as in consumer 
spending 
areas 
and 
those that are 
energy dependent.  
Through the first quarter of this year, 
District energy jobs were down 4½ 
percent
, and firms in our latest energy survey expect 
their 
employment to fall by 12 percent this year.  District manufacturing is also feeling the 
effect, as 
the last time our manufacturing survey composite was lower than 
its April reading was in early 
2009. Firms responding to our energy survey, however, note 
that 
breakeven oil prices have 
fallen considerably as services costs have dropped, providing some encouragement for future 

activity as oil prices edge higher.  On the other hand, D
istrict states with virtually no oil and gas 
activity have seen a solid start to 2015.  Colorado, in particular, continues to grow rapidly, driven 

by strong tourism and construction activity.  
As a result, total employment in the region is up 
       
      
       
         
  
     
              slightly this year, and overall services activity in the District continues to grow despite the 
energy layoffs.  In agriculture, drought has worsened, although winter wheat production is 

shaping up to be similar to its recent five-
year average, and corn a
nd soybean planting intentions 
are generally strong.  Still, persistently low crop prices and elevated input costs continue to 

increase farmers™ short
-term financing needs. 
For the national economy, my outlook for growth over the medium term is little chan
ged
.  I assume that 
the softness in first
-quarter GDP proves transitory, as it has for the past several 
years.  Weather effects and the sharp decline in energy investment look to be important factors 

holding down first-quarter growth.  However, more persis
tent factors 
producing softer export 
growth and a broader slowing in new investment bear watching.  
Alternatively, personal 

consumption appears to have some upside potential, 
as there is yet to be a significant boost to 

spending from lower gasoline prices. 
March™s payroll numbers were clearly below expectations, though the labor market 
continues to improve in several aspects.  The services sector continues to perform well.  In the 

first quarter of this year, services added
, on average, 
179,000 additional jo
bs per month.  This is 
better than the 134,000 
average in the first quarter 
of 
last year.
  Overall, I expect average 
monthly payroll growth to drift down from the rapid pace of 260,000 per month last year to 

200,000 this year before settling down to a pace 
of around 150,000 next year as the labor market 
continues to tighten and growth moves to its trend level. 
Research by my staff also indicates improving labor market conditions, 
as reflected by 
the number of workers moving from lower-
to higher
-paying sect
ors
Šthat is, the extent of 
cyclical upgrading.  Their analysis shows that the rise in the quits rate over the past two years is 

primarily due to a higher quits rate in sectors with lower pay, like wholesale/retail trade and 
           
        
               
  
      
   
      
      leisure/hospitality.
  Tracking individual workers in these sectors using C
urrent 
Population 
Survey data shows 
that 
they have recently been moving into higher-
paying sectors, like 
education and health services, at rates similar to those before the recession. 
Turning to inflation, I expect
 inflation to remain somewhat below target due to lagged 
effects from low energy prices and a stronger dollar.  Inflation in some sectors, such as health 
care, have also notably slowed.  In addition, 
because of some of the current factors affecting 

inflation, year-over-year core could drift lower as stronger readings from a year agoŠ
core PCE 
readings from March to June of last year were 
running at a solid 2 
percent pace
Šdrop out of the 
12-month window.  
Such base effects have not affected 
my overall confidence regarding the 
medium
-term outlook for inflation, assuming 
there are 
continued improvement in the labor 

market and stable longer-
term expectations.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  I will start with a few observations 
about the Ninth District economy.  It™s generally robust, but the decline in oil prices is certainly 

creating challenges in some areas.  I will then turn to the national economy, 
where I see 

continued shortfall
s in aggregate demand relative to supply. 
Labor markets are tight in many parts of the Ninth District, 
with contacts reporting 
significant swaths of unfilled openings.  There are signs of growing wage pressures in some 

economic sectors and geographical are
as.  However, overall, wage pressures remain muted. 
Importantly, many businesses report having little or no ability to pass on wage increases to 

consumers in the form of price increases.  So this is actually a flip side of the argument that 

President Will
iams 
offered
Šhe indicated that he didn™t need to see wage increases to feel 
confident in the 
return 
of 
inflation to 2 percent. 
The flip side of this is that we might see wage 
      
       
             
   
    
           
   increases happening and still not see inflation
, because the question is whether those businesses 
experiencing the wage increases have 
the pricing power to pass that on.  The contacts 
that 
we talk
ed to in the intermeeting period suggested they do not. 
Contacts at businesses with an international footprint expressed concern during 
the 
intermeeting period about how the high value of the dollar would affect the demand for their 

products, especially in light of overall softness in global demand conditions.  And so
me of
 the 
comments that 
President Bullard
 offered about China echo things we heard from our contacts 
during the intermeeting period. 
Not surprisingly, economic activity has slowed greatly in the oil-producing areas of 
North Dakota.  However, overall confidence in the B
akken region remains high.  Many, if not 
most, of our contacts r
eport seeing the currently low level of economic activity as a welcome 
opportunity to shore up critical infrastructure needs in the western part of North Dakota. 
Let me turn to the national economy.  Both real and nominal variables are telling us a 
similar story, I believe:  
There is insufficient aggregate demand to use available resources in an 
effective fashion.  In terms of real activity, if we look back over the past five years since the end 

of 2009, real GDP growth has averaged 2.3 percent.  T
here is l
ittle sign of this pace 
quickeningŠl
ast year
, real GDP growth was only 2.4 percent.  H
ere I
™m using annual averages 
to get away from some of the seasonal adjustment factors that have been highlighted in previous 

interventions.  
This year
 now looks like it may be even worse than this weak average 
performance.  In the wake of the data that we
™ve 
received from the first quarter, Tealbook
, Book 
A, has downgraded its outlook for 2015 economic activity, and it now projects growth in this 

calend
ar year to be less than 2 percent.  We will get more information
, of course
, tomorrow 
morning along these lines. 
            
          
            
                      
  The persistence of these patterns has led some to conclude that they reflect a permanent 
downward shift in the productive capabilities of the United States.  I think we should be very 
cautious before accepting these claims. We saw significant improvement in all labor market 

metrics in 2014.  This improvement seems to have had 
little 
effect
 on the excess supply of 
human resources in the economy. 
We saw little upward pressure on compensation or on the 
inflation outlook.  This conjunction of low price pressures and strong employment growth 

suggests 
that the 
ﬁRoom to Growﬂ 
scenario i
n Tealbook, Book A, might be quite relevant.  And 
if you look at th
e implications of that scenario, the weakness of aggregate demand relative to 

supply creates concerns with respect to nominal variables. 
The outlook for inflation in 
Tealbook, Book A, 
is 
that it will be below target until 2019, well over four years from n
ow. 
Just to follow up on some of the discussion we heard earlier about inflation over the past 
few years, headline 
inflation 
did go above 2 percent in 2011, but I think if you go back over 
2008, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013, and 2014, in all of those years, 
it was below 2 percent.  In 2011, it 
was above 2 percent.  On average, over that time frame since the end of 2007, 
it™s been
 about 
1.3 percent. Market
-based longer-
term inflation expectations remain low. 
I want to
 say something about the prediction issue.  It™
s absolutely true
, I think
, that if 
you do horse 
races of th
e kind 
that President Williams talked about
, market-
based measures 
don™t really fare that well. I think it
™s actually because they™re 
of value to policymakers, not just 
to statistical 
forecasters, because we
™re interested in a different loss function.  We
™re not 
interested in just minimizing mean square
d error
, we™
re actually interested in trying to mitigate 
low inflation, especially when it
™s going to be costly to households.  And I th
ink that 
monitoring 
these market
-based measures of inflation expectations 
is helpful along those lines. 
         
             
   
    
  
    
          
     
       
     Tealbook, Book A, notes that we™
ve seen some slippage in Michigan survey measures as 
well
ŠI don™t want to put too much weight on that at this stage, but 
it™s something to watch.
 I think there are signs in these data that we may be facing a prolonged period of inflation running 
substantially below our target.  Now, why should we care about a possible downward slippage in 

inflation and inflation expectatio
ns? 
This builds on some of the remarks that 
President 
Rosengren already made, that p
ersistently lower inflation expectations translate to lower nominal 

interest rates.  Lower nominal interest rates translate into little recession
-fighting capacity for the 
central bank.  And such a reduction 
in policy capacity would be especially troubling because it 
would build on the policy capacity associated with a significant decline in the neutral real 

interest rate noted by President Rosengren.  
So this decline in inflation expectations really 

creates a first
-order loss in terms of what we are trying to accomplish 
because it increases the 
probability of hitting up against the zero lower bound. 
As President Rosengren 
suggested, the decline in the neutral rate of intere
st should lead 
us to consider raising the inflation target.  I see a great deal of possible merit in this
 suggestion.  
More generally, I think that it would be useful to have discussions about the long-
run goals that 
we have established.  We learn 
more 
over time
, and it™
s useful to take 
that
 on board.  
We d
on™t 
want to do it every year, certainly, but I think at intervals we should be taking on information and 

reevaluating the long
er-run goal statement.  
The 
Bank of Canada does this on a five-
year basis
.  Every five years they go back and relook 
at their framework and what they™
ve learned
, and 
I think there
™s something to be gained from that kind of systematic reevaluation of our framework.  
So I would be very supportive of further discussion of President Rosengren™s suggestion. 
With that said, first things first.  We actually need to forestall a possible decline in 
inflation expectations 
today 
generated by a failure to hit the current low target. 
During the 
               
          
           
         
  
  intermeeting period, Governor Haruhiko Ku
roda of 
the Bank of Japan visited Minnesota 
and 
gave an excellent speech.  He described the aggressive efforts of the Bank of Japan to stimulate 
an increase 
in inflation expectations.  As I listened to him, I was reminded yet again of how we 
need to do all that we can to avoid leaving our successors with the kind of tough situation that 

Governor 
Kuroda now faces. 
I don™t see that determination reflected in 
alternative B, but I won™t 
talk about that until tomorrow.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
  In terms of the economic 
outlook, I™m of two minds.  On the one hand, I™m more uncertain about the growth outlook and 

more concerned about the potential downside risks to growth.  On the other hand, I think the 

downside risks on the inflation side have lessened considerably.  A
t the last meeting
, I would 
have said that I expected further labor market improvement but was not yet reasonably confident 

that inflation would return to our 
2 percent objective ov
er the medium term.  Now, I would at 
least partly reverse things.  Conditional on further improvement in the labor market, I™m getting 

closer to being reasonably confident that inflation will return to our 2 
percent objective
, but I am 
less confident about when I will see further labor market improvement and how quickly it will 

occur. 
Turning first to the growth side
, it strikes me 
that 
there 
are 
a lot of crosscurrents right 
now, and it™s really difficult to assess the net 
effect
.  To me, this sharp slowing 
in payroll growth 
in March should not be a big surprise, however.  As I noted in my comments at the March 

FOMC meeting
, a big gap had opened up between payroll growth and GDP growth, so unless 
one thought that the productivity growth trend would remain ex
traordinarily poor, it seemed 

reasonable to expect 
either 
GDP growth to pick up or payroll growth to slow down.  A
s it turns 
      
        
           
   
              
            out, GDP growth slowed rather than picked up, s
o that left payroll growth to bear the brunt of the 
adjustment. 
As I assess the firs
t quarter, I do think there are both transitory and more persistent 
factors responsible for the slowdown.  On the transitory side, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of 
New 
York™s staff analysis
 does suggest 
that 
severe winter weather did have a sizable effect
. We 
put the 
impact
 at about 1½ 
percent on 
the
 annualized growth rate, slightly less than last year.  Having 
said that, I wouldn™t take that point estimate too literally. 
Also
, I do think the West Coast port 
slowdown did disrupt economic activity.  We had a small business advisory group meeting, and I 
was surprised that two out of the eight or nine businesses that attended referenced the port 

slowdown as hurting their businesses 
in the first quarter
Šthis is 
around upstate New York and 
New Jersey, and that™s not really where I would expect 
the 
port slowdown to actually manifest 
itself
, so I thought that was meaningful. 
There 
are
 also some more long-
lasting components as well. As Steve Kamin made clear, 
the dollar™s sharp appreciation has led to a deterioration in U.S. net exports, and the 
Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York staff estimates that a 15 percent appreciation of the broad rea
l trade
-weighted 
dollar, which is a little bit m
ore than we have right now in hand, would cut about 0.6 
percentage point from the level of real GDP after one year, and I think that™s pretty consistent 

with the Tealbook estimates.
  And I think it™
s important because that™s just the partial 
equilibrium effect.  If you have a trade drag, it also drains real income from the economy, so 

there™s also the risk of second-
order effects. 
Now, the second thing 
is that 
oil and gas investment is plunging.  I™m not sure how 
severe the knock
-on 
effects will be, but I d
on™t think we™re done yet.  Firms have been protected, 
in part, this year by hedging their future forward production by selling oil forward, and they™
ll           
        
       
                      
       
     
   
become more exposed to the current oil prices as time passes
, so I expect a downward trend in 
investmen
t to continue.  As Helen Holcomb pointed out in her comments about the Texas 
economy, the effect does seem to be quite a bit larger, I think, than expected.  
Richard Fisher 

said
Šin January, I 
believe it was
Šat th
at time he thought that employment growth in 
Texas, 
which was well above average compared 
with 
the country, would slow down to the national 
average.
  But if you look at the payroll data in March for states on a seasonally adjusted basis, 
payrolls in Texas fell by 25,400 people, which is pretty sizab
le for Texas. 
And it™s interesting 
that Oklahoma was the state with the second
-largest decline in payroll. So
, clearly
, the fall 
in oil 
and gas investment is having a significant 
effect
.  It™s rippling through to incomes
, and i
t™s rippling through into c
ommercial real estate construction
, so I think it actually has a more sizable 
effect than just looking at oil and gas investment itself. 
Third, I think the inventory accumulation, which I don™t think anyone has mentioned, 
looks to me like it™s poised to be a drag on growth.  If you look at the inventory-
to-sales ratios, 
they have been drifting up, and if you look at the rate of inventory accumulation in the first 

quarterŠ
well, we™ll see what we get tomorrow
, but it looks to be on the high side in terms of 
what™s sustainable over the medium term.
  So if you had to ask yourself, 
ﬁAre inventories going 
to contribute positively to growth or negatively to growth over the next year
?ﬂ 
They are 
almost 
certain to be a drag on growth.  In the face of 
all 
of these cro
sscurrents, I think the next few 
months of data are really important.  I™m really looking at what April and May look like.  And 

even if we get strong April and May data, I™m not really sure what to make of itŠi
s this just a 
bounce after first
-quarter weakn
ess, or is this the new trend? 
In contrast to the growth side, I am getting more comfortable that inflation is starting to 
stabilize and is likely to start dri
fting back up toward our 2 percent objective.  When I look at the 
         
                  
  
      
    
     inflation data and all the other factors that feed into the inflation outlook, I think most suggest 
that inflation
Šdespite a stronger dollar, lower energy prices, and still-
sizable slack in the labor 
market
Šactually seems to be stabiliz
ing.  So let me run through the evidence very q
uickly.  If 
you look at the three-month change in the core CPI, it™s now above 2 percent compared 
with 
a 12-month change of 1.8 percent.  Inflation compensation, 
as measured by the five
-by-
five 
forward TIPS versus nominal Treasury has moved up a bit.  
Surv
ey measures of inflation 
expectations are generally stable, and I would argue that wage compensation growth trends are 

stable to slightly higher. 
So the fears I had of inflation getting unanchored to the downside seem to have 
diminished.  I could imagine that things could have worked out quite differently.  We™d have 

lower headline inflation feeding through into core inflation
.  T
hat, 
in turn
, would 
depress 
nominal 
wage 
growth and cause 
inflation expectations to be anchored 
to the downside.  And the 
fact th
at we haven™t seen that at this point, I think, makes that dynamic much less likely.  So I™m 
much more confident now that inflation will return to our 2 percent objective, subject to having 

sufficient growth to continue to close the output gap.  Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This discussion has appropriately focused on 
the significantly weaker
-than-expected incoming data on first-
quarter economic activity.  The 
staff forecasts a r
eturn to higher growth of around 2 percent or more in the second quarter and 
the second half of the year, and we™ve heard similar forecasts during this round of discussion 

from several of the 
Reserve 
Bank presidents.  The Tealbook forecast is, not surprisingly, 
consistent with what we see in the charts given 
to 
us by Bill Wascher
Šin particular, the two real 
GDP forecasts and their fan charts
.  S
o there™s a fair probability that will happen, but it™s not a 
      
    
               
         
       
    guarantee that we™re going to bounce right back in the coming quarter and there 
have been some 
weak data in April. 
In terms of elementary textbooksŠlooking at C + 
I + G + NXŠthe Tealbook forecast
s expect the bulk of the rebound in the second quarter to come from consumption, which is a 
reasonable forecast i
n light of expectations for employment and real disposable income.  
The 
Tealbook also expects government purchases to rebound significantly, net investment to decline 

more slowly than it did in the first quarter, and net exports to decline at the same rate 
as in the 
first quarter.
  This is all very interesting, but of course, we™re waiting for tomorrow™s first 
estimate of first
-quarter growth to clarify
, perhaps, 
what happened in the first quarter. 
When you focus on recent growth rates, you get a fairly pes
simistic picture of what™s 
happening, and we need to remind ourselves that the overall position of the economy is good.  

Let me start with the labor market.  The unemployment rate remains at 5.5 percent, a level that is 

not that much above many estimates of the natural rate today and is not above estimates of the 
natural rate that we had going into the March meeting.  A year ago we didn™t think we™d reach a 
rate that low until 2016
.  A
nd, importantly, some, though not all, 
of the other labor market 
indicato
rs whose behavior suggested that the U-3 unemployment rate understated the extent of 
labor market problems appear to be returning to pre-
recession levels. 
So, from the policy 
viewpoint, the basic question on output and employment is whether employment wil
l continue to 
grow at a rate sufficient to bring further improvement in the labor market in coming quarters. 
The inflation rate remains below target, and that is a problem.  However, one gets the 
impression that while we are committed to looking through tr
ansitory factors
Šparticularly dollar 
appreciation and the decline in oil prices, 
and gasoline prices in particular
Špopular discussion 
both here and in Europe has not focused on what that means.  It does not mean focusing solely 
      
     
           
          
            on core inflation, because both energy and import prices affect core inflation.  Core PCE 
inflation was 1.3 percent over the 12 months through March.  According to Board staff estimates 

in the Tealbook, increases in the dollar, which are very unlikely to persist indefinitel
y, 
are 
holding down that figure by 0.3 percentage point this year, bringing what could be called 

nontransitory core inflation to something like 1.6 percent.  And current energy price changes are 

reducing core inflation by another 0.1 percentage point, which brings you to a nontransitory core 

inflation rate of 1.7 percent. 
Now, you might be concerned about this if the low core numbers were being reflected in 
declining inflation expectations, but the survey measures seem to be relatively well anchored.  

And a
ll this, again, seems consistent with the data presented in the 
bottom two charts in Bill 
Wascher™s handout
, which show inflation coming back rather quickly to just below 2 
percent. 
I expect that the transitory factors
Šwhich are, fundamentally, 
oil and th
e exchange rate, which 
may or may not turn around reasonably soonŠwill gradually abate and possibly begin to reverse 
themselves.  We only need them to abate.  And labor market slack will continue to diminish, 
putting inflation on a path that, over the medi
um term
, will take us very close to our inflation 
target.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  A lot of people have talked about Q1 and 
have posed the question, 
ﬁWas Q1 an aberration?
ﬂ I certainly
 hope that it was an aberration, and 
I expect that it has been an aberration. 
And I don™t think, personally, that 
we™re going to learn 
that much from the GDP number tomorrow morning.  I
f it
™s kind of low or really low, it may not 
tell us very much because
 we had a really low number in the first quarter of 2014, and that didn™t 

seem to mean very much a quarter or two later. 
       
      
  
           
   
         
    
              
         I actually think the question is not so much 
ﬁWas Q1 an aberration?ﬂ 
but more the 
question that was implicit in some of 
Vice Chairman D
udley
™s analysis a minute ago
: ﬁAre 
there 
things at work in the economy that will give us a growth path for the rest of the year that
™s somewhat lower than what many of us expected toward the end of last year
?ﬂ Not that it will in 
any way resemble Q1, bu
t that somehow there are forces that are restraining growth a little bit 
more than we would have anticipated.  
Vice Chairman Dudley
 suggested one in his presentation.  
Another possible explanation of that phenomenon, should it occur, is the one that 
I think lies 
behind the Tealbook™s alternative scenario of a persistent slowdownŠ
that is, 
that there is a kind 
of confidence problem that™s inhibiting consumer spending despite the extended improvement in 

income fundamentals because of job growth and mayb
e a little bit of wage growth
, as well. 
I think for that reason one has to be a little agnostic right now in awaiting data over the 
next couple of months
Šas President Mester
, Vice Chairman Dudley, and several other people 
have said
.  A
lthough, as someoneŠI 
think it was 
Vice Chairman Dudley
Šalso said
, even then, 
it™s not clear how much some of the questions we™
ve been asking will be clarified because 
there
™s going to be a certain degree of snapback.  So instead of trying to speculate about all of 
that, I wan
ted to put on the table in a little bit more detail something 
Simon had an exhibit on in 
his presentation at the beginning of this meeting and that is the phenomenon of negative interest 

rates on European sovereign debt.  This phenomenon may be relevant to 
an assessment of the 
most likely medium
-term U.S. growth trend because of 
its potential 
effects
 on financial markets 
and the dollar, potential downside risks, andŠ
and I
™m not going to talk about this, but it may be 
relevant to the 
great debate about s
ecul
ar stagnation. 
There have been negative interest rates on some shorter
-term European sovereign debt for 
several years now, but the last six months or so have 
seen a qualitative change in the 
       
     
             
   
       
                    phenomenon in a number of respects.  First, negative rates have m
oved down along the yield 
curve in European countries with the strongest credit reputations to the point that, as in the chart 
that Simon distributed, we now see negative interest rates in a nontrivial portion of 5-
to 7
-year 
debt in the stronger European sovereigns.  Second, yield curves, as he mentioned, are quite flat in 

these countries.  I just checked this morning, and the spread between German 
2-year and 10-
year 
government bonds is about 40 basis points.  That compares to a spread of about 140 basis points 

for U.S. T
reasury securities.
  The 30-
year 
bund is still trading positively but 
at 63 basis points, 
which is a pretty low number for a 30-year.  As everybody knows, the Swiss 10-year sovereign 

issue earlier this month went out at negative rates, and 
I believe that™
s the first time 
in history 
that any sovereign debt of that duration has been priced negatively.  
And 
so, as 
far as Thomas 
Jordan knew, he was setting a precedent, or at least his country™s government was setting a 

precedent. 
Currently, 
as S
imon™s chart shows, more than 35 percent of all euro-zone government 
debt carries a negative interest rate. As recently as two weeks ago
, I think
, it was up over 
40 percent. There
™s been a little bit of an interest rate change since then, which has affec
ted the 
yields in some of those medium
-term tenors.
  Substantial portions of some non-euro-zone 
sovereigns, notably Denmark and Switzerland, also are priced at negative rates, and some 

shorter-duration corporate bonds of the highly rated European firms are 
also priced at negative 
rates now. 
Clearly, this is all related to long
-standing European economic problemsŠand, 
more 
immediately, first the prospect and now the reality of the ECB™s QE program.  It
™s also related
, I guess, 
to the relative scarcity of sov
ereign debt instruments 
issued by countries like Germany 
that continue to run tight fiscal policies and large current account surpluses, notwithstanding 
                                 
  
   
  
           
 economic conditions in the euro zone more generally.  
The unprecedented nature of this 
phenomenon has caused most thoughtful analysts to offer only tentative v
iews of the relative 

importance of various 
stories that explain
 why investors would hold longer-
term sovereigns with 
negative yields.  
Logically, I think the explanations fall into three 
categories. 
First is gloom 
about the long
-term prospects for the countries in question.  Now, it™s true, there™s not a whole 

lot of high optimism to be found about European growth prospects, but almost everybody 

discounts this as a dominant explanationŠ
that is, the idea that there
™s going to be negative 
growth 
or deflation
 for 10 years in Europe. 
The s
econd group of explanations are based on investor inertia, basicallyŠwhether 
forced, as in the case of pension funds and some other institutions, which may be required by 
law 
or regulation to hold certain percentages of extremely low-risk bonds, or unforced, as in the case 

of other investors who are themselves unsure of what all 
of 
this negative rate stuff means and are 
waiting right now to see what happens, and maybe 
chan
ge their investment decision if things 
don™t turn around relatively soon. 
The third set of explanations is that, in an environment that doesn™t offer 
a lot of 
appealing investment options, 
there may be some plays available here.  For example, you may 

get capital gains if yields go even further into negative territory, or you may get exchange rate 

gains whether from short-
term developments that cause quick swings in currencies or from 
longer-term appreciations of currencies with very low inflation or even deflation.  That is, if you 

think that there
™s going to be very low inflation in Switzerland for a long time to come and you 
are a U.S. investor, and you think that there™s going to be inflation in the United States, you 

might actually end up profiting by that play.  
As an example of th
is search for an investment 
play, I took note of one analyst™s advice to his clients that the best play may be in bonds with a 
        
           
  
       
           good bit of convexity so as to m
aximize the chances of catching the wave of large market 
movements when these trends reverse. 
To date, as a very good 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Market
Source 
report 
indicated, there have been relatively few discontinuities observed in European debt markets.  But 
I think this is the point at which Herb Stein™s memorable aphorism comes to mind, because 

unless the medium
-term prospects for Europe are a lot worse than most people think, there™
s going to be a reversal of negative rates at some point.  Even 
if there
™s no near
-term reversal 
resulting from sufficiently enhanced growth prospects or from sufficiently significant policy 

moves, a nontrivial number of investors might, over time, 
overcome their inertia and start 

seeking positive nominal yields elsew
here. 
There are 
a lot of potential outcomes here, some of which are relatively benign.  Others, 
though, are of potentially greater concern.  For example, if enough investors were caught flat
-footed by an unexpected change in ECB policyŠand, paradoxically, an unexpected 
improvement in European economic prospectsŠ
there could be some pretty significant turmoil in 
relevant markets, although there we would have to ask ourselves how much the financial turmoil 

would be offset by the prospect of improvement in the real economy.  I think of 
even greater 
concern to us would be a decision by those investors who did not initially move out of European 

sovereign debt that they couldn™t take the uncertainty or the negative rates any longer.  The 

natural destination for the
se investors is
, of course, U.S. T
reasury securities
, and I think that 
some of the dollar strengthening we™
ve seen this year has been attributable to 
the existence of 
investors
 who have already made such a move.  And it is possible, though very hard to judge 
how likely, that many more could follow.  If they were to do so, the recent modest retracing by 

the dollar could itself be halted and reversed pretty significantly. 
                  
       
      
                  On this last possibility, it™s worth mentioning that, notwithstanding the notable spread
s between 
bunds and T
reasury securit
ies, some European investors have apparently concluded that 
the roughly 80 basis point difference between German and U.S. two-
year 
bond rate
s is 
insufficient to compensate for currency
-hedging costs and other risks.  And 
this calculus is
, I think, what may be contributing to some of the otherwise-
hard
-to-explain changes in the yield 
curves of some of the stronger European sovereigns, since fundamentals are not really changing 
there but you™re seeing some movement in those yield curves, which I take to be everybody 

repositioning
, trying to figure out the best defensive place to be right now.  So investors may be 
moving around within bonds that are either euro-denominated or effectively tied to the euro. 
But if that spread b
etween 
U.S. T
reasury interest rates 
and rates on European sovereigns 
were to widen, either because we raise rates or because QE and other developments in the EU 

drove yields down even further there, then more European investors might be tempted to take the 

Atlantic plunge.  And this, in turn, could cause some market dislocation in Europe, a renewed 
unwelcome strengthening of the dollar, or both.  This is pretty speculative right now, but 
certainly in a context in which the trajectory of U.S. economic perfor
mance is at least in some 
question after the 
past few months, I think this situation is another reason for us not to be in a 
hurry to raise rates, at least not until we
™ve had a chance to see how investors are adapting, and, 
most importantly, what their adaptation means for the dollar. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming data for the first quarter have 
been weaker
, overall, than expected, including data for household and business spending, 
industrial production, and housing starts and permitsŠ
a little bit different but quite similar to the 

first quarter of 2014.  In addition, the initial BLS report on the employment situation for March 
              
   
   
        
      
     
       was also much weaker than expected, and 
that™
s different from last year
, when payroll gains 
continued 
to be 
very strong right through the first quarter.  And the question, of course, is how 
much signal to take.  
One reason to discount these data somewhat are the transitory factors that 
are likel
y to reverse, including bad winter weather and the West Coast port disruption 
as well as 
the technical factors that have been discussed.  Another is that GDP data may eventually be 

significantly revised and is a noisy signal
Šand I thought that the new exhibit in Tealbook, 
Book A, on prediction intervals was interesting and useful on that point.  
In any case, it makes 
sense to me to take some signal from this year™s weak first quarter, both for labor markets and 

for GDP
.  I think the baseline staff forecast 
strikes a reasonable balance for the rest of this year 
by assuming higher GDP growth, but not a significant catch-up quarter like we had in the second 

quarter 
of 
2014. On inflation, I would tentatively say I feel a little better about inflation, which is n
ow 
forecast to run at about 1½ 
percent
 for Q2, well above the Q1 readings.  Survey expectations 
remain stable.  Breakevens have moved up modestly across the curve since the March meeting, 

seemingly driven more by oil prices and liquidity rather than changing expectations.  
In light of 
all of the recent market readings that suggest concerns about low inflation, it™
s an improvement
, for a change, 
to read stories that fixed
-income traders are seeing a greater likelihood of inflation 
getting back to mandate-consistent levels and less risk of very low inflation.  
Of course, we may 

overread these market movements, and it may simply be that TIPS got a little cheap relative to 

nominals, and traders acted on that.  The underlying story of a return to 2 percent inflation over 

the medium term, given GDP and labor market outcomes as forecast, continues to make sense to 

me.  And I look forward to gaining more confidence from the incoming data on that.  I would 
      
  
   
    
                        
   worry more about lower inflation in the case that the economy does slip into a lower gear in 
growth and labor markets. 
Looking forward, the positive narrative is that consumer spending will increase to healthy 
levels supported by low energy prices, high confidence, and much better labor market conditions. 

In fact
, going back to 
Stan
™s basic equation, you could say that the U.S. economy has grown at 
about 2.7 percent over the last two years, with net exports at around zero.  With net exports now 

contributing negative 0.7 to negative 0.8 percentage point, you have to ask, where is growth 

going to come from?  It™s not going to come from government spending
, it™s not going to come 
from housing investment, and it™s not going to come from business investment in a world in 

which
 drilling is being significantly reduced.  So it really has to come from consumption.  And, 
in fact, in the medium
-term forecast
, PCE growth accounts for well more than 100 percent of the 
growth.  That narrative, I have to say, makes sense to me, but it does amount to an airplane 

flying on one engine.  S
o far
, the combination of the weak spending data and high consumer 
confidence says that the consumer, 
in effect
, is now 
ebullien
tly saving. 
In terms of the risks, one, of course, is that PCE growth does disappoint.  Another one, 
frankly, is that
, in a 
world of still
-slow growth, a return to stronger growth here could well lead 
to a tightening in financial conditions not so much through the rate channel as through the dollar 

channelŠi
t may not be a rate tantrum that is really the threat this time.
  We will see
, by the time 
of the June meeting, 
whether there is progress in addressing Greece™s fiscal crisis or whether 

Greece, instead, is headed for control
s on capital flows
, sovereign default, and the like, with 
potential disruption for the U.S. economy.  
We™ll see two more
 employment reports and 
a lot 
more data.  And we™ll know, I think, at that point, something about whether the first quarter™s 
      
               
      
  
  
  
   
         
        
    disappointment is transitory
 and anomalous or, instead, marks some kind of real loss of 
momentum. 
Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to reflect briefly on the quarterly 
assessment of financial stability and then turn to the outlook. 
Although overall risks to financial stability in 
the United States remain moderate, one 
area that 
bears 
heightened scrutiny is the potential for spikes 
in volatility due to changes in 
market liquidity.  In particular, we should be asking whether episodes of severe volatility, 
like 
the wild swings we saw
 in T
reasury 
bond yields on the morning of October 15, 
are likely to 
become the new normal.  Bond inventories held by broker-
dealers have declined
, in some part 
due to regulatory changes.  Separately, and predating the onset of Dodd-Frank, changes in 

marke
t structure may be at least as important in some markets
, for which automated and high-
frequency traders may now account for a majority of the activity.  Coupled with the big run-up 
we™ve seen of investments in bond mutual funds, this raises the specter of amplification of 
volatility and fire
-sale dynamics at times when investors looking to cash out could be surprised 
by lower-
than
-expected liquidity.  Together, 
these changes to the structure of financial markets 
could increase the volatility of asset price 
responses. A modest increase in the average 
level of 
volatility shouldn™t be a concern, particularly if market participants respond with more rigorous 
risk management
.  But a lack of liquidity that leads to large and self
-reinforcing swings in prices 
and market freezes during periods of stress could pose threats to financial stability and would be 

especially concerning in the case of the U.S. T
reasury market, with its traditional benchmark 
status. 
                 
          
               
  
   
     I think it
™s premature to draw conclusions for financial 
stability.  Some of the 
preoccupation with the decline in dealer inventories may, 
in fact
, be misplaced, and I think 
focusing too much attention on the critical role of dealers as reliable providers of liquidity during 
severe stress episodes suggests a ver
y high degree of amnesia.  Moreover, bid-
ask spreads are in 
line with historical norms. 
As we
™re learning from the investigation of October 15, we also do 
not yet fully understand the implications of the growing role of high-
frequency traders in these 
mar
kets. 
With heterogeneity across their size, business models, and trading strategies, some of 
their activities may
, in fact
, contribute to market liquidity, 
while 
some 
may be destabilizing. 
And, finally, it™s unclear how much leverage or high-
quality liqu
idity is embedded in bond 
mutual funds and how vulnerable they might be to liquidity mismatch and fire-
sale dynamics. 
The Dodd-
Frank requirement for mutual funds to undertake stress tests holds some promise, but 
only if deployed rigorously.  In short, I a
m very pleased that we are putting intense focus on this 
issue, and I think it will only rise in importance as the date of liftoff approaches. 
Now let me turn briefly to the outlook in the United States.  The recent data on the labor 
market, aggregate spen
ding, and industrial output have been disappointing.  The key question 
that we are wrestling with around this table is how much of this unanticipated weakness 

represents a slowing in the underlying momentum of activity and how much is due to transitory 

dis
turbances
?  The preliminary conclusion I would draw from the surprises in the recent data is 
that the negative impulse to U.S. aggregate demand from the combined effects of the plunge in 

oil prices and the surge in the dollar seem to be at least as strong as we had expected, while the 

expected positive effects have not materialized so far. 
Turning first to the positive effects, recent shocks were expected to be reflected primarily 
in stronger consumption growth, but the recent data have been disappointing.  Some of the 
               
   
  
  
   
            
      
  preliminary indicators of consumer spending are often substantially revised, so we perhaps 
should not take too much signal from them.  Indeed, auto salesŠamong the most reliable of 

indicators
Šrebounded strongly in March.  Nonetheless, subpar data on retail sales have now 
persisted for four months, suggesting that temporary infl
uences or statistical noise 
are 
not fully to 
blame.  On balance, it™s possible that the forces boosting consumer spending may not be as 

strong as we might have hoped.  
Weaker
-than
-expected consumption would be very unfortunate, 
because strength in other ca
tegories of aggregate demand remains elusive.  The recent data on 
housing starts and permits, for example, suggest that this sector continues to struggle. 
On the negative side of the ledger, the drop in oil prices was expected to curtail business 
investment related to drilling, while the dollar™s rise was anticipated to reduce net exports. A 

broad variety of indicators suggests that these effects are materializing with greater force than 

had been anticipated.  Drilling investment looks to have dropped at an annualized rate of 

50 percent in the first quarter
.  And orders and shipments of capital goods, as well as business 
sentiment, have also been weak and suggest that overall business investment will edge lower 

over the first half of this year.  
A variety o
f indicators also suggest 
that the 
stronger dollar is 
weighing significantly on activity.  Net exports subtracted 1 percentage point from growth in the 

fourth quarter, and the staff estimates 
a contribution of minus 
 percentage point in the first 
quarter.
  The national manufacturing purchasing 
managers™
 diffusion index of new export orders 
has been in contractionary territory for the past three months.  Manufacturing production 

declined at an annual rate of 1 percent, and the outlook for internationally or
iented firms has 
worsened significantly in recent days. 
       
               
  
                
       
      
In parallel, the recent labor market data suggest a slowing in the 
take-up 
of slack. 
Average monthly payroll employment gains were 200,000, down about 60,000 from last year™s 
pace
, and all of the indicators of slack have moved sideways in the last month. 
Of course, there™s a danger in reading too much into this data.  It™s entirely possible we™
ll see the stronger trend in underlying activity that was apparent in the second half of the year 

reassert it
self.  But it
™s important to keep in mind the international context.  On the one hand, we 
have seen some encouraging data from the euro area
Šdata on retail sales and industrial 

production, in particularŠwhich holds out some promise that aggregate demand wi
ll strengthen. 
And the dollar™s sharp ascent seems to have stalled, at least for now.  On the other hand, 

negotiations between Greece and its creditors remain challenging.  And although the macro data 

are
 notoriously unreliable, Chinese GDP growth looks to have slowed noticeably in the first 

quarter.
  On balance, the foreign economic outlook suggests continued weak demand in some 
important advanced foreign economies and signs of faltering growth in some important emerging 
market economies.  In this context
, the threat to price stability from stronger demand growth in 
the United States seems quite limited. 
Let me close by touching briefly on inflation.  Recent data have provided some 
reassurance that underlying inflation is not moving lower.  Oil prices have moved up somewhat 
further since March, and the 
3-month moving average of core PCE inflation has increased from 

the very low level reached in January.
  Even so, current estimates of both the 3- and 12-month 
changes in core PCE prices point to an underlying trend rate of only 1.4 percent.  And while it™
s reassuring that survey
-based measures of inflation expectations are remaining stable
, and there 
has been some improvement in market-
based measures, th
e latter 
are still materially below the 
levels 
that preva
iled
 until the middle of last year. 
The overall picture should suggest at least 
              
     
         
        
                
        
some caution about attributing all of the recent softening to transitory factors and puts a high 
premium on incoming data as we assess the timing of liftoff, which is 
the topi
c for tomorrow™s 
discussion.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, thank you.  Thanks to everyone for another interesting and 
thoughtful round of observations.  As usual, I™
ll try to summarize a couple of main themes and 
add a few remarks of my 
own. 
Starting with real activity 
and 
the labor market, everyone agreed that the news has been 
generally disappointing since our last meeting, although views 
differed 
about its implications. 
With respect to employment, the March employment report show
ed unexpected weakness in 
payroll gains, but many of you emphasized 
that 
one shouldn™t make too much out of one month™s 
report.  And, still, average gains in the first three months of the year are running 
at about 
200,000, which is a respectable pace, especiall
y given how weak output growth looks to have 
been in the first quarter. Other labor market indicators during the intermeeting period were 
mixed but generally, 
I think
, imply little change in resource utilization.  The unemployment rate 
stayed at 5.5 percent.  Broader measures of labor underutilization ticked down one-tenth, but 
the 
labor force participation rate fell 
one-tenth, and the employment-
to-population ratio was 
unchanged.  You noted that 
the JOLTS
 job openings rate ticked up slightly, but there wa
s also a 
slight decline in quits and hires, and 
at least 
the Board™s labor market condition
s index was 
unchanged.  I noted some reports from business contacts about increases in turnover and the fact, 
as President George mentioned, that people who are 
ﬁtur
ning over
ﬂŠwho are quittingŠ
appear 
to be moving to jobs 
in which
 they™
re receiving wage gains. 
On wages, I think everyone agreed that aggregate measures suggest very little pickup in 
wage growth, although some of you suggested that the reports you™
re recei
ving from your 
       
      
    
                  
        
    
  business contacts are beginning to hint at a broader acceleration in wage gains and labor market 
pressures.
  That said, many of you noted that wage pressures are confined to particular regions 
and sectors
, such as high-
tech 
in Silicon Valley
 and San Francisco.  But, 
as President Williams 
noted, the implications of movements in wages for inflation and 
for 
our criterion of wanting to 
have reasonable confidence that inflation will move back 
are 
debatable, and at least in recent 
years it doesn™t 
look like there
™s that much of a close link between 
nominal wages and inflation. 
With respect to spending, everyone remarked on the unexpected weakness we™
ve seen in 
a broad range of spending and production indicators, including retail sales, housing start
s, orders 
and shipments of capital goods, nonresidential construction, drilling, exports, and industrial 

output.  And, of course, tomorrow morning we receive the first-
quarter GDP preliminary 
estimate.
  The underlying cause of the Q1 slowdown and its implications for future growth is 
obviously very important and unclear at this point.  Many of you mentioned, and cited evidence 

from your business contacts, 
of the importance of bad winter weather and the West Coast port 
dispute.  A number of you mentione
d the fact that we have a pattern here
Šover many yearsŠ
of 
Q1 being unusually weak, suggesting some residual seasonality in the GDP figures.  
Views on 
the size of these transitory effects differ, but if they are substantial
, then the prospects for a quick 
return to moderate growth should be good. 
On the other hand, a number of you mentioned that other explanations for weaker growth 
that may be relevant in the first quarter could have implications 
for the remainder of the year.  In 
particular, the dollar rece
ived a good deal of mention.  It looks like the dollar may be having a 
significant negative effect
 and that many of your business contacts mentioned the negative 
effect 
they™re seeing from the stronger dollar.  In addition, the decline in oil prices does seem to be 

having a significant effect
Šmaybe larger than we anticipated on business investment and 
       
      
                       
                
    drilling activity, and we haven™t yet seenŠ
surprisingly
, perhapsŠmuch evidence of a positive 
effect
 on consumer spending.  The anecdotes that you reported fro
m your business contacts were 
somewhat mixed, but I interpreted those as being reasonably positive in terms of not seeing any 
really significant changes in business prospects. 
On the international side, a number of risks 
were mentioned: 
Greece
; China, 
whose growth looks like it slowed more than expected
; geopolitical risks that bear on oil prices
; and 
a very interesting discussion, I thought, of what™s happening in global financial markets, 
with 

negative rates in Europe and the potential for a 
global reshu
ffling of portfolios that could raise 
volatility or could have very significant effects either on the dollar or interest rates and could be 

triggered by a shift in U.S. monetary policy. 
On the inflation front, incoming data came in pretty much as the 
staff
 had expected.  Core 
inflation was a touch higher than expected.  Oil prices were up somewhat since our last meeting, 

and the broad dollar exchange rate actually fell a little bit during the intermeeting period.  S
ome 
of you noted that these are welcome developments from an inflation perspective, as they indicate 

that the downward impetus 
provided by 
oil and the dollar to 
inflation is ebbing and shouldn™t 
continue. We had a nice discussion of measures of inflation expectations, with survey measures 

generally remaining stable and market-based measures of inflation compensation moving up 

slightly, although 
they are 
still bel
ow where they were last summer. 
President Williams™
s discussion about the relevance of these inflation expectations to inflation forecasts was 

interesting.  They don™t seem to be very good forecasts of inflation, and it is interesting 
that 
we have, 
I thin
k, 
repeatedly noticed that these measures are more heavily influenced by oil prices 
and movements in oil prices than, 
it would seem
, is reasonable. 
             
  
            
                   On the other hand, with respect to inflation and the outlook for inflation, a number of you 
suggested
, I thi
nk, that we could be in for a period in which inflation undershoots our objective 
for many, many years to come
 and, crossing over into the policy domain, suggested quite a bit of 
concern that we may be in for a very long period of an inflation undershoot.  That took us to 
some interesting observations on the question of 
what the equilibrium real rate is
; the possibility 
that it may be persistently depressed or not, as some think
; a debate about what
™s happening with 
the equilibrium real rate
; and the possib
ility 
that 
if the equilibrium real rate really is depressed
, what 
that implies for our monetary policy, and particularly for our inflation target, which is 
something that maybe we want to get back to and consider. 
Okay.  Let me just stop there as 
a summary
 of what I heard.  Are there any comments or 
corrections anyone wants to offer?  [No response] 
Then
 I™d like to offer some comments of my 
own, then we can quit and go to dinner.  I, of course, was also disappointed in incoming data on 

employment, spending, and production.  I recognize this may be just another soft spot, akin to 
what we saw last year and in a number of years past
, and I definitely think we should be careful 
not to overreact to what is a few weeks™ worth of news.  I find it reassuring that indicators of 
consumer confidence remain pretty upbeat, and I really haven™t altered my modal outlook for 

employment and output over the medium term.  I guess if I were updating my SEP forecast now, 

I would mark down projected growth this year, but modestly.  That said, I do find the widespread 

nature of the recent negative surprises disconcerting
, and, at a minimum, I am more worried 
about downside risk and 
am 
more uncertain about the outlook. 
In March my concerns focused on the external sector, and now I see question marks 
pertaining to the underlying strength of domestic aggregate demand as well.  I find it particularly 

disturbing that the slowdown in business investment appears to have become more widespread. 
                  
     
    
                In March the weakness appeared concentrated i
n drilling activity, and I think now we are seeing 
outright declines in real equipment outlays and nondrilling, nonresidential construction as well.  
The Tealbook assumes 
that investment in intangibles is still growing at a solid pace, but we 
actually have no idea what
™s happening there because reliable source data won™t be available for 
some time.  The broad weakness in business fixed investment may be partly explained by the 

slowdown in aggregate sale
s and output via an accelerat
or effect, but conceivably other factors 
that may prove to be more persistent may also be at work, and I worry about that. 
I™
m also concerned that we may not see a pickup in residential investment nearly as large 
as the Tealbook forecast
s this year.  Housing starts and permits have been incredibly weak even 
though mortgage rates are low, employment and income are rising, and demographic trends seem 

to call for a faster pace of building.  
According to staff calculations, 
if housi
ng remains weak 
it could shave 
¼ percentage 
point or so off the Tealbook projection of real GDP in the second half 
of this year and in 2016. 
I worry most about retail sales having been soft for several months now.  Savings rates 
moved up 1 
full percentage 
point since the fourth quarter despite large gains in employment, a 

sharp decline in oil prices, record equity prices, 
a solid increase in house prices, and low 
borrowing costs.  I suppose one could explain this by saying that bad winter weather and other 

transitory factors are at work here
.  I suppose supporting such an explanation is 
the fact that 
we did see strong auto sales in March, and consumer sentiment, even though the C
onference 
Board 
number fell today, is still pretty high.
  And I suppose, for tho
se reasons
, the Tealbook forecast 
seems reasonable to me, but I must say my confidence in the Tealbook forecast that projects that 

PCE growth is going to pick up to 4 percent really, 
to me
, is a leap of faith, and I worry that we 
may not see a pickup that™
s that 
large.
  And as several of you have mentioned, at this point the 
                          
         
             
    
  only real source of strength in the economy is consumer spending.  I
f there are question marks 
associated with
 consumer spending, that puts a lot of question marks on the outlook overal
l. I don™t think the risks from the external sector have diminished.  Maybe they have even 
increased to some degree. 
The s
taff has marked down estimates of export growth in the first 
quarter 
appreciably
.  It may well be that the drag 
generated by
 past dol
lar appreciation and slow 
foreign economic growth could be greater than previously assumed.  I also worry about the 
Greek debt situation
.  If Greece were to put in place controls on capital movements 
or, worse, 
exit the euro, 
I think it
™s hard to know what 
effect
 that would have on the dollar.  I™m not sure 
whether it would cause the dollar to appreciate or depreciate
, and 
I think there are reasonable 
stories either way. 
I certainly am hopeful that information between now and June will help us resolve some 
of these uncertainties. We will see
, certainly
, two more employment reports and a range of 
indicators on spending and production that could tell us whether we™ve been through a soft patch 
or if there
™s a more significant loss in momentum.
  But by June, 
the spending data for the second 
quarter will still be incomplete, and we shouldn™t underestimate the possibility that new data will 
confuse rather than clarify our assessments of the state of the economy. 
As for inflation, I don™t really have anything to add to what
™s been said.  Even though 
core CPI inflation came in a touch higher than expected, overall, the incoming data on wages and 

prices has been roughly in line with expectations.  My own outlook is little changed.  Both core 

and headline PCE 
inflation 
rates 
are running well below 2 percent and are likely to do so for the 
rest of the year, barring some major surprise in oil prices or a fall in the dollar.
  And the April 
Tealbook projects that headline inflation will be under 1 percent this year on a Q4-over-Q4 basis, 
                              and th
at core inflation this year is only going to run at 1¼ 
percent.  Those forecasts seem quite 
reasonable. 
Given this inflation outlook, the likelihood that employment and output will expand at 
only a moderate pace in coming quarters, and uncertainties about the global economy, I 
personally think it™s unlikely that the 
conditions we
™ve set out for a firming of policy will be met 
by June, but I have an open mind.  We™ve agreed to be data dependent, and that assessment could 

certainly change 
as we receive additional data on real activity and inflation in coming weeks. 
So let me stop there
.  We should probably break for dinner.  Tomorrow, 
Thomas will 
give his briefing. We may have to make some changes in the statement when we see what
™s in 
the GDP report, but I think we have enough time tomorrow morning to do that.  We™ll begin 
tomorrow 
at 9:00 a.m. 
[Meeting recessed] 
         
   
                       
            
          
   
    
              
  
   
                                                             
  
 April 29 Session 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  I guess 
we should get started
, and 
I™d like 
to first turn to Bill
 Wascher to give us an update on this morning™s GDP announcements. 
MR. WASCHER.
6  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll be referring to the handout 
titled ﬁMaterial for Gross Domestic Product Update.ﬂ  You 
have a table that 
summarizes some of the key aspects of this morning™s GDP data, and the first thing I 

would say is that it™s nice to be lucky once in a while.  [Laughter] 
As you can see 
from the first line of the table, the BEA™s advance estimate of real GDP 
growth in the 
first quarter was 0.2 percent at an annual rate.  That™s 
one-
tenth of 
1 percentage point 
higher than 
our estimate
 in the Ap
ril Tealbook. 
Among the major spending categories, 
real PCE growth slowed from 4.4 percent 
in the fourth quarter to 1.9 
percent in the first quarter, about as we had expected. 

Business fixed investment, which is labeled here by its official title, 
nonresidential 
private 
fixed 
investment, fell 3.4 percent, and residential investment edged up 
1.3 percent.  Again, both of th
ose were close to our expectations. 
The next three lines show some offsetting misses that turned out not to have much 
effect on the top-line GDP number.  In particular, government spending fell by less 

than we were expecting
, net exports fell by more, and 
there was a greater 
accumulation of inventories than we™d written down.  
In terms of their contributions 

to growth, net exports were estimated to have subtracted 1¼ 
percentage points 
from 
GDP growth in the first quarter, while inventories added 
¾ percentag
e point to 
growth.  I should note that, 
for these two categories in particular
, the BEA does not 
have complete data for the 
first 
quarter
.  In the advance GDP estimate
, inventories 
and net exports are based on two months of data and BEA™s 
assumed values fo
r the 
third monthŠin this case, for 
March. 
Our staff had a chance to look at the monthly assumptions and other details of 
both of these components, and Steve mentioned to me that his colleagues in the 

Division of I
nternational 
Finance 
are inclined to disc
ount some of the negative miss 
in net exports between their forecast and the BEA™s estimate.
  Going the other way, it 
looks as though the BEA wrote down a very high assumption for inventories in 

March, and we might be inclined to discount a little bit of that.  So I don™t know that 

it would have much effect on the top line.  B
ut I 
believe
 our thinking at this point 
would be that net exports aren™t quite as weak as the BEA has estimated, and 
that 
inventories may not be quite as large. 
The bottom of the table shows 
the BEA™s estimate of consumer price inflation. 
Total PCE prices fell 
2 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter, the same as our 
6 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
           
        
     
                
                                                                               
  
 Tealbook estimate, while core PCE prices rose 
nine
-tenths 
of 
1 percent, 
one
-tenth 
more than we were expecting. 
Finally, I
™ll
 just mention that real disposable personal income rose at an annual 
rate of 6.2 percent in the first quarter, while the saving rate came in at 
5.5 percent.  

Both of those figures were also close to our expectations.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Are there questions for Bill?  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. Bill, is the staff embarrassed that you missed this by 50 percent? 
[Laughter]  No, congratulations on this.  This is a good call, and I think it was useful information 
to bring to the Committ
ee.  It™s a tough job, and when you get something right, you should 
definitely take some credit for it. 
MR. WASCHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great.  Then let™s turn to Thomas, who is going to brief us on 
our monetary policy decisions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.7  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™ll be referring to the handout 
labelled ﬁMaterial for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.ﬂ 
At previous meetings and, indeed, yesterday, several of you discussed the 
possibility of market turbulence in the run-up to, or following, the onset of policy 
tightening.  Although the Committee now has communications tools, including the 
SEP, that it did not have at the start of previous tightening cycles, unexpected 

movements in yields and volatility, up or down, may nevertheless occur even if the 

expected policy 
rate 
path does not shift markedly.  The upper-
left panel of your first 
exhibit provides some perspective by showing the staff™s estimate of the 10-
year 
Treasury term premium over the past 25 years.  The vertical bars high
light three 
episodes:  the beginning of the tightening cycles in 1994 and 2004 and the taper 

tantrum in 2013.  Within the shaded 18-month windows around these events, term 

premiums moved substantially.  But they also did so at other timesŠ
and likely in 

res
ponse to factors other than monetary policy. 
The upper-
right panel isolates the episodes associated with the three shaded 
regions and, for reference, the current episode conditional on the staff™s assumption of 

liftoff at the September meeting.  As shown by the red line, in 1994, the term 

premium rose substantially in the months following the onset of tightening.  By 

contrast, in 2004, in blue, it moved up several months before the federal funds rate in 

response to stronger economic data that moved up the expected timing of policy 
7 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
                       
     
  
       
           
   
    
  
             
 tightening.  But the term premium then began to decline and continued to do so over 

the remainder of 2004Š
the well
-known ﬁconundrumﬂ episode.  Finally, in 2013, the 
term premium began to rise around the time of Chairman Bernanke™s JEC testimony 

in late May, apparently reflecting market participants™ reassessment of the outlook for 

asset purchases and possibly policy rates.  As shown in the middle-
left panel, these 
term premium movements may, to some extent, have reflected uncertainty about the 

future course of monetary policy.  The panel shows the width of the 90 percent 

confidence interval for the federal funds rate 12 months ahead, derived from options 

on federal funds futures. The term premiums are highly correlated with this pro
xy for 
policy uncertainty in the 1994 and 2004 episodes, but less so in 2013, presumably 

because uncertainty in that episode was driven less by the path of the federal funds 

rate over the next 12 months than by the course of asset purchases and longer
-term 
rates. 
These experiences suggest that, even in a context in which the FOMC™s policy 
communications tools are more extensive than in the 1994 and 2004 cycles, it may be 

prudent for the Committee to consider its likely response to unexpected changes in 

term
 premiums that might occur around the time when it begins policy firming.  A 
special exhibit in the ﬁMonetary Policy Strategiesﬂ section of the Tealbook, Book B, 

provides some background that might be useful.  As shown by the dotted black line in 

the middle-right panel, the staff projects that the 10-
year term premium will rise at a 
modest pace after the Committee is assumed to start raising the federal funds rate. 

This slow projected rise in the term premium reflects in part the waning effects on 

longer-t
erm yields of the Committee™s asset holdings.  The magenta line presents the 
path for the term premium in a scenario, labeled ﬁTightening Tantrum,ﬂ that is similar 

in magnitude to, albeit less persistent than, the rise in the term premium that began in 
May 2013 (the green line).  As shown in the lower-
left panel, in the ﬁtantrumﬂ case, 
optimal control would call for a more gradual increase in the federal funds rate for 
several quarters, with the federal funds rate running, on average, 35 basis points 

below 
the optimal control path associated with the Tealbook baseline (the black line) 
over the four years following the shock. 
Recent public discourse has largely focused on the specter of another market 
tantrum.  However, a repeat of the 2004 experience, in whi
ch term premiums 
remained surprisingly low for a while, is also a possibility.  For example, such an 

outcome might occur through the effects of the very large asset purchase programs 

that are under way in Europe and Japan.  The yellow line in the middle-
right panel 
shows a scenario for the path of the term premium that is similar to the 2004 

conundrum episode.  In this instance, optimal control would call for a federal funds 

rate path that is 40 basis points higher, on average, over the next four years. 
The 
lower
-right panel highlights a few caveats. The tantrum scenario abstracts 
from the possibility of widespread liquidity or solvency problems, a point worth 

mentioning in light of recent commentary about reduced liquidity in key markets, 

which Simon discussed in his briefing.  More generally, the scenarios do not examine 

the consequences of term premium movements that are associated with other 

disturbances.  If, for example, the term premium fell because of weaker economic 
           
                   
        
       
         
          
    
  
  activity abroad and associated fl
ight-
to-safety flows, the optimal policy response 
could be to keep the federal funds rate lower, not higher, than in the baseline.  Finally, 

the appropriate policy response to either scenario depends importantly on the 

persistence of the deviation of the t
erm premium from its baseline path, which will be 
known only in retrospect.  In response to such scenarios, policymakers may wish to 

emphasize that they will respond to financial conditions that are judged inconsistent 

with the achievement of the FOMC™s objectives. 
Turning to the draft policy alternatives, thanks to the excellent work of Bill 
Wascher and his colleagues, I can discuss the alternatives as distributed yesterday. A 

key issue for your decision today is how to convey the implications of recent and 

incoming economic information for the likely timing of policy normalization.  First, 

as indicated at the top of exhibit 2, assuming that the Committee decides to remove 

time
-based forward guidance from the statement, it will primarily rely on paragraphs 
1 and 2 to speak to its assessment of whether its criteria for liftoff
 have been met or 
when they are likely to be met.  In broad terms, with alternative B, the Committee 

would communicate that the conditions for an increase in the federal funds rate are 

not yet in place, while alternative C would suggest that those conditions will likely be 

in place in the near future.  Alternative A would indicate that the preconditions for 

liftoff are unlikely to be met in the near future. 
The second set of bullets summ
arizes how each of the three alternatives may 
shape expectations for the timing of liftoff.  On the Committee™s criterion that it 

would need to see ﬁfurther improvement in the labor market,ﬂ alternative B states that 

ﬁunderutilization of labor resources wa
s little changedﬂ over the intermeeting period, 
citing the moderation in the pace of job gains and the steady unemployment rate.  

Regarding the second criterion, that the Committee would need to be ﬁreasonably 
confident that inflation will move back to its
 2 percent objective over the medium 
term,ﬂ alternative 
B updates the description of recent data in paragraph 1 and retains, 
in paragraph 2, the expectation that inflation will 
ﬁrise gradually toward 2 percent 
over the medium term.ﬂ  Thus, alternative B does not signal a change in confidence 
about the inflation outlook. 
In addition, the Committee noted in the March minutes that the timing of the first 
increase in the federal funds rate would also depend on the evolution of economic 

conditions and the outloo
k.  In that regard, alternative B provides the judgment that 

the Committee sees the recent weakness in economic activity either 
ﬁin part
ﬂ or ﬁat 
least in partﬂ as transitory and indicates that, despite the first
-quarter slowdown, the 
Committee still expect
s economic growth at a pace that will lead to further 

improvement in labor market conditions.  Under alternative B, the Committee would 

remain fully data dependent and offer no time-based guidance about how soon the 

conditions for liftoff are likely to be 
met. 
By contrast, alternative C would communicate the Committee™s readiness to begin 
policy normalization in the near term.  Paragraph 1 indicates that, despite a steady 

jobless rate, ﬁsome labor market indicators suggest that underutilization of labor 

resources continued to diminish.ﬂ  It expresses a more positive reading of recent news 
               
    
    
    
           
    
    
              
                   
         
on inflation and notes that, although inflation remained below the Committee™s 

objective, ﬁit was no longer declining.ﬂ  In addition, paragraph 
1 of alternative C 

attributes this winter™s economic slowdown largely to transitory factors. Paragraph
 2 suggests not only that the Committee continues to anticipate moderate economic 

growth and further improvement in labor market conditions, but also that it now has 

become more (or perhaps somewhat more) confident that inflation ﬁwill rise 

gradually to 2 percent over the medium term.ﬂ  Having made those assessments of 

recent developments and the outlook, the Committee would adopt new guidance in 

paragraph 3.  Rather than repeating t
he criteria for liftoff adopted in the March 
statement, the Committee would announce that ﬁeconomic conditions mayﬂ or ﬁlikely 

will soon warrant an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate.ﬂ  While 

alternative C reintroduces a time dimension 
to the forward guidance, it also retains 
the more general data
-dependent statement that the timing of the adjustment would 
depend on realized and expected progress toward the Committee™s objectives of 

maximum employment and 2 
percent inflation. 
Finally, with alternative A, the Committee would express heightened concerns 
about the underlying strength of the economic expansion, downside risks to the 

outlook for the labor market, and possible persistence of below-
target inflation. 
In paragraph 1, in 
alternat
ive A, 
as in alternative B, the Committee describes 
underutilization of labor resources as ﬁlittle changed,ﬂ but it stresses that inflation 

ﬁcontinued to run well below the Committee™s longer
-run objective.ﬂ  It does not 

offer any judgment on how much of this winter™s slowdown may have been 

transitory. Additionally
, in 
paragraph 2™s assessment of 
the outlook, 
under 
alternative 
A it would be report
ed that the Committee now sees the risks to economic activity 
and the labor market as ﬁtilted to the downside.ﬂ And the statement would voice 
concern that ﬁinflation could run substantially belowﬂ 2 percent for a protracted 
period, and possibly that ﬁthe pace of improvement in the labor market could remain 

slow.ﬂ 
Given these risks to the outlook, alternative A 
introduces a somewhat more 
stringent precondition for the initiation of policy firming, stating in paragraph 3 that 

the Committee would need to see inflation ﬁclearly moving up towardﬂ the 

Committee™s 2 percent objective rather than being ﬁreasonably confi
dentﬂ that it will 
do so.  In addition, alternative A emphasizes concern about the inflation outlook by 

indicating that ﬁthe Committee is prepared to use all of its tools as necessary to return 

inflation to 2
 percent within one to two years.ﬂ All told, alternative A would 
communicate that liftoff appears unlikely for some time. 
Thank you, Madam Chair.  That concludes my prepared remarks, and I will be 
glad to take any questions. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there questions for Thomas?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHA
RT.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Thomas, I™d like to ask you about your 
thinking as you drafted 
alternative C.  Specifically
, I™m referring to the bracketed choices in 
                  
             
            
             paragraph
s 2 and
 3, and I™m interested in how the staff is thinking about the choice of the 
ﬁhas 
become somewhat more confidentﬂ
 and 
ﬁmay soon warrant an increaseﬂ language
, as opposed to 
the 
ﬁhas become more confidentﬂ 
and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ language. 
These two language options could be seen as a sequence of statements over, say, two 
meetings.  They could convey increasing certainty on the part of the Committee or increasing 

probability of a liftoff decision.  Alternatively, I can imagine choosing between these two 

language options 
at the 
meeting ahead 
of liftoff
, with the choice depending on the probability of 
the 
liftoff decision. 
So I can see a case for both of these interpretations of the alt
-C bracketed 
language as something we might consider in the future, and 
I wonder if the staff had either of 
these ideas in mind or 
if 
it™s just providing an option for this meeting alone. 
MR. LAUBACH. 
We also explored the choice between ﬁmayﬂ and ﬁlikely willﬂ 
in 
previous drafts of a
lternative C and in other materials that
, if I remember correctly
, were sent to 
the Committee ahead of the January meeting.
  In my view, just focusing for now on that, one key 
question is how the Committee wants to strike a balance between, on the one hand, sending some 

advance notice and, on the other hand, emphasizing data dependence.  So I think one key 

question for you at some point will be, how firmly do you want to express that the next meeting 

might be likely for liftoff
, and how do you 
balance that against 
the fact 
that
, of course, over
 any 
intermeeting
 period, yo
u will receive data that may change the 
course of policy?  T
hat™s some 
of 
the thinking that went into the considerations about 
ﬁmay
ﬂ and ﬁ
likely will.
ﬂ As to the ﬁsomewhatﬂ in 
paragraph 2, you
™re right that you can see a pair between
Š ﬁsomewhatﬂ in 
paragraph 2 could perhaps fit better with ﬁmayﬂ in p
aragraph 3 because it still 
emphasizes a little bit more that you™re reserving judgment.  So that™s certainly a possibility. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
          
   
    
     
          
     
      
           
     MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes
Šthank you, Madam C
hair.
  I had a question and a 
comment.  The comment is on page 1 of the handout that you provided, ﬁMarket Expectations 
and Policy Issues.ﬂ  I thought that was a very nice set of experiments, and 
I like the idea of 

having these three possible cases
 and 
lay
ing them out.
  My own thinking is, focus more on the 
tantrum case, but, 
certainly
, it™s useful for us to keep in mind 
the conundrum case as well. 
My comment is about the use of optimal control as a way to evaluate the appropriate 
policy response here.  
Whe
n I think about what was going on in these episodes
, it wa
s really that 
there were uncertainties in markets about what the 
Committee was trying to achieve with policy 
Šand you used 
the same language, I believe
, when I was listening to you. 
But
 optimal con
trol, 
of course, involves the 
assum
ption that 
what we were trying to achieve 
with
 policy 
is all pretty 
much common knowledge. 
For example, 
in the tantrum case, we might want a more aggressive response in order to 
rebuild lost reputation, 
in some sense
, abo
ut what we™re actually trying to achieve. In the 
conundrum case
, the same is true
Šwe might want to be even tighter than what™s built in here, 
because we™re actually trying to convince markets that we are really concerned about inflation 
getting too high.  
But
 in the tantrum case, 
we might 
be even easier than what™s described by 
optimal control, because we have this need to rebuild reputation in 
the eyes of the markets 
about 

the fact that 
we really
 care about getting inflation back up to 2 
percent. 
That™s a comment.  The question I had actually builds, 
I think
, on what Dennis was 
asking about alternative C.  I™ll ask the same question about a
lter
native B.  As you described on 
page 2, which was a great way to summarize 
what™s in the various alternatives, we™re really 

relying on p
aragraphs 1 and 2 to speak to the Committee™s assessment of 
the 
criteria for liftoff.
 I         
  
   
            
       
             
         guess we™re relying on the evolution of the data over time to allow the public to figure out what 
we think 
is relevant. 
Another way to proceed is to actually be more explicit about, 
ﬁOkay, we™ve had some 
incoming dataŠparagraphs 1 and 2.  We just saw GDP now.  H
ow does that affect the li
kelihood 
of liftoff in, say, June?
ﬂ  So we could have provided more explicit guidance about that in the 
statement in 
alternative B.
  And I guess my question is, what were you thinking in not doing 
this? 
MR. LAUBACH. 
I have 
two thoughts, perhaps, on that, and maybe Simon can also 
weigh in on 
at least one of them
.  N
amely
, as Simon showed you yesterday, there was a question 
in the primary 
dealer survey on which factors market participants view as most relevant for the 
achievement of reasonable confidence.
  So there is an indirect route in the sense that what you 
say in the statement will be evaluated even though you may not have a direct statement in there 

about how 
the Committee is no
w more or less confident than before.  Presumably, 
market 
participants will
 look at your characterization of these various factors and draw conclusions from 

that about how your confidence has shifted. 
I™m not quite sure how easy it would be to try 
to come up with a summary statement for 
the degree of confidence because, well, my 
guess is that various participants rank different 
criteria differently, and I think that
™s evident from your comments.  Therefore, I believe 
this is a 
step that™s left to market participants and the public in general to draw conclusions about this. 
MR. POTTER. 
Prior to the GDP release, I think 
the 
dealers put an average 
probability of 
13 percent on liftoff in June.  Let™s assume that™s moved down to 8 
percent 
or something 
right 
now based on the 
GDP release
.  If you felt that that 
8 percent 
was way t
oo low compared 
with 
the likelihood that you might lift off in June, then you might want to try 
to indicate something.  
                                          
    
      Before it was way too high, but it 
seems a little bit 
less likely that you would want to indicate 
something at 8 percent. 
MR. KOCHERLAKO
TA.  That™s helpful.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Are there other comments or questions?  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thomas, I wonder if you could, to help us understand these scenarios, 
refresh the Committee™s memory about the extent to which overnight 
short-
term interest rates 
that we influence directly through the federal funds rate target can affect economic activity in 
the 
FRB
/US model 
independently of the value
s of the 
5-, 7-, and 10-
year interest rates
, which appear 
to figure prominently in th
ese scenario
s. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  Monetary policy transmission 
in the 
FRB/US 
model 
is largely through 
long-
term rates
, so I™m
Šlet me think. 
MR. LACKER.  Entirely? 

MR. LAUBACH
.  Largely
Šwell, to varying degrees.  F
or example, there are some rates 
in there
, like
 the rate on auto loans, that arguably are not quite as long term.  So they are not only 
a 10-year Treasury 
yield
. But it™s true that the funds rate
, in and of itself, doesn™t carry a whole 
lot of weight in monetary policy transmission, but only through its ef
fects on longer
-term yields. 
By implication, 
these shifts in term premiums that we are considering in the scenarios are 

actually quite powerful.  So they do have 
a substantial macroeconomic effect
s. 
MR. LACKER. Well, 
I have two follow-ups.  One is, when I think about this, 
I have 
difficulty reconciling that structure with the impression that a sizable volume of bank lending 

among 
the bankers I talk to seems to be priced off LIBOR and other short
-term interest rates. 
The s
econd thing is, what would this imply for Taylor r
ules? 
Have we been wrong for 
years?  Should we have been including a ter
m premium thing that we accommodate in the Taylor 
           
  
       
   
     
      
  
  
    
  
  
               rules? 
Should we think about policy differently now that we™
ve got this transmission 
mechanism 
whose 
strength varies
 depending on what the term premium does? 
MR. LAUBACH
.  There are two separate aspects to this.  One is, what if monetar
y policy 
transmission also importantly works through term premiums?  That means that term premiums 
systematically vary with the path of short-
term interest rates. 
To some extent, that is actually the 
case in 
the 
FRB
/US model
Šnamely
, that the term premium is an endogenous function of 
expected future output gaps.  So to the extent that choices about the path of the funds rate affect 

the outlook for future output gaps, that has an added effect by moving term premiums 

endogenously 
as well. 
A separate ques
tion is, should a Taylor r
ule also take into account other financial 
conditions more broadly?
 And there, arguably, a Taylor rule that responds only to current 
economic conditions may have a shortcoming because it responds only to current inflation and, 

say, the current output gap, whereas financial conditions that you observe today, like movements 
in the dollar and things like that, clearly affect your outlook in the future.  So that is not an asp
ect 
that is captured by Taylor r
ules that
 just mechanically respond to current conditions.  Of course, 
for example, if you look at optimal control, 
it obviously knows about these things because it™
s run under 
perfect 
foresight.  Therefore, agents anticipate that changes in financial conditions 
today more broadly, including changes in term premiums, will affect the future outlook. 
MR. LACKER. 
Let me follow up further.  When I look at the plot in the upper-
left
-hand 
corner, if I took Taylor rules and incorporate this term premium, d
oesn™t that mean that an 

augmented Taylor r
ule should now predict interest rates 
2 percentage points higher 
for
 1994 than 
would a Taylor r
ule without that augmentation
?                            
         
    
          VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  That™s a
ssuming you have a time-constant equilibrium 
real rate, but the equilibrium real rate could be moving, too. 
MR. LACKER.  Yes, there
™s that.
  There™s the gap.  There™s inflation.  But now we add 
the term premium
, and that™
s poi
nting in the other direction by 2 percentage points. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  If you look just at, say, the lower-frequency movement, it now seems 
as though, 
on a
n almost secular or at least a highly persistent basis, the term premium seems 
about 2 percentage points 
lower than it was back then.
  That is an effect that arguably ought to be 
reflected already in current conditions. 
MR. LACKER.  Current conditions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  If you thought about a sudden drop right nowŠ 

MR. LACKER. 
What about the current Taylor r
ule?
  Shouldn
™t it be in the current 
Taylor r
ule, too
?  We should include 
it. MR. EVANS.  It™s in the current Taylor rule through current conditions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  W
ell, I think the point I
™m trying to make is that this 
is a 
secular 
downshift 
in the term premium from a mean of what looks like around 2 percent in the 1990s to 
about close to 
zero
 now.  But that™
s not a recent development
, that™
s been persistent since
 the 
mid
-2000s.  T
he decline in the term premium
, in and of itself, arguably had, at some point, 
a stimulative effect
.  Assuming that this really occurred in isolation
, as I referred to in my briefing, 
you could seeŠ 
MR. LACKER.  So it
™s affected the current gap and the current inflation rate. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  Exactly. 
MR. LACKER.  But your optimal control says that, even given the current gap and the 
current inflation rate
, there should be some response of the funds rate to the term premium. 
               
  
   
     
                         MR. LAUBACH. Yes
, but those are projected future changes in the term premium, not 
where it is today
.  So my point is, if you had just observed 
in recent history a 
2 percentage point 
decline in the term premium, then if that had happened in isolation, 
that should indeed affect 
your outlook.  Your outlook should be stronger, all else being equalŠagain, wit
h the caveat ﬁall 
else 
being equal.ﬂ  If the 2 percentage point decline occurred in the context of a flight to safety, 

that™s no longer so obvious.  But if that had recently occurred, then, indeed, 
there is a little bit of 

a discrepancy in terms of your standard Taylor rule response only to current conditions.  If these 

current conditions haven™t responded yet to that decline in the term premium, then there is a bit 

of 
a tension since 
you project that 
that decline in the term premium, in itself
, actually is going to 
provide a boost. 
If you think, for example, about the staff projection, 
it is, very importantly, driven by our 
assessment of financial conditions today and over the projection period.  So the Taylor r
ule does 
take account of that over the projection period. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Governor Fischer, do you have a two-hander? 
MR. FISCHER. 
Yes, it™
s a two
-hander.  
What is the correlation between the term 
premium and the difference between the short
-term rate and the long-
term rate?  Is it high? 
MR. 
LAUBACH
.  The correlation between the term premium and the slopeŠ
sadly, I do 
not know this right off the top ofŠ 
MR. 
POTTER
.  It has to be high on a daily basis. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It has to be high. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Yes, i
t would be high. 
MR. POTTER. 
That™s because the short
-term
 rate is not moving that much
, because the 
FOMC
 is not moving 
it, but the 10-year is moving around every day. 
                                      
    
         
         
  
         MR. EVANS.  Yes, arithmetic, I guess. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS. 
My question is related to P
resident Lacker™s topic, but I guess it
™s really more about how we think about movements in the term premium in general.  A
s I understand 
the 
FRB
/US model and 
the way you described it, Thomas, is that these 
movements 
have very powerful effects because they affect all asset prices. 
They 
affect mortgage rates, the 
stock market, and the 
exchange rate. These 
movements are really spilling over throughout 
financial conditions, 
and 
so have a very powerful effect on GDP, employment, and inflation. 
The research on the effects of QE
ŠI™m thinking of the work of 
Vis
sing-Jorgensen 
and 
KrishnamurthyŠa lot of the research has looked at this and 
seems to have called into question 

whether there
™s this full pass
-through of T
reasury term premi
um effects onto private rates, 
such 
as corporate bond rates 
and 
mortgage rates, 
as well as asset prices in general.
  I guess the 
question is, to what extent are you buying into the story that maybe the term premium doesn™t 
affect financial conditions as fully as the FRB
/US model would tell you? 
Or how do we think 
about some of the more recent research in terms of these simulations? 
MR. LAUBACH
.  I think the short answer to that is, what I have here on the handout and 
what is being shown in the 
ﬁMonetary Policy S
trateg
iesﬂ section of Teal
book, Book B, of course, 
buys fully into the FRB
/US view that, to the extent that long rates matter for re
al a
ctivity, 
changes in the term premium are in 
long-
term
 rates.  So no distinction 
is drawn between
 whether 
the movement 
is in the expectations compo
nent or in the 
term
-premium component
. We could certainly 
try 
to look at how the results will change.  Broadly speaking, my 
expectation would be 
that 
the lines 
you see in the lower-
left 
panel 
are based on 100 
percent
Šthat 
                     
     
                 
        is, t
erm premiums are worth 
exactly 
as much as changes in expected future interest rates
.  Then 
you can shave that if you thought that a more reasonable estimate was, say, 50 percent. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you.  The second comment is really to President Lacker.  
This 
is why you have a 
time
-varying 
r*. In my view, this is the argument for thinking about the fact 
that the term premium changes over decades.  Other factors
, such as 
risk premi
ums
, the equity 
premium, 
and the sovereign risk premiumŠlots of things change in the 
economy
, whic
h is 
basically the argument not to have a constant 
r*. Your point is exactly right.  On its own, the term premium going down would argue for a 
higher 
r*. So what™
s really striking is that 
Laubach
-Williams, which just tries to let the data 
decide, has 
r* falling all 
of 
the way to zero, despite the fact that QE and other factors have 
pushed the term premium down.  T
he way I view this is
, there are these factors pushing 
r* up, but the other factors, the headwinds and the other things, are just so much more po
werful that
, on net, they push 
r* down.  Through the lens of 
r*, everything makes sense.  [Laughter]  Thank 
you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Why don™t we begin our round now?  O
ur first speaker is 
President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m looking forward to hearing 
President Williams™
s remarks through the lens of 
r*. [Laughter]  We™
ll see how that goes. 
Madam Chair, I favor alternative A.  My rationale for alternative A is based on the modal 
outlook for prices and employment, the risks to that outlook, and the zero lower bound.  On the 

benchmark outlook in 
the 
Tealbook
, Book
 A, you see 
that inflation does not return to the 
FOMC™s target of 2 percent until 2019, which is four years from now.  We should take steps to 

facilitate a fas
ter return of inflation to target.  These additional steps would also help boost 
           
   
    
                          
  
   
    employment over the medium term.  
Our congressional mandate calls for us to achieve 
maximum employment and stable prices.  If we are able to simultaneously create more jobs an
d impro
ve our performance on the price-stability goal, we should do so. 
That™
s the argument 
just 
based on the modal outlook alone.  It provides a clear 
justification for the policy course described in a
lternative A. 
I think this argument is enhanced 
by consideration of the risks to the outlook.  I agree with the Tealbook, Book AŠthe risks to the 
outlook for prices and employment are to the downside.  The standa
rd risk
-management 
considerations that are often advanced by the Committee suggest that these fut
ure downside risks 
bolster the case for current accommodation. 
When we think about the zero lower bound, as recent Brookings 
conference paper 
by 
President Evans 
and his colleagues 
makes crystal clear, these risk
-management considerations 
are significantly 
enhanced by the presence of the zero lower bound.  The past five years have 
taught us that when we™
re close to the zero lower bound, as we expect to be over the medium 
term, we will not be able to mitigate downside risks as effectively
 as we would like.  A
s President Evans™
s paper points out, this means that we should make policy choices so as to 
strengthen the economy in advance of these shocks hitting.  That, again, argues in favor of the 

kind of stance described in a
lternative 
A. So I see three arguments
 in favor of a
lternative A
Šthe modal outlook, the risks to the 
outlook, and the constraints on policy imposed by the zero lower bound. 
As I
™ve indicated in the past, I believe that it is important for monetary policy decisions 
to take account of the macroe
conomic risks created by potential financial instability.  My own 

reading of the QS report is that the main financial stability risk we face right now is actually 
          
         
      
     
   
                
associated with higher, not lower, interest rates. This will build on some of the work that 
Thomas was showing us earlier this morning. 
In May 2013, we began to tighten policy while we were still apparently several years 
away from achieving our macroeconomic objectives.  Market participants lost confidence in the 

willingness of the FOMC to buffer the economy against adverse shocks, and we saw a rapid 

increase in the term premium. If we raise the target range for the federal 
funds rate when 
headline inflation and core inflation are both running so low, we risk sending the same message 

that we did in 2013, and, accordingly, 
we risk seeing the same rapid run-
up in the term premium. 
Madam Chair, the modal outlook for inflation is too low.  We can best address this 
deficiency and simultaneously create more jobs by making clear, as 
alternative A does, that we 

are willing to use all 
of 
our tools to return inflation to target within one to two years, and that 
such a determined approach
 in 
the pursuit of our mandated objectives is also the best way to 
manage the risks we face, especially
 near the zero lower bound. 
I™d like to conclude by suggesting a topic for a possible research briefing
.  I
t builds on 
President Bullard™s comments yesterday and
, actually
, the conversation we were just having 
among 
President Williams, President Lacker, an
d Thomas.  I think it would be really useful for 
us to understand the work going on in the System on 
r*Šwhat™s determining it and 
what
™s moving it around.  It plays, actually, a pretty critical role, even in the statement itself.  So I 

believe
 exposing the Committee to the research going on in the System on this would be very 

valuable.  
With that, I
™ll conclude.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Today™
s GDP report confirms what we 
alr
eady knewŠ
that GDP growth slowed significantly in the first quarter. It™s too early to 
       
                  
   
  
       
      
     
 determine whether that slowdown will be persistent or whether it will be t
emporary, as last 
year™s first
-quarter slowdown turned out to be.  With no decision on the table, we don™t have to 
make that determination today.  
June™s decision is going to be data dependent, 
and we™ll be receiving important 
information
, including two monthly employment reports, 
to help
 come to a decision about liftoff 
in June.  Thus, I think it™s important not to signal anything today about a June decision.  
I support the spirit of a
lternative B today because
, at this point
, I favor data dependence 
and the meeting-by-meeting nature of the decision of liftoff.  
I believe it is appropriate to 

acknowledge the slowdown in growth and employment in paragraph 2, but then to maintain the 

characterization of the risk
s to the outlook for economic activity and 
the labor market as nearly 
balanced.
  However, in my view, the tone of the first paragraph on inter
meet
ing developments is 
too negative.  I think some of that negativity comes from focusing too much on short-
term 
changes 
in economic indicators instead of providing the Committee™s assessment of changes in 
economic cond
itions that matter for a policy decision. 
I do appreciate some of the changes that 
were made between the first draft of statement language that was circulated and the draft on the 

table today that addressed this issue of tone, but we have to remember that the public doesn™t see 

the evolution of our drafts. 
The 
Tealbook, Book B, 
tells us that the intention of 
alternative B is to avoid any date
-based guidance and ret
ain the option of beginning policy normalization in June if the data and 
outlook justify it.  
My concern is that 
alternative B doesn™t seem to achieve this.  My concern is, 
it™ll be read as our signaling that we™ve taken June off the table when that™s not the case, and it 

would be inconsistent with our data-dependent approach. 
             
  
    
           
                      Since our 
March meet
ing
, market expectations have shifted to a later liftoff and 
a flatter 
policy 
rate 
path.  In normal times, 
such a shift would be reflecting their assessment of the 
incoming data for the economic outlook, and we might want to take some signal from it.  
But 
as we prepare for liftoff, markets are particularly sensitive to our communications.  The shift in the 
expected policy 
rate 
path may not be providing any independent assessment of the economy.  
Instead
, it might be reflecting the market™s view of the Committee™s view. 
As former Chairman Alan Greenspan once said when discussing how difficult policy 
communications are, ﬁPeople hear what they want to hear.ﬂ  In such an environment, 
we must be 

even more careful than usual not to say things that could be misinte
rpreted
, even if they™re 
factually true.
  Of course, anticipating how the market might react to anything 
we do say is a 
difficult task. 
Turning to language specifics, in paragraph 1, I would opt to say ﬁgrowth slowed . . . , in 
part reflecting transitory f
actors,
ﬂ rather than ﬁ
at least in part.
ﬂ  And at this point, I understand 
that the rest of the language is pretty well locked down, but I would like to suggest one change.  

Instead of 
ﬁGrowth in household spending declined,ﬂ 
can we say ﬁH
ousehold spending 
continued to grow
, although at a slower pace
ﬂ? Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  So you said 
that, 
instead of 
ﬁGrowth in household spending 
decline
dﬂŠwhat did you want? Just review what you wanted to say instead. 
MS. MESTER.  Ye
s.  ﬁHousehold spending continued to grow, although at a slower 
pace.
ﬂ CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  
President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I support 
alternative B, including the 
statement and President Mester
™s suggestion concerning ﬁin part.ﬂ 
                 
        
                    
I see t
he decision 
at this meeting on both policy and statement as straightforward.  So I™d 
like to spend a few minutes looking ahead and thinking aloud about statement language 
possibilities in alternative economic scenarios, obviously evidence
d by incoming data, and 

alternative liftoff decision scenarios. 
I expect it will be evident in this round that there is some desire to keep June an active 
option.  In any event, I think having various communication strategies in mind could help the 

Committee achieve as smooth a policy transition as possible and reduce the chances of avoidable 

and unwanted market volatility associated with liftoff.  For my part, I™m not so optimistic that by 

June we will be able to make a clear and plausible case that the economy is on track 
in terms of 
our two decision criteria.  Having repeatedly emphasized the data dependency of our liftoff 

decision, I think it™s important that we not cause impartial observers to scratch their heads about 

the data on which we™re basing a liftoff decision.  I expect 
that the data picture will be 
sufficiently inconclusive by the time of our next meeting to justify waiting a bit longer. 
As my earlier question to Thomas indicated, I™m trying to think through how 
communication might evolve in the coming meetings should we decide not to move in June.  As 

I suggested in framing the question for Thomas, there are a couple of ways the language options 

in this meeting™s 
alternative C might serve as a template. 
The ﬁ
has become 
somewhat more 
confidentﬂ and 
ﬁmay soon war
rant an increaseﬂ language option
, combined with the ﬁhas become 
more confidentﬂ and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ version
, could be viewed as a 
sequence of statements o
ver two meetings in advance of the liftoff decision.  
Alternatively, the 
two v
ersions could be viewed as distinct choices
, with one or the other selected depending on the 
degree of certainty or probability the Committee wishes to convey, presumably in a statement of 

the meeting just ahead of the liftoff meeting. 
         
             
             
          
        Having said all 
of 
that
, my sense of 
opinion in 
the Committee is that there is not a lot of 
appetite for signaling liftoff two meetings in advance, even if couched in very tentative terms.  I 
also doubt there™s much support for a move to language along the lines of a
lternativ
e C unless 
the liftoff decision is highly probable.  So I have difficulty actually envisioning circumstances in 

which we might choose to use the softer ﬁ
has become 
somewhat more confident
ﬂ and 
ﬁmay soon 
warrant an increase
ﬂ version in a
lternative C. 
Where 
this leaves me is the view that the most 
feasible approach to some amount of guidance in advance of a liftoff decision is the ﬁhas become 

more confidentﬂ and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ choice.
  I apologize for walking 
everyone through my tortu
red thought process.  [Laughter] 
It™s certainly possible that we will receive a string of data reports between now and June 
that is strong enough to justify pulling the trigger.  If we were to move in June, 
the advance
-
signal decision will be moot, of cour
se.  In that case
, the question becomes whether the June 
statement ought to address what comes next
Šthat is, provide some more concrete guidance on 
what is the Committee™s expected path of policy over the subsequent meetings. 
As I said at the top of my remarks, 
I just want to air some communications 
considerations.  I think it would be helpful to further discuss the question of whether to provide 

advance guidance and, if so, how to phrase it.  And it™s not too early to start thinking about ways 

to prepare the public for the path of policy 
after 
liftoff. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
alternative
 B.  The data to 
date have 
not 
met the conditions we provided in the Marc
h statement for raising rates.  I am very 
skeptical that these conditions can be met by June.  
With t
wo quarters of weak real GDP growth, 
        
  
             
  
              
  
  
   
  
       
we once again are faced with a forecast of improvement
Šthe data reflect broader
-based 
weakness. 
In addition, interna
tional conditions since the 
March meeting have become more 
worrisome.  The frustration among Greek leaders when talking with European policymakers is 
palpable, while the European policymakers I spoke with seem
ed to have more confidence that 
any problems as
sociated with a Gree
k default could be readily contained. 
I am less confident 
that a smooth resolution will be achieved.  Moreover, I worry that this misplaced confidence 
in the likely 
containment of spillovers arising 
from a possible Greek default may ge
nerate 
conditions that make default even more likely. 
As I discussed yesterday, it is possible our inflation target is too low, given the 
accumulating evidence that we set the target based on research that underestimated both the 

likelihood and severity of being at the zero lower bound.  If we are willing to entertain a higher 

target, then a later liftoff would be further justified.
  In part, this would also indicate a higher 
standard for moving, shifting from reasonable confidence that we are moving toward our 

inflation target to just plain confidence that we are moving toward our inflation target. 
As the 
data to date should not make us even reasonably confident, this distinction will become more 

relevant at future meetings, presumably in the fall. 
In term
s of language, I would take out the ﬁat least,ﬂ and I would keep ﬁin part reflecting 
transitory factors.ﬂ
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
First Vice President Holcomb. 

MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
There
™s no denying that the bulk of data 
on real activity released since our March meeting has disappointed expectations.  However, a 
                              
       
      
    
     review of what has happened and what may be revealed to have happened argues for maintaining 
flexibility with respect to the tim
ing of liftoff. 
Labor market conditions continue to improve, albeit at a slow pace.  We™ve also seen the 
trade
-weighted exchange value of the dollar fall slightly against other major currencies and the 
price of oil move irregularly upward.  So we have some reason to think that the two main forces 

that have driven down headline inflation and which might pose a threat to long-
term inflation 
expectations are abating. 
Measures of core inflation have ticked upward. 
In the University of 
Michigan survey, longer-term inflation expectations edged downward in April™s preliminary 

report but remain within their recent range. 
Between now and the June meeting, the information that we will receive may shed new 
light on jobs, retail sales, consumer sentiment, and the overall health of the manufacturing and 

nonmanufacturing sectors.  We will also have two new reports on trimmed mean PCE inflation 

and household inflation expectations. Several of the current uncertainties hanging over the world 
economy may be at least partia
lly resolved.  It seems to me to be well within the realm of 
possibility that the information we receive between now and June will warrant a policy response. 
I believe it is important, therefore, that a June liftoff remain on the table. 
While
, technically
, there is nothing in the language of a
lternative B that takes June liftoff 
off the table, I do have some concern.  I can readily imagine people in the financial markets and 

business press drawing the conclusion that June action is all but impossible, given the lack of 

foreshadowing in a
lternative B.
  This move in market expectations could prove to be an 
impediment to Committee action.  Therefore, the language in paragraph 3 of a
lternative C with 
the ﬁmay soonﬂ option is attractive, 
as it more clearly indic
ates that June remains a viable option. 
On the other hand, a
lternative B states the Committee™s intention to take timely action once its 
         
            
    
                 
  criteria have been met
.  With the possibility of continued uncertainty on both fronts, 
I support 
alternative B.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, although with a 
language change, which I will get to toward the end of my remarks. 
I first wanted to say that I agree with people that once w
e have removed the forward 
guidance, as we™ve now done, every meeting should be a live meeting in which the possibility of 

a change in the federal funds rate can be on the table.
  Having said that, though, we still have 
different assessments as to how like
ly it is that we think we
™re going to want to raise the federal 
funds rate target range in the next couple of meetings.  I, for one, don™t think it™
s very likely at 
all.  But I do 
believe
 that we should not do anything that formally takes it off the table. 
I wasn™t going to comment on this, but 
President Lockhart
™s 
thoughtful observations did 
provoke me to say a couple of things on how to begin moving forward.  I think I™m coming out 
in a somewhat different place, although only in a tentative way, and would 
like to hear other 
people™s views on this.  I™d be reluctant to put back into paragraph 3 at some point an indication 

that, one or two meetings from now, we are more likely to move.  T
he reason 
is, I think that 
becomes a form of calendar guidance of its o
wn.  J
ust as
, when we put in the quasi-
calendar 
guidance before, saying, ﬁWell, 
this isn™t really calendar
Šit™s all data dependent,ﬂ the markets 
all read it as calendar guidance
, I think the same thing is going to happen now if we put in 

language such as t
hat included in paragraph 3 of a
lternative C. 
My preference would be that we use paragraph 2 as the vehicle for beginning to 
communicate a change in the Committee™s collective view as to where the economy is headed, 

which
, it™s hoped, actually begins to, I would say, 
increase some volatility a little bit as people 
        
           
         
  
      
  
       begin to think 
liftoff
 is more likely but is not a done deal.  T
hat 
way, we don™t have a surprise at 
the meeting in which we eventually lift the target range, but it is not de facto occurring just by 
the inclusion of language in paragraph 3 at a meeting before we™
ve actually decided to lift the 
target range. 
As I said, my current view is that June is very unlikely as an appropriate time to increase 
the target range.  I thought that paragraph 1 as originally circulated a week or two ago actually 

hit about right the factual characterization of the economy.  It™
s fairly
 hard to argue with the 
proposition that the data w
ere 
rather 
disappointing and pretty bad, yet paragraph 1 began with 
something sayin
g that it was 
ﬁin part reflecting transitory factors.ﬂ  M
ost important, 
I think, the 
beginning of paragraph 2 communicates that ﬁAlthough growth in output and employment 

slowed during the first quarter, the Committee continues to expect
–ﬂ In other words, 
the basic 

direction of the 
Committee™s expectations ha
sn™t changed, notwithstanding the disappointing 
developments reported in paragraph 1. 
Notwithstanding the fact that I thought the original paragraph 1 got it about right, I
™m okay with most of the chang
es that have been made since the original language was circulated, 

although I wouldn™t want to see us going too much further to try to look for the cheery in a way 

that would obscure what™
s actually happened.
  The one exception, Madam Chair, is the 
sentence 
on inflation, which is the second-
to-last sentence in paragraph 1.  Back in March, that sentence 
said ﬁInflation has declined further below the Committee™s longer-run objective, largely 

reflecting declines in energy prices.ﬂ So the phrase 
ﬁlargel
y reflecting declines in energy pricesﬂ 
was, in effect, explaining how the decline had gone further below.  It was an explanation of the 

delta. 
                                
       
  
       
 I think the language that was circulated 
originally to the Committee a week or two ago is 
now in a
lternative A
, and the language is as follows: 
ﬁInflation continued to run well below the 
Committee™s longer
-run objective, largely reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and 
decreasing prices of non
-energy imports.ﬂ  There, the way I read it when that language wa
s circulated was that now this 
phrase 
ﬁlargely reflectingﬂ in effect explains the ﬁwellﬂ part
Šwhy 
it is ﬁwellﬂ below.  But as it
™s been modified, the sentence now reads ﬁInflation continued to run 
below the Committee™s longer-run objective, largely reflect
ing earlier declines in energy prices 
and decreasing prices of non-
energy imports.ﬂ 
I don™t think it
™s the case that all of the difference between the Committee™s target and 
where we are right now is explained based on the earlier declines in energy prices 
and decreasing 
prices of non-energy imports.  On the contrary, as many people pointed out yesterday and a little 
bit today already, we haven™t been hitting the inflation target for quite some time now.  And if 

you pull out housing inflationŠ
which
, of cour
se, is largely a function of rents imputed to 
homeownersŠthen you have an awful lot of continuing questions 
about how much inflation 
there is. 
As a factual matter, I think we should modify that sentence to say something like the 
following: 
ﬁInflation cont
inued to run below the Committee™s longer-
run objective, partly 
reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non
-energy importsﬂŠ
or something just making clear that that second phrase does not account for all of the difference 

betw
een the Committee™s target and where we are right now. 
Finally, like those who have gone before me, I would prefer removing ﬁat leastﬂ in the 
first sentence.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 
                   
                             MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Our March statement provided forward 
guidance only as far ahead as this meeting, and it effectively said we were going to go to a 
meeting
-by-
meeting
, data-dependent approach to decisionmaking.  From now on, that™
s the right 
thing to do, and I think 
tha
t™
s imp
ortant.
  This means we will not be in the business of 
telegraphing interest rate moves in the previous meeting™s
 statement.  I support the observations 
President Lockhart made on this.  A
n important corollary 
of that is that we should not be 
encouraging pe
ople to believe we won™t raise rates without having sent a telegraph on the issue 
in the previous meeting™s 
statement. 
Concerning 
alternative 
C as a stalking
-horse for future statements, I don™t feel the need to 
include language like that in paragraphs 2 or 3 
at a meeting prior to liftoff
.  So I agree with 
Governor TarulloŠevery meeting should be live, and we should, to the extent that we have the 

opportunity, condition people to expect that we could move without forewarning, perhaps.  
A critical aspect is today™s characterization of the economy
, especial
ly in the first 
paragraph.  As I said in the earlier round, a substantial amount of data is scheduled to arrive 

between now and our June meeting.  If those reports are reasonably close to what the Tealbook is 

forecasting, they
™re going to show a rebound in consumer spending growth, and they™re going to 

show a firming in the monthly inflation figures. 
In that case, there could well be a strong argument for raising rates in June.  Now, we 
don™t know for sure the data will come in that way, and we don™t know for sure there won™t be 

some looming concerns on the horizon that alter the outlook. We could find we™ve hit a more 

prolonged soft patch.  I
n that case
, we may be inclined to delay raising rates when we get to 
June, and I™m open to that possibility.  But, in view of the information we™
re going to get, I think 
it™s very important not to take June off the table. 
        
  
                 
   
         
          As I said, the critical aspect is how the statement characterizes the data, and that focuses 
attention on the first paragraph.  T
he revisions that were made between 
the 
beginning of last 
week and the end of last week in the first paragraph were good, important, and 
necessary
.  But I 
agree with President Mester that the first paragraph still has somewhat of a ﬁglass half
-empty
ﬂ tone, emphasizing the empty half of the glass I guess you™d say.  I support her suggestion for 
changing the characterization of household spending.  I 
also 
support Governor Tarullo™s change 
of ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpartl
y.ﬂ I think he™
s right on there. 
But I 
believe 
that the inflation sentence in 
alternative 
C is more balanced and fair
, as it acknowledges that inflation is no longer declining.  
It calls that out. 
Central bank communication i
s all about what you choose to call out, and I 
think it would be fair to call out that inflation isn™t declining
.  S
o I™d put that suggestion on the 
table. 
Regarding 
the phrase ﬁat least,ﬂ 
I™ve 
been wrestling with that in my mind.  Certainly, in 
a broad-brush kind of way, you can see how including it might make things a little more dour than 
they ought to be, as President Mester argued.  But, on the other hand, ﬁat least in partﬂ means 
that the amount that™
s attributable to transitory factors is 
ﬁin part
ﬂ or ﬁgreater than in part.ﬂ  F
rom 
that point of view, 
ﬁat least in partﬂ seems to me like a more upbeat assessment than just ﬁin part 

reflecting.ﬂ But I could be persuaded either way on that.  Those are my comments on language, 

Madam Chair.  Thank you very much. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank y
ou.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m going to make three comments here.  
First of all, I support President Kocherlakota™s call for a symposium on 
r*.  We could probably 
benefit from getting a lot of views on the table about th
is important parameter in our models
Š         
  
    
                 
    
        
  
  
   how we
™re thinking about it and how that thinking shapes policy choices.  So that would be an 
excellent thing to do, if we could fit that in at some point. 
That leaves me with two comments.  One is about building credib
ility for data
-dependent 
policy, and the other is about shading policy to prevent asset price bubbles.  On the credibility 
question, as we all discussed yesterday, recent data ha
ve been relatively weak.
  We have been 
trying to build credibility 
regarding 
a data-dependent policy 
being the basis for rate decisions 
as we go forward.  
I guess my assessment so far is that we have indeed built some credibility, even 
considerable credibility, 
regarding 
a data
-dependent policy rate for the period ahead
, despite the 
fact that we haven™t moved the policy rate for six and a half years.  And that™
s an achievement. 
Markets
Šappropriately
, in my viewŠmoved the likely date of liftoff back in response to 
weaker
-than-expected readings on the U.S. economy during the intermeeting period.  That™
s exactly what you™d expect to observe if policy is data dependent.  If we can maintain this type of 

credibility as the 
data wax and wane during 2015, we™
ll be in excellent shape at the time of 
policy liftoff, whenever that should arrive, in the sense that there will be few surprises in the 

markets at that juncture. 
The more we can do to convince people that we™re going to 
react to the data
 and be clear 
about what data we™re going to react to, the better off we™
ll be
.  I™m hopeful that the day of the 
first move will be an anticlimactic event because we have credibility that that
™s what we 
were 
going to do.  T
hen we make the 
move, and it™s pretty smooth.  I think we™
re well on the way to 
that, but we probably have more work to do during the spring. 
Let me turn to the second comment on the shading 
of 
policy.  The staff™s forecast is that 
there will be a smooth glide to the steady state.  This forecast envisions unemployment only a 

few ticks lower at the end of the forecast horizon in 2017 than it is today.  This is not my 
        
                   
          
    
     
    baseline forecast. 
I envision unemployment falling well into the 4 percent range over the 
forecast horizon,
 barring any large negative shock to the U.S. economy.  This is what happened 
in the 1990s and in the 2000s, and I think it™
s a good baseline forecast of what
™s going to happen 
again this time. 
Simultaneously, the labor market conditions index, which takes 
into account all aspects 
of labor market performance, will continue to rise far above its average value
.  So we
™ll be 
talking about, 
in the years ahead
, a very robust labor market performance when compared 
with 
metrics on past labor market performance in 
the U
nited S
tates
.  This is going to constitute a 
boom phase for the U.S. economy, notwithstanding this morning™s GDP report, which I think is 
going to prove to be temporary. 
The boom will be associated with about 3 percent growth, at least for a time, in the U.S. 
economy.  That 3 percent growth, while not stellar, is still about 1 percent higher than the 

potential growth rate for the U.S. economy.  T
his is very similar to the 1990s
, when we had years 
in which 
we were at 4
 percent in an economy that had a 3 
percent potential growth rate. We
™ll be growing at 3 
percent for a time in an economy that has a 2 
percent potential growth rate. 
Inflation will rise
, go through the inflation target, and be higher than 2 percent over parts of the 
forecast horizon. 
Duri
ng this period, interest rates will remain exceptionally low by historical standards. 
We™ve already committed ourselves to that by saying 
that
, even 
when 
we start to normalize, it 
would be very small and very gradual.  You could throw in that my view is t
hat this policy rate, 
as we
™re envisioning it over the next couple of years, 
will be below the likely natural rate of 

interest, the 
r* value.  I
n this sense
, we™re going to provide accommodation as currently 
                         
        
        
      envisioned all 
of 
the way through this boom phase for the U.S. economy.  This is how I™
m thinking about it. 
Now, the boom period, combined with exceptionally low policy rate settings, is a recipe 
for asset price bubbles.  Asset price bubbles have plagued the U.S. economy during the 1990s 
and 2000s and have been a major point of debate at this Committee over the p
ast 20 years. 

These bubbles are not in our models.  They were not in the past 20 years, they™
re not in our 
models today, and we don™t see any component of this in our standard presentations on w
hat we 
should do about monetary policy.  So we do not have a good understanding of where these 

bubbles come from or how to control them when they occur.  Furthermore, bursting asset price 

bubbles can have devastating consequences for the U
nited S
tates
 and the global economy.  It™
s no small matter if this thing gets going and develops. 
The basic strategy, in my view, should be to head off this kind of possibility.  We™ve had 
boom-and-bust cycles during the 1990s and the 2000s.  What you™d like to do this time around is 
not to 
have that boom
-and-bust cycle
.  Then you™ll get a longer expansion, and you
™ll 
get better 
outcomes for everybody. 
It™s true that we have an improved macroprudential stance today, and that 
will help 
mitigate some of the more severe consequences of a bursting bubble.  But untested 
macroprudential tools alone are, in my view, insufficient to rely on, given the exceptionally dire 

consequences of bursting asset bubbles not just for the U.S. economy, but 
also 
for the global 
economy. 
The prudent policy, in my view, is to combine our efforts on macroprudential policy with 
a sensible monetary policy that hedges our bets in the direction of prevention of the kind of asset 

price boom-and-bust cycles 
that we
™ve
 experienced during the 1990s and 2000s.  I think we 
      
   
                    
       
    
     
  
  
      should be shading in the direction of slightly higher interest rates than we would otherwise have, 
on the grounds that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure on this dimension.  We do
n™t 

have very good knowledge of what these bubbles are or how they form, so we should be hedging 

our bets on this.  This is an important reason to get going on a modest normalization program 

when the opportunity ar
riv
es, which I expect it will later this y
ear. 
Let me turn just to alternative
 B for a minute.  I support 
alternative
 B, 
as written, for 
today, without the ﬁat leastﬂ phrase 
in the first paragraph.  T
he ﬁin partﬂ covers the bases there, 
and I don™t think we need to add anything more to that. 
I do 
agree with President Mester™s suggested change. 
The wording ﬁG
rowth in 
household spending declined; household
s™ real incomes rose stronglyﬂ is a little bit jarring, and I 
like President Mester™s suggestion there that would smooth that out a little bit. 
I agree with Governor Tarullo and President Lacker that we should not try to reintroduce 
calendar
-dependent language as liftoff nears.  We™re trying to get away from that, so we should 
not try to do that.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  P
resident Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  President Kocherlakota made a good case for 
alternative 
A, and I™m sympathetic to his view, but I can support a
lternative B.  I continue to 
believe that economic conditions will most likely be consistent 
with an appropriate time for 
liftoff being sometime in 2016.  I currently think, based on data, that it will take until then for me 

to be reasonably confident that we™re on course to achieve our inflation objective within an 

acceptable time 
frame. 
The information we™
ve received since our 
March 
meeting has not changed my opinion on 
this.  Indeed, I™
m a little nervous over the latest data on activity and their implications for further 
                    
                            
             slower reductions 
in resource slack. The recent stabilization of energy p
rices and 
the 
dollar are 
positives.  But, 
as I discussed yesterday, I need to see a good deal more broad
-based, concrete 
evidence before being confident that underlying inflation trends actually are heading up with 
adequate momentum.  But, having said that
, we
™ll see how the data evolve. 
Let me make a couple of comments about other things people have mentioned.  I agree 
completely that we have moved to the point 
at which 
it™s a meeting
-by-meeting decision.  
They
™re all live decisions on the rate increase, 
so data conditionality, by itself, is all we need.  I 
don™t think we need special language, 
either
, to signal our intent. 
I agree completely with Governor Tarullo on the paragraph 1 language on inflation.  I had 
noted that myself.  T
he problem is that the 
previous iteration had talked about the gradientŠ 
inflation declining
Šand now it
™s a level concept
Šﬁcontinued to runﬂŠ
but it leaves the same 
factors in place. 
So if you add, as I think you said, ﬁ
part
ly reflecting earlier declines,
ﬂ that would 
take care of 
that.
  Alternatively, if you leave the language, you could also add ﬁand resource 
slackﬂ as part of the explanation, but the more minimal ﬁpart
lyﬂ would probably be better there. 
I™m indifferent on the language about 
household spending
 growth that Preside
nt Mester 
indicated.  I™
m a little worried that it
™s going to sound like 
the message you communicate 
when 
you go out and say, ﬁI support so-and-so 1,000 percent.ﬂ  When you say, ﬁHousehold spending 

continued to grow,ﬂ the alternative to that is a recession.  If household spending doesn™t grow, 

it™s a recession, so I
™m not quite sureŠbut, 
at any rate, that
™s fine. 
On ﬁ
consumer sentiment remains high
,ﬂ these are factually correct observations, 
but
 I™
m a little worried that it might be risky.  After all, we
™re thinking that the energy price declines are 
transitory.  Gas prices are going to go up, and we know that sentiment goes down when gasoline 

prices go up.  
So we might be providing a different bright line for people looking for a bright 
            
  
    
      
                 
     
  
  
    sign here.  Then, if you see that one go down, 
it might have a little more of an implication than 
we intend
.  B
ut otherwise, I don™t have a problem with that.  I support a
lternative B. 
Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B and the latitude it 
offers the Committee to consider a change in policy at its next meeting. 
In terms of guidance that we can glean from policy rules, the benchmarks in the 
Tealbook, Book B, continue to generally suggest 
that 
the funds rate should be higher than its 
current setting. Granted, the equilibrium real rate, or 
r*, we
™ve been discussing remains 
depressed and raises 
questions as to whether these benchmarks are providing appropriate 

guid
ance today. 
At the same time, common frameworks used to estimate 
r* also provide an estimate of 
potential GDP in which 
declines in 
r* go hand in hand with lower potential.  
For example, the 
current Laubach
-Williams framework indicates that 
the equilibrium real rate is negative, though 
it also implies that output is actually above potential.  So
, while policy should incorporate a 
lower equilibrium real rate into the appropriate setting of the funds rate, it also should not neglect 

the implications for potential GDP and the output gap.  For example, using the lower 
r* measure 
and positive output gap in the Taylor (1999) rule with inertia suggests a higher current funds 

rate.  The Taylor (1993) r
ule indicates a setting above 1 percent, even with the lower equil
ibrium 
real rate.
  I don™t take the positive output gap to completely reflect current conditions by any 
means, since some labor market slack remains.  However, this example illustrates 
that 
taking on 
board a lower equilibrium real rate may also imply a sma
ller output gap. 
      
              
          
              Finally, although this is not a decision for today, I note increasing uncertainty about the 
timing and effects of ceasing reinvestments.  I
™m a bit concerned in looking at the market 
participant surveys and noting that expectations on the 
timing of when reinvestments will be 
ended are quite diffuse. For example, a slight majority of dealers expect 
Treasury reinvestments 
to end in the first quarter of 2016, but then expectations are spread over the next four quarters 
into 2017.  This is somewhat concerning, especially given the risk highlighted in the QS report 

and recent IMF financial stability reports that longer
-term rates could increase sharply 
approaching liftoff.  Or the Committee could be facing another conundrum in which longer-
term 
rates 
remain low.
  I think we should try to manage some of this risk by providing more guidance 
on the timing of reinvestment, perhaps incorporating 
it into the SEP or perhaps just 
distributing it 
on an internal basis for our own use, to think about 
expectations on when we anticipate ceasing 
reinvestments.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Prichard. 
MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I view the evolution of the draft 
alternative 
B to finally contain entirely data-dependent language.  This is a very positive 
development and, 
I believe
, an essential step on the path to policy normalization.  I also interpret 
the language in alternative B as leaving our options open for beginning normalization at any 
future meeting 
as we are
 informed by incoming data. 
My biggest concern with a
lternative B is its overly weak interpretation of the current 
economic environment.  As I mentioned yesterday, expenditure-side data for Q1 over the past 

30 years appears to be suffering from poor and pe
rhaps incorrect seasonal adjustment.  An 
ind
icator that incorporates income
-side data, GDPplus, which was posted to 
the website of 
our Real-T
ime 
Data Research 
Center this morning, indicates that the first quarter may not be nearly 
             
              
     
    
          
   as weak as many of the 
nowcasts
 being reported.  GDPplus grew at 1.65 percent in the first 
quarter after growing 3.3 percent 
on a year
-over-
year 
basis
 in 2014:
Q4. 
Further, 
I suggest that the Committee consider
, now or in the future, 
simplifying its 
assessment of the labor market. 
Many labor market indicators paint a relatively healthy picture 
of the labor market.  F
or that reason
, I would favor deleting the third full sentence in 
paragraph
 1Šagain, either now or in the futureŠand simplifying it.  T
hat sentence begins with 
ﬁA range of labor market indicators–
ﬂ  This sentence is fairly imprecise, and it adds little to the 

meaning that is already embodied in the preceding sentence.  The idea would be to seek every 

opportunity to boil the FOMC statement down to its essence by eliminating sentences that don™t 

add particularly to meaning or understanding. 
I am otherwise supportive of the suggestion to eliminate ﬁat leastﬂ and 
of the other 
suggestions that have been made.
  Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Presid
ent Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B.
  Let me respond to 
some of the language suggestions first.  Like others, I would not include the phrase ﬁat leastﬂ in 

the opening paragraph.  That™s not needed.  It™s even unclear. 
On Governor Tarullo™s suggestion, I think he™s absolutely right.  I would put ﬁpartly 
reflecting earlier declines in energy pricesﬂ in the penultimate sentence in 
paragraph 1. 
That™s 
exactly right.  In the recent data, core is running about 1 per
cent.  O
verall 
inflation
 is running 
at around zero over the past couple of quarters, but 
it was 
obviously negative in 
the first quarter
.  There are a lot of factors going onŠPresident Lacker made this point, too.  T
hat™s just accurate 
and, 
I think
, better.
  Paragraph 2 is really 
the place in which we do the heavy lifting and explain 
how we interpret things. Paragraph 1 is really about the data. 
         
                              
  
    
   
     
   I™ll 
make a comment about data dependence in 
paragraph 1.  T
his is part of life. We™re in 
the data-dependent mode.  Paragraph 1 is going to describe the data.  We had only a month, 
really
, of data here.  This is a very small sample, but these are the data we have, and I think we 
have to just describe them accurately. 
The part of the statement 
in which we try to expl
ain how we interpret 
them 
is 
paragraph 
2. In that respect, 
I thought 
paragraph 2 did a nice job of making the point that, yes, the data 
have been weaker.  Yes, we™ve had th
ese 
factors in terms of inflation
.  But, basically
, our outlook 
hasn™t changed much.  I™m not concerned so much about the weakness or the signaling in 

paragraph 
1 as currently stated
, because I think that™s the way the data have been.  It™s just a 
small sample, and
, of course, we™ll get a lot more data bef
ore our next meeting.  So I™m fine with 
that. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo and others who™ve commented on where the future 
statements should go, obviously President Lockhart started us down that road.  I strongly agree 
with Governor Tarullo and, 
I think
, P
resident Evans 
as well as
 some others that we shouldn™t be 
going back to trying to put some quasi-
date
-based guidance in there.  That whole thing of how 
we have to take a couple 
of 
steps before we act is a kind of straightjacket we don™t want to get 
ourselves in. We™re in a good place now on our statements, and I wouldn™t want to see us move 
back to that. 
Now, my own view in terms of the outlook hasn™t really changed based on the data we™ve 
seen in the 
past month, 
which is similar to what 
others have mentioned.  
First
-quarter 
data seem 
to be distorted by some seasonal factors and other factors.  We™ve been down this road before.  

In terms of the inflation data, I haven™t changed my view there, 
either. I still have 
the 
view that 
inflation 
will come back over the next couple of years to our target. 
                    
                               
  But this is 
all 
forecast
, and we™re now in the data-dependent mode.  When I™m asked 
when I think we™ll be raising rate
s, I say,
 ﬁI might have a view on this, but I don™t know.ﬂ 
I try to avoid tal
king about June, September, December, or whichever year because it really depends 
on how the data 
come in
, how they influence our outlook, and what the right policy is. 
That™s a hard message for us to get across
, because we™ve been focused on June versus 
September versus December or whatever.  So I™ve been thinking a little bit outside the box here 
about how we can, beyond this statement, get to a more data-dependent approach.  
Madam 
Chair, I have a suggestion for you.  I made you a special T-
shirt 
[Laughte
r].  The message reads 
ﬁMonetary P
olicy Is
 Data 
Dependent.ﬂ 
CHAIR YELLEN.  How about one for everybody? 

MR. WILLIAMS.  I have a whole box of them.  You wear this around, and then I think 
that™
ll make the point pretty clear
.  We won™t have to worry so much aboutŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Fantastic. 
Love it. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you. 

MR. 
TARULLO. 
Have the softball team wear th
ose. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Another great idea.  Oh, I have one 
last comment I want to make
Š sorry
.  [Laughter] 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You can™t top that, 
John. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  No, I know.  Actually, 
President Kocherlakota
, I can
Šin this way.  I 
would like to second the comments of 
President Kocherlakota
 and 
President Bullard about 
having more of a discussion 
regarding 
the natural rate of interest, 
with 
r* e
stimates
 obviously 
being at the center of this.  I get a lot of feedback, pro and con, about this, and there is some 
                    
              
      
  
           literature developing on 
this besides just the Laubach
-Williams 
model.  So I really do think that 
having a further discussion about 
that wo
uld be helpful. 
The basic logic of Laubach
-Williams is actually pretty simple.  Over the 
past five years
, output growth 
has been averaging 2.3 percent
ŠI™m picking up on President Kocherlakota™s 
point yesterday about 
how L
aubach
-W
illiams
 works.  The 
trend
 growth in our model is 2.0 
percent
.  I think that™s consistent with most people™s views. So we™re getting growth of 
0.3 percentage point above trend over five years, while the real federal funds rate has been about 
minus 1.7.  The only way you can interp
ret this statistically is 
to think 
that the real rate gap
Š basically
, the 
amount of monetary stimulusŠis very modest over the p
ast five years, and this 
hasn™t changed in our model. 
What 
Laubach
-Williams is telling you is simple.  We™ve had negative real rat
es for five 
straight years.  Output growth has been just a smidgen above potential.  Therefore, 
there™s really 

not much monetary stimulus relative to the neutral rate going on.  This is something we should 
discuss further, but, 
basically
, that™s how the mo
del interprets the data.  If the equilibrium real 
rate really were 
2, growth would have been a lot faster than 2.3.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I had read about the T-
shirt in the 
media, and I™m glad to see the real thing in front of us. 
But the 
more 
serious thing 
is, President Williams summarized a number of people™s 
comments that we want to get away from being date 
dependent.  One challenge 
with regard to 
that is the way the 
Summary of 
Econom
ic 
Projections presents our policy outlooks.  That™s very 
date dependent.  In fact, that™s what I™m often asked about
:  ﬁBoy, it looks as though everyone™s 
saying 2015. What do you think about that?ﬂ  So it™s something to be thought about
.  I
f we™re 
        
         
    
                       really trying to get away from date dependence, I think that says something about how we want 
to be talking about interest rates in the 
Summary of 
Economic P
rojections as well. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  That™s a good suggestion.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FIS
CHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d like to first discuss briefly the inflation 
target issue that arose yesterday
, and then turn to the monetary policy decision and explain why I 
support 
alternative 
B. Yesterday President Rosengren
, supported by President Kocherlakota and one or two 
others, 
suggested raising the target inflation rate, a suggestion that™s also be
en made by 
Olivier 
Blanchard.  I believe 
that 
we should constantly be reexamining all 
of 
our assumptions about 
monetary policy and the behavior of the economy, but that, 
particularly in the case of targets, we 

need to be very careful about our public stance. 
With regard to our public stance, we fixed a target inflation rate in 2011 and announced a 
2 percent target in 2012.  The setting of a 
target inf
lation rate was a major achievement and
, to 
those outside the S
ystem
, a major surprise
.  We need to be very careful indeed about reopening 
that decision and that discussion. 
The argument for raising the target inflation rate is that the higher target would permit 
normal monetary policy to attain a more negative real rate of interest than is now possible.  That 

is true, but there™s not so far been public discussion of the negative aspects of a higher inflation 

target. 
The main cost, I believe, relates to Al
an Greenspan™s definition of the desired inflation 
rate as a rate such that inflation is not taken into account in routine economic decisions.
  In 
particular, at around 4 
percent inflation
, we very likely would see the return of indexation into 

relatively 
short
-term contracts, including labor contracts.  Monetary policy becomes much more 
difficult in heavily indexed economies, in part because the inflation rate typically becomes more 
                  
        
    
  
      
               
  variable the higher the indexation rate and 
because 
the probability that t
he dynamics of inflation 
become unstable increases. 
A second cost relates to the credibility of the inflation target and of the F
OMC
.  It is possible that we should, at some future point, 
raise the inflation target
.  But if we 
go out now and 
start a public discussion about the inflation target, we will undoubtedly be asked why we™re 
raising the target and what the effects of doing so are likely to be.  
There are answers to these 

questions, but the answers may well reduce our credibility precisely at a time when reasonable 

people regard us as the most credible and most professional of the macro policymaking 

institutions in the United States. 
WeŠthat is, the participants in this meeting
Šshould not take that risk.  We should not 
go public with any doubts that we might have about the goals of monetary policy.  At the 

moment
, we™re in the middle of the process of trying to normalize monetary policy.  We should 
always be reconsidering our policy framework, but there are times to go public and times not to 
do so.  That is why our discussions of the target inflation rate should continue within the Federal 
Reserve System and within the Committee, and that is why it is fine that Eric raised the issue in 

yesterday™s go
-round, but we should not go public with that discussion. 
Turning now to the monetary policy decision, yesterday™s discussion, 
in which almost 
every participant said, 
rightly
, that 
the key issue is whether first
-quarter weakness i
s transitory or 
a signal of a longer-term weakening of growth, and this morning™s announcement 
of the first 
estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth make it clear that we should wait before making a decision 
to change the interest rate. I say that while bearing in mind an almost true maxim I once heard:  

ﬁThe situation is never clearer in the future.  It™s just unclear in a different way.
ﬂ  [Laughter] 
         
      
       
       
        
           
    I support 
alternative
 B, in which the first three paragraphs do a good job of showing that 
we are watching the data carefully
, and that the probability of a June liftoff has declined, but that 
June remains on the table. As weak as the incoming data have been and as threatening as 
the 
many black clouds that are out there 
are, it remains important to keep June as a possible liftoff 
date.  How could it be possible?  Well, we™ll receive two more employment reports before the 

June meeting.  If we see very high payroll gains in April and May and if the unemployment rate 

comes down to, say, 5.3 percent while the spending data firm as expected, it would be reasonable 

to argue 
for liftoff. 
Some might suggest that we should wait just a little longer to be sure
, since September 
isn™t really that different from June
, to perfect our communications about liftoff or to reexamine 
the tools we intend to use to raise the interest rate.
  That would mean that even in the face of very 
good data, the June versus September decision would be a close call.  But in making that call, 
we 
need also to take into account the importance of our credibility, which would require us to act 
when the conditions for acting that we have set out are fulfilled. 
Turning to the bigger picture, my views on when to lift off were influenced by the very 
helpful paper that was sent to this Committee in January by 
Oliver d
e Gr
oot, 
Etienne 
Gagnon, and Robert 
Tetlow
, whose results I quoted in the March FOMC meeting.  In that paper, they 
compared the probabilities that policymakers might regret their decisions under early and late 
liftoff scenarios.
  Using random draws from historical shocks, they show that the probability that 
we would fall behind the curve and wish that we had tightened sooner was negligible if we go on 

the early side but 
was close to 
10 percent if we wait a year longer
.  In contrast
, the difference 
between the probabilities that we would need to retrace our steps if we go earlier, 10 
percent, 

rather than later, 
5 percent, w
as not as great. 
        
        
              
           
       
Now, it™s a very good paper, but it™s not obvious where we are today relative to going 
early or
 going late.  Nonetheless, all in all, I found that analysis very useful, and it helped 
persuade me that we should seriously be contemplating lifting off soon.  It further helped 
convince me that ﬁ
early and gradual
ﬂ is a much better approach to raising the 
interest rate than 
ﬁlate and steep.
ﬂ  Of course, in the event, 
we may have to raise the rate faster or slower than we 
anticipate, but, 
at this stage
, we have to work with expectations. 
I™d also like to relate to the argument that we™re only in this relati
vely good position on 
employment and 
this 
potentially good position on inflation because the interest rate is so low, 
and that, therefore, we should not move anytime soon.  It™s undoubtedly true that the U.S. 

economy would not be in this relatively favorable position if the F
OMC
 had not moved rapidly 
after Lehman Brothers to the zero lower bound and then undertaken three rounds of QE 
as well 
as Operation Twist.  I believe history will show that the 
Federal Reserve
Štogether with the 
decision to recapitalize 
the banking system, in which the Treasury and the Congress played 
critical roles
Šsaved the United States from a second Great Depression. But we need to realize 
that, at some point, we have to put the interest rate back into action as a tool of monetary policy.  

In so doing, 
we™ll not only begin to activate a more normal way of undertaking monetary policy, 
but we™ll also be sending an extremely important signal to businesses and households that, 
after 

seven years
, the American economy is ready to exit the Great Recession and begin the return to 

normal. 
When should we do this?  The answer is, we should do it w
hen an interest rate higher 
than we have now is still consistent with 
the closing of the output gap.  I believe that, on the 
inflation rate
, the 
staff 
forecasts we heard yesterday from Bill Wascher are far less pessimistic 
than what I™ve heard around this table this morning.  I
t™s true we™ve got negative inflation in the 
          
           
  
    
                         
  
   first quarter, but it™s very important to note that forecasts of core PCE inflation 
are somewhere 
well above 1 
percent, and that when you take the special factors into account, it™s expected to 
rise not to 0.7 percent, but to 1.7 percent, which is very close to target. 
We should also note that even the 
r* in the Tealbook, Book B, is about 110 basis points 
above our current real federal funds rate, suggesting that a sooner liftoff would not be 
incompatible with further progress toward our goals if the situation improves.  Or, to put the 

criterion in the words of 
alternative 
B, we should move when the Committee ﬁ
has seen further 
improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 

2 percent objective over the medium term
.ﬂ  And I expect that will happen reasonably soon.  
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B.  On the 
statement
, I support taking out ﬁat leastﬂ and changing ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpartly.ﬂ 
More broadly, paragraph 1 initially struck me, and continues 
to strike me
, as fairly 
downbeat.  But what saves it for me is this comment about how household real income is rising 

strongly, which I think really sets out our narrative for just how much we™re counting on 

consumer spending and is a pretty strong statement in a context of weak spending.  
So, overall, 
it achieves a level of balance, and I™m fine with it with those changes. 
In terms of forward guidance, I™ll just add that I 
believe 
it™s a very bad idea to surprise 
the market with l
iftoff.  I would avoid calendar-based guidance.  I would let the data speak.  I 

would let the statement
, the minutes, 
and the speeches speak. 
I do think the market will get it. 
It™s very unlikely that the people in this room would be approaching a decision to lift off the 

interes
t rate
, with all 
of 
the attention we™re getting, and that this would be a surprise to the 
        
         
     
   
                    
  
   
          
   market.  T
hat™s incredibly unlikely. 
In fact, my guess 
is, as we approach that, it™s not going to be 
a surprise to the market, 
in light of 
all of 
the transparency and all of the attention being paid. 
More broadly, I think that policy is right where it™s supposed to beŠlooking at incoming 
data to see whether the liftoff narrative still holds together, that narrative being reasonable 
growth that is strong enough to support further improvement in the labor market at a meaningful 

pace and inflation moving up to 2 
percent in the medium term. 
The sense I had at the beginning of the year was that the labor market would continue to 
heal fairly quickly in a context of moderate growth, and I thin
k there™s a better
-than-
even chance 
that something like that narrative will reemerge as we leave the first quarter behind, just 
as it did 

in 2014.  
So, as I said yesterday, I feel good about where the current Tealbook forecast is, and 
I consider that to be still on the same path we were on
Ša little bit slower, but a reasonable path. 
I do have to admit I have a concern now, though, that the speed limit on U.S. growth may 
now be closer to 2 percent than 3 percent, because of the drag gen
erated by
 the behavior of net 
exports, and that improvement in the labor market will also slow down as a result.  TimeŠand 

dataŠ
will tell
.  Monetary policy can respond and really has already done so through 

expectations.  It may 
limit further tightening bu
t doesn™t feel 
as though 
it can reverse 
the 
tightening 
in financial conditions that we have already experienced. 
In the case of returning closer to the old path that had strong job growth, we™re close to 
the natural rate.  Monetary policy works with long lags.  Zero isn™t the right number.  This 

remains for me a very satisfying approach if we do get back to that path, and, 
again, that™s my 

modal case. 
The lower path is just much tougher. We™re still close to the natural rate. We™re still 
eliminating slack
, but at a much slower pace, and I think 
that, 
more important, 
the economy is 
       
                      
              more vulnerable to an unwanted tightening 
in financial conditions and probably in a nonlinear 
way. 
I would still want to lift off, just a little bit later
.  But I would point 
out that the 
communication challenges and the risks are much less attractive. 
I™d be very happy to see data come in that would justify liftoff in June or at any meeting 
subsequent to that
.  But, 
having resisted predictions so far for the most part, I™ll co
ntinue to do so 
today.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  I support a
lternative B.  It seems appropriate for the 
statement to recognize that incoming data ha
ve shown softness across a range of 
spending 
categories
, in industrial production as well as in labor market conditions. 
Although there is reason to believe that some of the weakness reflects transitory factors 
or statistical noise, my best guess is that some of it also reflects a more persi
stent slowing in 
economic momentum.  In particular, the negative effects of dollar appreciation and weakness in 
activity abroad on net exports and business investment, as well as the negative effects of earlier 
oil price declines on drilling and mining, appear to be greater than expected, and the boost to 

consumption has not materialized. 
This softness of recent data
, along with the advance estimate of GDP, 
leads me to favor 
removing the bracketed ﬁat leastﬂ language from the first sentence. 
I also support Governor 
Tarullo™s modification to the sentence on inflation.  T
hat is simply a more accurate statement. 
By the same token, reflecting our uncertainty about the persistence of these effects, it is 
appropriate to include mention of some continuing positive economic signals, such as the 

relatively high level of consumer sentiment.  For that reason, I support the additional words in 
        
  
           
            
        
       paragraph 2, which stress that, 
despite the weaker data, the Committee continues to expect the 
economy to expand at a moderate p
ace. 
For those who worry 
that p
aragraph 1 is too downbeat, I would note this is significantly 
counterbalanced by the fact that a
lternative B makes few changes to 
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the 
March statement, including importantly reiterating that the risks to
 the outlook and the labor 
market are nearly balanced rather than emphasizing downside risks in light of recent data. 
In my view, the incoming data, on balance, do not suggest we™re appreciably closer to our 
two conditions for liftoff.  The incoming data on the labor market do not provide evidence of 

further improvement.  If anything, the softer tone of the aggregate spending data raises the 

possibility that labor market improvement may stall this year.
  My reading of the data on 
unemployment, labor force p
articipation
, and the number of employees working part time for 
economic reasons is that slack remains.
  Nonetheless, we™ll have two additional labor market 
rea
ding
s to help with our assessment before the June FOMC deliberations. 
Meanwhile
, the modest improvement we™ve seen in putting a floor under inflation falls 
short of our standard of reasonable confidence.  We™ve seen some encouraging movement in 

core CPI, although core PCE remains persistently soft relative to our 2 
percent target. 
The recent 
firming
 of oil prices and the recent 
plateauing 
in dollar appreciation raise the possibility that we 
might be seeing an inflection point
, but further appreciation seems likely
, accelerating wage 
growth has 
yet to materialize, and market
-based measures of 
inflation expectations remain soft, 
although they™ve shown some improvement as the price of oil has firmed. 
It™s possible that the data we 
will 
receive 
in the coming months 
will reveal the weakness 
in the data to have been a temporary aberration, and that momentum in underlying activity is 

undiminished.  It could also be that incoming data and economic developments abroad will show 
                  
     
                  
       
 foreign activity to be on more stable footing than now appears to be the case.  
If so and if price 
inflation 
and 
measures of in
flation expectation
s show further signs of firming, then liftoff could 
be appropriate.  On balance, my assessment is that
, although June should remain on the table, the 
probability of liftoff has shifted from June to later in the year.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLE
N.  Thank you.  
Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.
  I support a
lternative B.  Given the 
slowdown in growth, the weaker payroll trend, and a host of other weak economic data, I think 

it™s unlikely, speaking for myself, that I™m going to see su
fficient news in the next seven weeks 

that™
ll cause me to want to lift off at the June FOMC meeting.
  That said, I wouldn™t rule it out 
completely
, because, as 
Governor 
Fischer makes clear, it™s possible that we could see two strong 
employment reports and a big upturn in economic activity.  So we could get there.  I just don™t 

think that™s very likely at this point. 
I hope the economy is going to cooperate and is going to make a September liftoff 
feasible, but I 
don™t even 
really have that much confidence about that, 
either. 
The Tealbook 
forecast is actually interesting now in the sense of how flat the unemployment rate trajectory is. 

So modest shortfalls in growth could actually cause the unemployment rate trajectory to be 

completely flat or even tick up.  In that case, we might not find ourselves yet 
able to pass the 
ﬁfurther improvement in the labor market
ﬂ test. 
I think that 
ﬁfurther improvement in the labor marketﬂ and ﬁreasonably confident [about] 
inflation
ﬂ are really good tests, and I feel very comf
ortable using those 
when 
speaking about my 
own views in terms of the tim
ing 
of liftoff
.  We should talk about that in speeches and make 
those our criteria, and that will help the market participants think along with us. 
       
                                
   
     
             
In terms of language, I™m with every
one else. I would delete ﬁat least.ﬂ  I™m not that 
confident that it™s all due to transitory factors
, so 
I think ﬁat leastﬂ goes a little too far. 
With respect to President Mester™s suggestion to change the sentence about consumption, 
I believe 
the meanin
g is the same. 
MS. MESTER.  The meaning is the same. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Given 
that 
the meaning is the same, I guess I prefer to go 
with the more parsimonious number of wordsŠ
a more direct approach.  So I think 
I prefer what 
we have. 
MS. MESTER.  I 
think second derivatives are harder to understand. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo™s ﬁpartlyﬂ versus ﬁlargely,ﬂ 
I think you really could go either way.  You think about the gap between our target of 2 
percent 

for inflation and where we 
are. 
My judgment would be 
that
 about two-thirds of that gap is due to 
lower energy prices and the stronger dollar, so about one-third is due to other things.  You could 
call that ﬁlargelyﬂ if you wanted to
, or you could call that ﬁpartly.ﬂ 
It™s really wh
at the 
Committee wants to communicate in terms of how concerned they are about inflation being low 
that should drive whether you want to be ﬁ
largely
ﬂ or ﬁ
partly.
ﬂ  I would slightly favor ﬁ
partly
ﬂ because I™m not as concerned about inflation today as I was six weeks ago, but I™m happy to 

accept the judgment of the Committee. 
With respect to the statement, I™m really glad that we™
re now in a data-dependent place, 
and I don™t feel bad about that in the slightest.  The market should be able to think along with us 

as they see the data
, as long as they can interpret them through the prism of labor market 

improvement and 
whether we are
 becoming reasonably confident about the inflation outlook 

over the medium term.  
If the market starts to diverge from what our expe
ctations are, there 
are 
                    
     
                        
       
 plenty of forums in which to remind people of what the data mean to us in terms of those two 
criteria.  I think we can easily pull the market back. 
Lastly, Chair 
Yellen 
opened the meeting by recognizing Chris Cummings
, so I want to 
close my remarks similarly.  I want to acknowledge Chris™
s service to the New York Fed
, the 
Federal Reserve System
, and this Committee.  On several occasions during the crisis
, Chris was 
forced to sit in this chair and provide the New York Fed™s views on monetary policy, and she did 

that very ably.  We hope that will never have to happen again. 
In terms of Chris™
s contributions to the 
System, they™re very large.  She™s been a great 
colleague to me and to many others throughout the Federal Reserve System.  I™ve heard many 

people comment to me over the past few days and weeks about how much they™re going to miss 

her and how important she™s been in contributing to the Federal Reserve System writ 
large, as 
opposed to just the New York Fed.  She embodies, in my mind, the modern central banker 
in that 
she has a 
very deep and broad portfolio, ranging from 
serving as p
roduct d
irector for the 
Wholesale Product Office to chairing the Financial Stability Board™s Cross
-Border Crisis 
Management Group.  That™s a pretty wide span of responsibilities. 
I want to thank her personally for her wise counsel and support during my tenure.  And, 
of course, I wish you the best in all 
of your future endeavors.  [Applause] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thanks, everybody.  
First of all, 
let me acknowledge 
that I 
heard the support for 
a Committee discussion about 
r* and the factors influencing it, and I also 
think that™s a good idea
.  W
e™ll work with Thomas and others to see if we can put that together.  
It™s a great idea. 
I heard
, in gene
ral
, broad-based support for 
alternative 
B for today, and we have a few 
language issues to review.
  First, starting at the top of 
paragraph 1, we have the bracketed ﬁat 
         
       
               
   
               least,ﬂ and I actually heard a large number of people who suggested we not include the bracketed 
ﬁat least.ﬂ
  Let me give anybody who wants it in there an opportunity to say 
so.  President 
Lacker
, I heard you support putting it in there, but are there others?  [No response] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Then I will
Š MR. LACKER.  I c
ould support deleting 
it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great. 
So we will remove the bracketed ﬁat least.ﬂ
  The next 
change suggested was President Mester™s recommend
ed change in the language about household 
spending.  Just to remind you, she suggested changing the words ﬁGrowth in household spending 

decline
dﬂ to ﬁ
Household spending continued to grow
, although at a s
lower pace.ﬂ 
I heard a little 
bit of support, not a great deal, and a couple of people 
were opposed.  Let me just ask
ŠI think I 
heard two supporters in addition to 
President Mester.  Is there widespread support for that 

change?  If so, please indicate if you support that change. 
MR. FISCHER.  I do. 
PARTICIPANT.  I support the change. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I see 
three
 people who are supportive.  And how many are 
opposed?
  [Show of hands]  Okay.  I™m going toŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Chair™s prerogative. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Chair™s prerogative
.  I think leaving it as is
, rather than going with the 
suggestion, is, frankly, my own preference. 
Finally
, we have Governor Tarullo™s 
suggested change
.  That would be in the ﬁinflationﬂ 
sentence, the next
-to-last sentence in 
paragraph 1, and the suggestion is to change ﬁlargely 
reflectingﬂ to ﬁpartly reflecting.ﬂ 
I did hear quite a bit of support for that.  Personally
, I™m also 
               
  
   
      
                
   open to making that change, but let me see what people think who didn™t weigh in on that.  H
ow 
many people wouldŠ
President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  C
ould I ask a clarifying question? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sur
e. 
MR. EVANS. 
Vice Chair
man
 Dudley, you mentioned two-
thirds o
fŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  That would be my characterization. 

MR. EVANS. Was that 
of 
headline inflation or 
core? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Headline 
is zero
.  Core is running about 1.3-ish on a 
year
-over
-year basis
. MR. EVANS.  So you™re saying two-thirds of the low headline inflation. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Yes, exactly. 

MR. EVANS.  Ye
s.  That™s fair. I agree. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It refers to inflation.  It doesn™t refer to core inflation. I 
think you can argue it either way, frankly. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Inflation is running about ¼ 
percent.
  Core is running about 1.4 or 
something like that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.  So about two
-thirds of the gap is in these transitory 
factors
, and about one
-third is
Š MR. EVANS.  When I s
ay inflation
, I™m thinking underlying inflationŠ
something closer 
to coreŠso that™s why I 
believe 
ﬁpartlyﬂ is important
.  But you™re right.  If this was nailed down 
and 
it said headline inflation
, that would be okay.  At any rate, I support Governor Tarullo™s 
recommenda
tion. 
             
          
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
            CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. 
Let me see support for Governor Tarullo™s suggestion.  [Show 
of hands] 
I see broad
-based support.  Is there anyone who feels strongly opposed?  Okay.  So let 
us also make that change. We will change the word ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpart
ly.ﬂ
  And those are all 
of 
the suggestions that we need to review, s
o I think we™re ready, Matt
. MR. LU
ECKE.  The vote will be on a
lternative B 
as depicted 
on pages 7 and 8 of 
Thomas™
s handout, with the changes of taking out the words ﬁat leastﬂ in the fir
st sentence and 
replac
ing ﬁlargelyﬂ 
with 
ﬁpartlyﬂ in the penultimate sentence in 
paragraph 1
.  It will also cover 
the directive on page 12 of Thomas™s handout. 
Cha
ir Yellen 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
Governor Brainard 
Yes 
President Evans 
Yes 
Governor Fischer 
Yes 
President Lacker 
Yes 
President Lockhart 
Yes 
Governor Powell 
Yes 
Governor Tarullo 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You should have your gavel.  [Laughter] 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
Okay.  
We need 
to confirm the date of the next meeting, which is 
Tuesday and Wednesday, June 16 and 17.  Thanks, everybody, for your participation.  The 

meeting is adjourned. 
END OF MEETING 
      
                                                                
    
 ________________ Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
April 28
Œ29, 2015 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 28, 2015, at 

1:00 p.m. 
and continued on Wednesda
y, April 29, 2015, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the 
following: 
Janet L. Yellen, Chair 

William 
C. 
Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Lael Brainard 

Charles L. Evans 

Stanley Fischer 

Jeffrey M. Lacker 

Dennis P. Lockhart 

Jerome H. Powell 

Danie
l K. Tarullo 
John C. Williams 
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, and Eric 
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Helen E. Holcomb and Blake Prichard, First Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Dallas and Philadelphia, respectively 

Thomas Laubach, Secretary and Economist 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 

David 
W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle 
A. Smith, 
Assistant Secretary 
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Eric M. Engen, Michael P. Leahy, and William 
Wascher, Associate Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account 

Robert deV. Frierson,
1 Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market Committee and t
he Board of Governors. 
                             
                           
  
       
         
   
 ________________ Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of 

Governors 
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Governors 
James A. Clouse and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 
William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, 
Board of Governors 
Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider, and Stacey Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board, 
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Michael T. Kiley, Senior Adviser, 
Division of Research and Statistics, and Senior 
Associate Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 

Governors 
Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Joshua Gallin, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci,
2 Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 
of Governors; Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, 

Board of Governors 
Jane E. Ihrig
1 and David López
-Salido, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Edward Nelson, Assistant Director, Division
 of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Eric 
C. Engstrom, Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Penelope A. Beattie,
1 Assistant to the Secretary, Of
fice of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
2 Attended the portion of the meeting following the joint session of the Federal Open Market Committee 
and the Board of Governors. 
                                    Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Katie Ross,
1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
Jonathan E. Goldberg, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

James M. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

James J. McAndrews, Executive Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 
Troy Davig, Michael Dotsey, Evan F. Koenig, and Spencer Krane, Senior 
Vice 
Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Todd E. Clark, Sylvain Leduc, Giovanni Olivei, Douglas Tillett, and David C. Wheelock, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, San Francisco, Boston, Chicago, 

and St. Louis, respectively 
Kei
-Mu Yi, 
Special Policy Advisor to the President, Federal 
Reserve Ba
nk of 
Minneapolis 

Matthew D. Raskin, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Jame
s M. Egelhof,
1 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 
                   
             
  
      Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
April 28
Œ29, 2015 April 28 Session 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Good afternoon, everyone.  I™d like to welcome back First Vice 
President
s Holcomb and Prichard, who will again be representing Dallas and Philadelphia, 
respectively. 
On a sad note, my understanding is that this is the last FOMC meeting for New York 
First Vice President Chris Cumming.  Chris has attended 92 FOMC meetings, 70 of which she 
attended as an alternate voter
.  And, as all of you know, Chris has been involved in a wide array 
of 
System work over many years in all facets of what we do and has been a very wonderful 

colleague.  Chris, I really thank you for your service and want you to know that you will be very 

much missed.
  [Applause] 
Next, I™m pleased to let you know that Brian Madigan has agreed to return to the Board™s 
Division of Monetary Affairs as 
deputy d
irector
, reporting to Thomas, effective June 1.  I think 
all of
 you know that Brian served as d
irector 
of the 
division 
and as FOMC 
secretary
 from 2007 
to 2010.  
Since he retired from the Board, Brian has been a visiting professor in the Department 

of Economics at Georgetown 
University
. Now, as I think many of you know
, in recent years
, the job of 
director 
of 
the Division of 
Monetary Affairs has become increasingly burdensome.  It has entailed serving as the 

Committee™s chief monetary policy advisor, as s
ecretary of the FOMC, and as leader of a large 
organization with c
ritical responsibilities.
  As part of a strategy to create a more sustainable 
situation, Brian will have oversight responsibility for the FOMC Secretariat and will play a key 

role in the production of the minutes and transcripts of FOMC meetings.  Obviously, 
these are 
things he has done superbly well in the past and for which he is eminently well qualified. 
                           
                               
                                                           
  Accordingly, I intend to propose that Brian be appointed by the FOMC as its s
ecretary
.  Unless there are objections, I will 
ask the 
FOMC 
Secretariat to send out a request 
in early June 
for notation 
votes to select Brian 
as our 
secretary
.  Under this 
arrangement, Thomas will 
continue 
to serve as 
the 
Committee™s primary advisor on monetary policy and will also be able 
to 
dedicate more of his 
energy to ensuring that 
the Division of 
Monetary Affairs fulfills its critical 
role 
in supporting our monetary policy and other responsibilities. 
Okay.  Now, 
the first two items 
on our agenda 
today will be 
considered in a joint meeting 
of the FOMC and the Board of Governors, and, accordingly, I need a motion to close the Board 
meeting. 
MR. FISCHER.  So moved. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  O
ur first item is financial 
developments and open market operations, and let me call on Simon to delive
r the 
Desk report. 
MR. POTTER.
1  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Lorie and I will split the briefing into 
three parts. 
First, I will review financial market developments. Next, Lorie will 
review Desk operations.
 Finally, I will discuss staff work on enhancing 
the 
calculation methodology for the federal funds effective rate. 
Over the intermeeting period, domestic financial conditions eased following 
more
-accommodative-
than
-expected U.S. monetary policy communications and 
weaker
-than-
expected
 economic data, including the March employment report.  
On net, nominal Treasury rates declined by as many as 25 basis points, the S&P 500 
index gained 2 percent, and the DXY dollar index decreased nearly 3 percent. 
A substantial portion of these changes came around 
the time o
f the March FOMC 
events, which were characterized as 
being 
more
 accommodative than expected 
despite the removal of ﬁpatientﬂ language from the statement. 
Investors pointed, in 
particular, to the large downward shift in the target 
federal funds 
rate projections 
in 
the SEP 
and, to a lesser extent, the downward revisions to Committee participants
™ projections of inflation, GDP growth, and the longer-run unemployment rate.  
The 

left column of your top-
left panel shows 
that nominal and real interest 
rates declined 
in the one-hour window around the statement and SEP releases
, while measures of 
inflation compensation rose, equity prices increased, and the dollar weakened. 
As shown in the right column of the table, the absolute magnitudes of these moves 
were 
1 The materials used by Mr. Potter and Ms. Logan are appended to this tran
script (appendix 1). 
             
            
    
         
           
     
         
     very large relative to changes in one-hour windows around FOMC statement releases 

over the past decade. 
One hypothesis for seeing moves of this magnitude could be decreased market 
liquidity. Indeed
, late in the trading session outside the window use
d to measure 
these FOMC announcement effects, there was a very large move in the euro
dollar 
currency pair.  The move pushed the intraday trading range for the currency pair to 

over 4 percent, a 5 standard deviation move over the period since 2004, as shown in 

the top-right panel.  The size of the move is comparable to the 6 standard deviation 

range in the 10
-year Treasury yield on October 15, both of which took place amid 

very high volumes.  
The March FOMC events shifted out expectations for the timing of 
liftoff 
according to the Desk surveys, as shown in the middle-left panel.  
The ﬁflashﬂ survey, 

taken 
three 
business days after the March FOMC meeting
, suggests that most of the 
shift occurred in response to the meeting and the large price moves in the hou
r 
following the March FOMC 
statement release
, therefore likely reflect
ing shifting 
policy expectations as opposed to outsized liquidity 
effects
.  Since the flash survey, 

soft domestic economic data and speeches from Federal Reserve officials appear to 

have further solidified this shift in policy expectations. 
The April surveys also showed a notably slower expected pace of policy 
normalization after liftoff. 
The middle
-right panel shows that the probability 
distribution for the pace of tightening in the fir
st year after liftoff, assuming no return 
to the zero bound, shifted toward a slower pace over the period, the first notable shift 

in these views since 
the question was originally asked last September.  
A similar shift 
occurred in the distribution of the expected pace of tightening in the second year after 

liftoff. 
In considering when the Federal Reserve will begin to normalize monetary policy, 
market participants are particularly focused on the outlook for inflation and the 

Committee™s reasonable confidenc
e that inflation will move back to its 2 percent 

objective.  
We asked survey respondents to score the importance of various factors 
they believe the Committee will use in assessing whether reasonable confidence in 

the inflation outlook has been achieved.  As shown in the bottom-left panel, 

respondents assigned the most importance to a further improvement in the labor 

market and the absence of weakening in realized core inflation.  
Over the intermeeting period, market-
based measures of inflation compensation 
increased alongside higher energy prices and a weaker U.S. dollar, as shown in the 

bottom-right panel.  Forward measures of inflation compensation increased at both 

shorter-
and longer
-dated horizons but remain below levels at the end of 2013.  
The 
increa
ses over the period were attributed to the March FOMC communications, 
somewhat higher-
than
-expected 
realized inflation, the increase in oil prices, and 
positioning dynamics in the TIPS market.  Longer-
term inflation expectations from 
Desk surveys were little changed over the period.  Meanwhile, front-month Brent 

crude increased nearly 22 percent but remains more than 40 percent lower since the 
      
   
               
          
            
       
   
                        
  end of 2013.  
As I noted, the DXY dollar index declin
ed nearly 3 percent over the 
intermeeting 
period but is over 20 percent higher since the end of 2013. 
Despite the depreciation over the period, market participants expect the exchange 
value of the U.S. dollar to continue its broad appreciation amid ongoing monetary 

policy divergence across major economies.
 Desk dealer survey respondents reported 
that dollar appreciation seen since last summer has prompted them to revise lower 

their forecasts for 2015 growth and inflation, with the median markdowns to 2015 

GDP growth and core PCE inflation of roughly 40 basis points and 20 basis points, 

respectively. 
A key factor contributing to broad dollar strength has been widening global 
interest rate differentials, especially between the 
United States
 and the 
euro area. 
These interest rate differentials became more pronounced as 
euro-
area sovereign rates 
have traded increasingly negative and yield curves have flattened substantially. 
The 
top-left panel of your next exhibit shows the extent of 
negative rate trading
 by country and maturity. 
 Red indicates that 100 percent of the bonds in that category 
trade at a negative yield, while green indicates that none trade negative. 
Despite the continued decline in 
euro
-area rates and the increasing universe of 
securities trading at negative yields, there have been few market
-functioning issues, 
and the ECB has stated that it has had little trouble achieving its purchase targets thus 

far.
 Even so, it is possible that market functioning strains will emerge over time, and 
to help address such strains, the ECB unveiled details of an augmented 
securities
-lending program aimed at supporting bond and repo market liquidity. 
The declines in 
euro-area rates, coupled with the very large currency depreciation 
and increase in equities, have s
ubstantially eased European financial conditions since 

President Draghi™s remarks at 
the 
Jackson Hole symposium last August.  
It is interesting to compare the asset price reaction 
with
 recent LSAP programs.  Using the 
price changes from when asset purchase
 expectations began to form until three 

months after the purchase programs were announced, the 
ECB™s PSPP and B
OJ™s 
QQE, shown in the left and middle columns of the top-
right panel, 
respectively, 
contributed to significant currency depreciation and meaningful equity price 

increases. The ECB™s program resulted in large declines in German nominal forward 

rates, but 
it has not been accompanied by an increase in longer
-dated 
forward 
inflation measures
.  In comparison, Japanese policies supported a large rise in 
forward inflation compensation and a pronounced increase in equities, perhaps 

stemming from the focus on reaching the new higher inflation target.  By contrast, 

U.S. asset price reaction
s to 
LSAP3 
were
 more limited, as the right column showsŠ 
though it did have a large effect in the mortgage markets, which is not included in the 

panel. 
One potential flashpoint for 
financial markets is the highly fluid situation in 
Greece. While Greek asset prices
 have responded sharply to recent developments, the 

broader market reaction to perceived downside risks in Greece has been relatively 

muted and perhaps a bit complacent.  
Market participants attribute the lack of 
          
  
                  
               
    
     
                
       
  
             spillovers to institutional improvements in 
the euro area, reduced 
private
-sector 
exposure to Greece, and the effects of ECB asset purchases. 
Reflecting the mounting 
liquidity pressure from deposit flight and bank funding strains, Greek banks have also 

increased their borrowing via the emergency liquidity assistance program to 

•76 billion in April from •69 billion in March.  
As would be expected, Greece™s 

Target2 liability, which represents balances owed to others in the E
urosystem
, rose in 
March, shown in the middle-
left panel. This level is near Greece™s prior peak Target2 
liability in June 2012.  It is uncertain how long the Greek government will be able to 

meet its debt obligations. 
Some market participants still expect an agreement 
between Greece and its creditors to be reached but only after
 a high-
stakes game of 
brinkmanship.  
Steve will further discuss Greece in his briefing. 
Shifting to emerging markets, there has been a very sharp increase in Chinese 
equities over recent months, shown in the middle-
right panel. Over the intermeeting 
period, mainland Chinese and Hong Kong equities rose by 23 
percent 
and 16 percent, 
respectively, and, 
over the past year
, the Shanghai Composite has more than doubled.  
Mainland equity outperformance 
came despite a worsening domestic economic 
outlook and proba
bly involved some speculative dynamics, though it was supported 
by expected and actual monetary policy easing.  
During the intermeeting period
, the 
People™s Bank of China 
cut their reserve requirement ratio 
by a larger
-than
-expected 
100 basis points; most contacts expect additional cuts to reserve requirements or 

decreases in lending and deposit rates in the near 
term. 
Equity prices in other emerging markets also increased
, and, as shown in the 
bottom-
left panel, broader EM asset prices rose, partially retr
acing prior period 
declines.
 The moves were supported by the accommodative March FOMC 
communication as well as a moderate abatement of risks in a number of countries, 
including Brazil and Russia.  
This partial retracement of emerging market asset prices 
came despite continued markdowns of expected growth in several countries.  
These 

markdowns and recent U.S. dollar strength have contributed to a broader trend of 

emerging market currency depreciation since the May 2013 JEC testimony or 
so-called 
taper tantr
um. 
Some market participants are concerned that taper tantrum
Œlike volatility in 
emerging markets could materialize as the Federal Reserve approaches normalization. 

Recall that implied volatility in emerging market currencies rose sharply with U.S. 

interest rate implied volatility in spring 2013, shown in the bottom-
right panel, and 
has recently moved back to similar levels.  Decelerating emerging market growth and 

rising corporate leverage, as well as volatility in commodity prices may make 

emerging markets vulnerable as normalization nears. However, these risks are 

somewhat offset by lower emerging market asset valuations and reportedly more 

cautious positioning fro
m emerging market investors, as discussed in the special QS 
memo. 
Volatility in emerging markets is only one part of broader financial market 
volatility that some worry could ensue from expected Federal Reserve normalization.  

Indeed, a senior IMF official 
recently warned of a ﬁsuper taper tantrum,ﬂ 
in which 
              
     
                                        
     negative term premiums 
would be rapidly decompress
ed as domestic policy rates are 
increased; Thomas will comment more on this risk in his briefing.
 Given the 
punctuated bouts of recent realized volatility in the very deep and liquid markets I 

discussed earlier, financial market volatility during normalization could be even more 

challenging for relatively illiquid markets. 
I will now take questions before turning to 
Lorie. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  No questions? 
Lorie. 
MS. LOGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll start 
with
 exhibit 3 and provide an 
update on MBS reinvestments, discuss testing of normalization tools, and conclude 

with the staff recommendation to extend the existing central bank liquidity and swap 

arra
ngements. 
The Desk™s MBS reinvestment operations continue to go smoothly, 
and MBS 
market liquidity remains stable.  
The continued trend 
toward higher prepayment 
speeds in March was largely an ongoing result of the low mortgage rates witnessed 

earlier in th
e year and has pushed the current monthly reinvestment amount up to 
approximately $40 billion, as shown in the top-left panel of your third exhibit.  

Despite the increased size of reinvestments, we do not anticipate having any issues 

with the execution of MBS operations, but we have increased the frequency of our 

operations to accommodate their larger size. 
Testing of the Federal Reserve™s overnight and term RRP operations continued 
over the intermeeting period.  Patterns of total RRP demand remained broadly 

consistent with recent experience, as shown in the top
-right panel.  
The additional 
25 counterparties that began participating in operations on March 16 have only 

modestly 
affected
 overall RRP usage. 
For broader perspective on the Federal Reserve™s 
involvement in reverse repo 
activity, this panel also includes reverse repos conducted with foreign official 

institutions, known as the ﬁforeign RP pool,ﬂ shown in gray.  The size of the foreign 

RP pool is notably above its pre-
crisis levels, largely a ref
lection of central banks™ 
desire to hold greater dollar liquidity buffers, while at the same time they are 

tightening their counterparty 
risk
-management
 frameworks.  Increases in the foreign 
RP pool this period, and since the beginning of the year, have been primarily driven 

by a single customer who has sought to increase the liquidity profile of its FX 

reserves 
due to precautionary 
financial
-stability motivations, in part by raising its 
cash balance 
held 
at the Federal Reserve. 
The Desk conducted two term operations over March quarter-end, the first a 
$75 billion, 14
-day operation and the second a $125 billion, 7-day operation, 

summarized in your middle-left panel.  This $200 billion offering in term RRPs 

reduced the Federal Reserve™s overall RRP offered am
ount spanning quarter-
end to 
$500 billion, down from the $600 billion offered at year-end.  However, the reduction 

did not appear to have an adverse 
effect
 on markets or meaningfully change 
participation, likely because the amount offered was perceived to still provide ample 
           
      
   
    
                     
   
           
         headroom above expected demand.  The 14-day operation was modestly 

oversubscribed, with $81 billion in propositions and a stop-
out
 rate of 9 basis points, 
a slightly higher rate than was expected.  
The 7
-day operation conducted on March 30 
was undersubscribed
, with $101 billion in propositions submitted and a stop-
out rate 
at the max offering rate of 10 basis points, similar to the rates on the undersubscribed 

operations held closer to year
-end.  Substitution between overnight and term R
RPs 
and the breakdown of counterparty demand at the March term operations were 

broadly similar to behavior observed in December. 
As shown in your middle-right panel, the Desk™s RRP operations continued to 
provide a soft floor under short-
term interest rate
s, even around quarter-end.  
The 
federal funds effective rate averaged 12 basis points over the period and printed at 

6 basis points on quarter-end.  While rates and volumes in unsecured 
markets
 over 

quarter-end were broadly in line with expectations, temporary funding pressures in 

secured markets
 were much larger than expected, with the overnight GCF repo index 

for Treasury collateral, shown in the dark blue line, printing at 45 basis points. 
Further, the dispersion in repo rates increased notably.  For ex
ample, the spread 
between rates on overnight Treasury GCF repo and 
triparty 
repo widened 
considerably on quarter-end.  This spread, shown in your bottom-
left panel, reached 
30 basis points on quarter-end.  
While all the factors that drove the larger
-than
-expected widening between repo rates are not fully understood, institutions with 

stable access to triparty repo funding appeared to demand increased compensation to 

intermediate between triparty cash lenders, like money funds, and GCF borrowers, 

such as sma
ller or less creditworthy dealers. 
It should also be noted that the spread between GCF and triparty repo rates has 
been gradually widening over the past several months even outside quarter-end.  
This 
trend is likely partially driven by financial institutions modifying behavior in 
response to regulatory changes and associated higher costs to intermediate between 

triparty and GCF repo markets. 
Looking forward, pursuant to the resolution adopted at the March FOMC 
meeting, the staff proposes conductin
g term RRP tests over June quarter
-end. 
For the June quarter-end, we suggest a slightly different approach to 
the 
public 
communication about the term RRPs than was used in December and March.  As 

outlined in your bottom-right panel, the Desk proposes to re
lease a statement shortly 
after the April FOMC meeting minutes on May 20 that would note the tentative 

intention to offer at least $200 billion of term RRPs in addition to capacity 
of 
overnight 
RRPs for the June quarter-end.  Based on our experience with t
he March 
term operations, we believe that $200 billion in term RRP capacity over June quarter-

end, in combination with at least $300 billion capacity in overnight 
RRP, should 
provide sufficient headroom on total RRP availability, assuming no change in the 

target range.  Further, we would propose noting in the statement that the Desk would 

release the remaining details on Monday, June 22
Šthat is, after the June FOMC 
meeting. 
        
   
     
  
                   
   
  
       
       
     
       
            
        We would thus come back to the Committee with a recommendation of the exact 
size and
 maximum offering rate for each operation at or shortly after the June 
meeting.  This communication approach could be replicated in future quarter-ends 

and should provide the market 
with 
confidence in available supply around quarter-
ends, but, 
importantly
, retain some flexibility to adjust the specific parameters of the 
operations should the Committee decide to lift 
off. 
In order to maintain operational readiness with the TDF
Šboth within the Federal 
Reserve and 
among banksŠthe staff is developing plans to resume a routine, every-
other-month testing schedule that would be similar to that employed prior to the 

series of special larger test operations conducted over the 
past year. Offering rates, 
counterparty limits
, and other terms of these operations would b
e set so that the scale 
of such testing operations would be modest.  The tentative plan is to announce and 

resume the routine periodic testing beginning next month. 
Additionally, the work on implementing changes to the methodology for 
calculating interest 
payments is proceeding according to schedule.  Comments on the 
Federal Register 
notice 
are due by the middle of May.  
If there are no major issues 
raised by those comments, the staff should be in a position to implement the new 

methodology before the June 
FOMC meeting as planned. 
Your fourth exhibit begins with the focus of some market participants over the 
intermeeting period on the discussion of normalization tools 
that appeared 
in the 
March FOMC minutes.
 Contacts specifically highlighted the discussion concerning 
temporarily elevated capacity for the ON RRP facility. 
In the Desk™s April surveys, 
respondents were asked to provide their expectations for both the level of the daily 

aggregate cap and level of ON RRP demand around the time of liftoff. 
As sho
wn in the top-left panel of your final exhibit, 10 respondents expected there 
to be no cap on the ON RRP facility immediately following liftoff.  Among those 

respondents expecting a cap at liftoff, the median expectation was a cap of 

$500 billion, and all anticipated that ON RRP demand would be at or below the cap.  

Across all respondents, regardless of whether they expected a cap, the median 

expected level of ON RRP demand immediately after liftoff was $300 billion, 

unchanged from the March survey. 
However
, many respondents did update their expectations for ON RRP demand 
from the previous surveyŠ
both immediately after liftoff and 
one- and 
three
-years 
ahead.  Expectations shifted in both directions, with a number of participants moving 

their expectations by several hundred billion dollars, perhaps pointing to significant 

uncertainly about the likely level of 
take
-up. 
Respondents were also asked about 
their 
expectation
s for the variation in ON 
RRP demand over various time horizons.  They expected the variability of the ON 

RRP demand around the time of liftoff to be more elevated than recent experience, 

largely due to uncertainties over the mix of overnight and term RRPs 
as well as how 
      
    
   
    
    
    
                       
              
          
      
   
    regulatory reforms might 
affect money markets when rates rise from the zero lower 
bound. In terms of the expected levels of money market rates at liftoff, the median 
estimate across respondents for the level of the federal funds effective rate was 

35 basis pointsŠ
very close to the center of the expected target range. 
The April 
surveys also asked respondents for the probability 
they attach to the level of the 
effective rate averaging within certain ranges during the month following liftoff.  
As 
shown in the top-right panel, respondents assigned very high probabilities to the 

effective rate 
being within the target range and only a negligible probability to the 

effective 
rate 
being outside the range. 
Finally, as discussed in the memo sent to the
 Committee on April 15, we would 
like to ask the Committee to vote on the authorization to renew for another year the 

standing liquidity swap arrangements with foreign central banks and NAFA swap 

arrangements. 
While the liquidity arrangements were authori
zed for an indefinite 
period in October 2013, the FOMC has the ability to unilaterally terminate its 

participation with 
six months™ notice. 
This is similar to the NAFA swap 
arrangements with Mexico and Canada, which are renewable annually on or before 

Dec
ember 15 of each year and require 
six 
months™ notice to terminate. 
The use of liquidity swap lines recently has been sparse, as shown in the middle-
left panel, with demand limited to regularly scheduled 
seven
-day dollar auctions held 
by the 
Bank of Japan
 over year
-end and March quarter-end.  
While this is consistent 
with relatively calm conditions in 
dollar funding markets
, we believe the swap lines 
are an important liquidity backstop, helping to maintain stability and confidence in 

global funding markets.  Additionally, liquidity swap and NAFA swap arrangements 

are tangible and constructive signals of cooperation among central banks, and their 
attendant costs are minimal.
 Liquidity swap arrangements also support the approach 
that the Federal Reserve along 
with other major central banks have endorsed that 
there are ﬁno technical obstaclesﬂ to central banks™ capabilities to provide liquidity 
quickly to a systemically important financial market utility. 
Therefore, the staff 
recommends that the Committee vote to renew the liquidity swap lines and NAFA 

arrangements. 
I will now turn back to Simon to discuss the calculation methodology for the 
effective funds rate. 
MR. POTTER.  Thanks, Lorie.  As detailed in a memo circulated in advance of 
the meeting, the staff has assessed that there might be some merit in changing the 

calculation methodology underlying the federal funds effective rate concurrent with 

the change in data source to the 
FR 2420.  We are interested in the Committee™s 
initial feedback on this 
assessment. 
As you a
re aware, the federal funds effective rate is currently calculated as a 
volume-weighted mean.  That is, each observed transaction rate is weighted by the 

share of total volume transacted at this rate
, and the effective rate is the sum of these 
                         
    
             
                      
 weighted rates.
 The distribution of volume by rates for a particular day from the 
FR 2420 data is shown in the middle-
right panel. 
The 
staff
™s 
assessment is that it may be more appropriate to calculate the effective 
rate as the median (
that is
, the 50
th percentile) of the distribution rather than its mean. 
As shown in the bottom-left panel, the volume-
weighted median generates a statistic 
that is the same as
, or very close to, 
the mean at most times
 except for 
the crisis 
period.  However, on tho
se occasions 
when
 the mean and median do differ 
significantly, the 
staff
™s 
preliminary analysis shows that the median is typically a 
better measure of broad money market conditions across a wide range of situations.  

Moreover, the median is much more robus
t to invalid data.
 In general, for an invalid 
transaction to 
affect
 the median, it must have a large volume attached to it, while the 
mean can be moved by an invalid transaction that has a more typical volume and rate.  

The s
taff believes this characteris
tic of the median would enhance both the integrity 
of the effective federal funds rate as a reference rate as well its credibility as a 

monetary policy instrument. 
 We look forward to your views on this subject, and, 
based on your feedback, the 
staff may p
resent a plan to move forward at the June 
meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  T
hat concludes our remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Are there questions or comments
, particularly in 
response to Simon™s request for comments on the federal funds rate?  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I found 
that 
the staff memo and also the 
memo to Reserve Bank r
esearch 
directors
 made a pretty good case, 
to my min
d, for using the 
volume-weighted median.  I
t™s a better measure of financial conditions for all the reasons that 
you went through, Simon.  
In addition, it™s more difficult to manipulate. 
What 
I mean 
is, in 
theory, 
any trade moves a mean, whereas to move the median
, it either needs to be 
fu
rther 
away 
or bigger.  Anyway, I think it is a good case, and I guess I have two questions 
relating to 
when 
we do ﬁ
socialize
ﬂ this to the public, 
which we may not have the answers 
to today.  One is, 
will a 
median versus a mean have a differential effect on existing contracts
, of which there are many 
trillions?
  Two is, I™d be interested to hear how market participants react to this mean
Œmedian 
thing. 
I think that the potential cost that™s laid out in 
the memo is that of successfully 
communicating 
it to the public.  I don™t really see that as an insurmountable concern.  I mean, 
                       
       
   
  
    
    
                 
  
      very few people even know what the 
effective 
federal funds rate is in the first place, and the kind 
of people who know that ar
e probably able to tell the difference between a 
volume-weighted 
mean and a median if they want to and need to.  I don™t see that as a big thing, but I would 
certainly be sensitive to the views of market participants on that. 
MR. POTTER. 
In terms of the c
ontracts that are written on the 
effective 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate, if we were to pursue this, there would be a long lead time 
during which 
the market 

participants would know that the change is coming.  We would have to weigh the effect that that 

would have, an
d it would have some effect because the median is not always equal to the mean, 

but many of these contracts average over a long period of time.  
So occasions on particular days 
when 
we do see differences 
are
 probably not going to have a large 
effect
 on tho
se contracts. 
What they will be perhaps more interested in is the level of rates that you™ll be setting in 
the future.  If you think about a contract in 2016, that™s going to be very heavily influenced by 

where they think you™ll be setting the target rate. 
The
 kinds of issues to do with the gap between 
the mean and the median are very second-order, compared 
with
 that.  They also have to think of 
things 
like
, ﬁWhere would the 
effective 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate
 be trading in the range?,ﬂ and so on.  
I don™t believe this change is anything 
of 
first
-order importance for 
a contract, and it™s pretty 
typical for the uncertainty that market participants face overall in terms of trading in the fed
eral 
funds market
, which 
we know some large participants have 
left
 and s
ome other participants 
could leave in the future, 
affecting where the federal
 funds 
rate 
trades 
in the range. 
On the market participants™ knowledge of this, I agree that many people probably don™t 
know that much about the detailed calculation of 
the effective 
federal funds rate.  Those who do 
would find it pretty understandable, I believe, that we switch from a volume-weighted mean to a 

volume-weighted median, partly because one of the things that we do know is 
that 
the mean is 
       
                                    
        quite heavily influ
enced by a small transaction at a rate 
that 
is far away from where most of the 
volume is. 
MR. POWELL.  That™s helpful. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I
n the 
LIBOR 
case, the issue about really 
small changes in LIBOR from what was perceived to be a correct LIBOR pricing was considered 

a big issue. 
Here you™ve got a picture of 
a 20 or 40 basis point difference.  I
t gives me a little bit 
of pause that the people 
who
 are contracting on this might be upset by this change. 
MR. POTTER. 
In the crisis period, particularly as the balance sheet got larger, we didn™t 
have that much control over the fed
eral
 funds 
rate
, and that was an event that really was 
exogenous to the calculation method.  Whichever calculation method we would have used, there 

would have been more variance at that time.  If
, arbitrarily
, the Federal Reserve
 had turned up on 
one day and sa
id, ﬁWe are going to change that calculation method,ﬂ without any kind 
of 
forewarning, that would make payments flow differentially to what people expected.  The plan 

here is
, if there is support f
or moving forward 
with
 this, 
it will be clearly communicated well in 
advance, and it will be the type of consideration that all market participants should have to take 

into account when pricing contracts. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments?  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL. 
Well,
 I have a question now.  This 
refers 
to the expectations about the 
size of the 
ON RRP facility 
post-
liftoff. 
This is anecdotal, but it sounds like there™s a systematic 
difference between 
buy-side 
participants
, who tend to be predicting a larger facility, and primary 
                      
        
      
    
     
   dealers
, who are predicting something more in line with what the Committee has been thinking 
of saying.  
Is that accurate? 
MS. LOGAN. We do see some distinction between the two.  The median for the dealers 
is 
$190 billion at liftoff for demand.  For the buy side, 
it is 
$350 billion.  T
here is some variation, 
but there is variation within the dealer estimates as well.
  But I think you are correct that the buy 
side is skewed a bit higher. 
MR. POTTER. 
There is variation within the same 
firm
. MR. POWELL.  Are we incl
ined to attribute more or less weight to the buy side? 
MS. LOGAN.  I don™t think there™s anything in the commentary that would suggest the 
buy side has some better analytics of understanding that from what we™re reading in the 

commentary.  As Simon said, even within firms, we™re hearing the numbers to be quite different.  

In the survey, we did find that some firms had produced written reports that had different 

expectations than 
those 
who
 filled out the survey, 
so I don™t think there™s any additional 
knowledge or analytics that the buy side is drawing upon. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions or comments?  [No response]  Okay.  Then let™s turn 
to swap arrangements.  We have a proposal to renew both the NAFA swap arrangement with 

Canada and Mexico and a proposal to renew the liquidity swap arrangements.  L
et me first ask 
whether there are any questions or comments on these proposals.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d like to respectfully dissent again 
on the 
foreign swap arrangements.  
The 
Richmond 
Reserve Bank has dissented on these swap lines 
going back 20 years on the grounds that they facilitate inappropriate actions by 
the Fed
eral 
Reserve
.  One is sterilized foreign exchange operations, which are inappropriate for reasons I 
       
   
                
                     
   
    
                                                              spoke about in January.  The other is channeling intergovernmental assistance to our 
NAFA 
partners, among others, who may be well deserving of such assistance, but that constitutes fiscal 
policy that™s best left to fiscal authorities
, in our view.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments or questions?  [No response]  Okay.  Hearing 
none, seeing none, we need two separate votes
.  I™d like to first ask
Šand this is an FOMC 
voteŠon the renewal of the NAFA swap arrangements with Canada and Mexico.  All in favor? 

[Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed? 
MR. LACKER.  Opposed. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker is opposed. 
Okay.  I think that passes, and, second, 
I™d like to ask for a vote on the liquidity swap arrangements.  All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes] 

Any opposed? 
MR. LACKER.  Opposed. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Okay.  We need one more vote to ratify 
domestic open 
market operations
. Is there a motion? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Any opposed?
  [No response] 
Okay. 
We will consider those 
approved 
as well
.  Next, I think we™re going to move to our second topic, which is normalization 
procedures, and I™m going to call on Ellen Meade to provide 
a briefing. 
MS. MEADE.
2  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  I will be referring to the handout 
labeled ﬁMaterials for Briefing on Governance Issues Associated with Liftoff.ﬂ  
When you commence the normalization process, the Committee will set the 
stance of policy by announcing the new target range for the federal funds rate.  In 
addition, as you™ve discussed previously, the Committee and Board will set the 

administered rates
Šthe IOER rate will be set to the top of the new target range and 
the ON RRP rate will be set to the bottom of the new target range.  The Federal 

Reserve will also announce the details associated with the capacity of the ON RRP 
2 The 
materials 
used by 
Ms. Meade 
are 
appended 
to this 
transcript 
(appendix 2). 
            
                                      
    
          facility and the discount rate, which will be set at a spread above the top of the federal 

funds rate target range. 
Earlier this month, you received a memo outlining possible arrangements fo
r enhanced reporting of market developments and the governance of decisions on 

operational adjustments to the administered rates around the time of liftoff.  In the 

early days after the liftoff announcement, it may be somewhat difficult to get a clear 

pict
ure of how normalization is proceeding because it may take several days for some 
participants in money markets to adapt to the new market environment.  For example, 

money market participants may need to revise investment guidelines, counterparty 

limits, or other restrictions on their allocation of 
funds 
so that they are able to engage 
in the arbitrage opportun
ities available after liftoff. 
Even if the federal funds rate initially lies below the Committee™s new target 
range, you may judge that the prudent course is to monitor developments while giving 

money markets some time to adjust.  During these early days, you may find it useful 

to 
prearrange
 briefings during which the staff could provide updates on market 
developments and assess the effectiveness of pol
icy implementation, and you could 
ask questions.  For example, you could schedule daily briefings for perhaps the first 

two weeks following the liftoff announcement; such briefings could be held via audio 

or videoconference.  These briefings would not be F
OMC meetings
, so no transcripts 
or minutes would be prepared.  Should you wish to express your views about market 

developments or discuss whether to adjust the target range or the administered rates, 

the briefings could be readily converted into joint meetings of the Committee and 

Board.  If the liftoff process does not proceed as planned and the funds rate is 

persistently outside its new target range, then you would presumably wish to discuss 

the timing and course of possible policy actions, and the scheduled briefings would be 

replaced by joint videoconference meetings. 
As discussed in the memo we sent you, the FOMC and Board may also 
wish
 to 
establish decisionmaking procedures that would govern small operational adjustments 

to the administered rates after the first tw
o weeks or so following the liftoff 
announcement.  Adjustments to these administered rates could be helpful if the 

effective federal funds rate were persistently outside its new target range. The memo 

did not discuss the advantages or disadvantages associ
ated with adjusting the IOER 
and ON RRP rates, either separately or together, relative to the new target range for 

the federal funds rate.  The memo focused on the governance of any such 

adjustments, and we provided two approaches for you to consider. 
Under the first approach, each adjustment would be approved by a vote of the 
Committee or Board.  The Chair could convene a joint FOMC and Board meeting via 

videoconference at which you could discuss potential changes to the administered 

rates; all policymaker
s would be involved in the discussion of changes to the IOER 

and ON RRP rates.  Following that discussion, the FOMC would vote on any change 

to the ON RRP rate, while the Board would approve any change to the IOER rate.  A 

variation on this approach would involve policymakers using SDS to submit 

comments on proposed adjustments to one or both of the administered rates, with 
       
           
      
  
        
   
                      
   
    
          
           
 approvals for changes to the ON RRP rate and/or IOER rate recorded via notation 

votes by the FOMC and Board, respectively.  While this would be operationally less 

burdensome than holding a meeting, and would not require the preparation of 

transcripts and minutes, it would not allow for an interactive discussion and, as a 

result, might be most appropriate for relatively straightforward adj
ustments that the 
Committee had previously discussed. 
Under the second approach, you would delegate to the Chair authority to adjust 
the ON RRP and IOER rates, subject to limitations established by the FOMC and 

Board.  If the first couple of weeks of the normalization process had proceeded 

smoothly and you felt comfortable with the delegation approach, one of the staff 

briefings could be converted to a meeting at which you would formally take the 

decision to delegate authority.  You might prefer this approach to ensure that the 

Federal Reserve is able to respond quickly should market conditions warrant.  This 

delegation would allow the Chair to make small adjustments to the administered rates 

if deemed necessary to keep the federal funds rate trading in its 
new target range.  As 

an example, the memo suggested that the Chair could be authorized to make 

adjustments of perhaps 5 or 10 basis points in the administered rates and 
also 

indicated that policymakers could determine in advance whether they preferred to 

address such a situation by adjusting the IOER rate, the ON RRP rate, or both rates in 

parallel in order to maintain a constant spread between them. There may be some 

communications advantages associated with the delegation scenario in that it would 

clearly separate your decisions on the stance of policy
Šthe target range for the 
federal funds rate established by the FOMC
Šfrom small technical adjustments to the 
administered rates necessary to achieve that policy stance. 
The final page of your handout lists the questions that were distributed with the 
memo for today™s go-round on governance issues.  Another memo that was 

distributed at the same time concerned the setting of the primary credit rate.  The 

lending rate for primary credit was originally set in 20
03 at 100 basis points above the 
Committee™s target for the federal funds rate.  The spread was reduced twice during 

the financial crisis, and has stood 50 basis points above the top of the federal funds 

rate target range since February 2010.  The memo discussed two options for the 

setting of the 
primary credit rate spread:  maintaining that spread at 50 basis points 
above the top of the Committee™s new funds rate target range at the time of liftoff and 

for some period thereafter, or raising the spread to 1
00 basis points at the time of 
liftoff.  During the go-round, you may also wish to share any views you might have 

on that issue.  Thank you; this concludes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Before we turn to questions for Ellen and our go-round, I 
would like to just make a few remarks of my own.  
At the outset, I want to emphasize that 
although our policy tools, by law, have different governance structures, the overall conduct of 

monetary policy is obviously the purview of the FOMC.  The gov
ernance issues before us this 
                           
                   
       morning really don™t concern the determination of our intended stance of monetary policy.  
Rather, this discussion pertains to the narrow issue of how to make tactical adjustments to our 

policy tools to deliver the intended st
ance of policy. 
We have spent a great deal of time and effort in devising our framework for 
normalization, and I am highly confident that it will work. But it is clear that when the time 

comes to raise the federal funds rate, we will face unprecedented un
certainties, and we need to 
stand ready to make adjustments, if needed.  It is important that we agree on an approach for 

managing both the initial phase of liftoff and the process for subsequent adjustments that may 

conceivably be needed once that initial 
phase is complete. 
The staff memo proposed that, 
for the first two weeks or so after liftoff
, we set aside time 
on our calendars to receive frequent market updates and, if necessary, hold meetings to make 

adjustments to our tools through the Committee and Board votes.  During this time, the FOMC 

may need to reconsider the setting of our tools, including the administered rates, parameters of 
the overnight RRP facility, and the use of term tools.  I just want to make clear that
, in my own 
view, decisions during this initial period should not be delegated to me. 
The FOMC and Board should vote on adjustments that are deemed necessary after 
debating the relevant policy considerations and alternative approaches.  For example, if the funds 

rate is trading soft relative to the target range, the Committee should decide whether to raise both 

rates, keeping 
the 
IOER

 RRP 
spread
 constant, or to instead adjust only one of the rates.  
These decisions are not entirely tactical or routine.  My expectation, however, is tha
t after some 
initial period, which the memo is guessing might be two weeks, we will have a reasonably good 

sense 
regarding
 how our approach is working, and only minor adjustments, if any, might be 
subsequently needed to keep the federal funds rate in the t
arget range. 
              
   
         
  
    
         
   
Assuming that our approach works roughly as expected, such intensive monitoring on the 
part of the Committee shouldn™t be necessary beyond this initial phase.  We ought to be able to 
settle into an arrangement in which
, at most
, modest adjustm
ent to our tools, especially to the 
administered rates, will be called for to keep the federal funds rate in the target range.
  I hope 
that such adjustments, if they prove necessary at all, can be made in a simple and efficient 

manner.  From a practical pe
rspective, I tend to favor an approach in which authority is delegated 

to me as 
Chair to make modest adjustments, perhaps up to 5 or 10 basis points, to the IOER and 

overnight RRP rates to help maintain the federal funds rate 
in the Committee™s target range. 
These adjustments would be in accordance with a strategy pertaining, for example, to the spread 

that had been decided by the Committee.  In such circumstances, I would, of course, keep the 

Committee fully apprised of ongoing developments.  If any problems in implementing policy 

emerge
d, clearly we would need to convene a meeting. 
I would expect the Committee to decide on any such delegation only at a time when we 
feel we have a good sense for how our approach is working and n
ot at the time of liftoff. Of 

course, if many of you are not comfortable with such an arrangement, we will have to, as Ellen 

indicated, work out a method for holding Committee and Board votes, likely by notation voting, 

and possibly on short notice, to ma
ke these potential modest adjustments once the first couple of 
weeks after liftoff have passed.
  Regardless of the approach we agree on, it 
will be important that 
it serve
s to reinforce rather than undermine market confidence and our normalization approach.  
Let me stop there.  I very much look forward to hearing your views.  W
e have now scheduled a 
full go-round, soŠ
Vice Chairman
 Dudley. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
So I am going to make a forecast that we are all going to 
agree that
, at least for the first few 
weeks
, we are going to want to have some sort of 
a discussion 
            
        
             
  
        
       if the funds rate is trading outside the target range.
  If we are going to do that, I have a couple of 
questions of the staff.  
At w
hat time of day would it be most appropriate to have those meetings? 
How would it work in terms of having the meeting, making the decision, notifying the marketsŠ 

what would the timeline look like as you are carrying that forward?  Because the memo didn™t 

really get into the mechanics of how you would actually implem
ent this.  I was just curious if 
there is any thought given to that at this point. 
MS. MEADE.  I think that we were trying to be optimistic when writing the memo
.  So we were thinking about the first couple of weeks or so as being briefings and not being about 

decisionmaking. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let™s say they were 
about decisionmaking.  When will 
you know enough in the day to have a meeting, to have decided?  When would you have to 

announce it to the market? 
MR. POTTER. We are still looking at when some of the volume is transacted and also 
scheduling, because not everyone is in the same time zone.  I think 
we believe that 
later in the 
afternoon 
will work
.  And that will give us enough time to then announce to the market that 
evening what the changes would be. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay. 

MR. POTTER.  The other choice is to announce very early in the morning. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I guess I would say that
, if we agree on this, we should 
nail that down pretty soon, because, in principle, this could happen as early as June, and it would 

be helpful if people actually had the time blocked out on their calendar.  I think we need to figure 

out the time slot. 
MR. POTTER.  We are working on it. 
                             
       
               
    
  
      CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions before we begin the round?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Just to clarify your proposed approach, 
any adjustment in the first two weeks of the overnight reverse repo rate would be an FOMC 

meeting. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  I know the memo used two weeks.  I am thinking there is an 
initial period. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Until things settle down, basically. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. When we are figuring things out, and if we have to make 
adjustments, we need to meet, we need to discuss it, and during that phase, until 
we decide 
further things are
Šlet me just call them ﬁroutineﬂ
Šthere would be FOMC votes.  We would 
probably be having videoconference briefings that would be converted to meetings, and both 

groups would be voting. O
nly after whatever that initial period is 
when
 things have settled down 
would we agree 
that 
now we have fallen into a rhythm, and any adjustments, if they are needed 
at all
ŠI mean, I think 
in 
the most likely case, we are not going to need any further 
adjustmentsŠbut if we do, those things 
will be 
routine, and then we are talking about delegating. 
Let™s see.  First, President Lacker, then President Rosengren. 
MR. LACKER. 
In this initial period, would you envision all meetings, or a mix of 
briefings and meetings? 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
My understanding is 
the idea 
is that 
we are going to preschedule 
these times. 
When we start the video meeting, we will have some sense of whether things are 
going smoothly, and we really don™t have decisions to make, in which case the staff could be 

relieved of the burden of doing transcripts and so forth.  I would call that a briefing.  
But clearly, 
if things are not going very smoothly and we need to deliberate, we would convene that as a 
         
           
      
  
                  meeting 
right from the outset
.  And, I suppose, even in the middle, if something bega
n as a 
briefing, and we decided in the middle of that briefing, ﬁLook, we need to discuss something.ﬂ 
Is that fair 
to say? 
MS. MEADE.  Yes. 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
We could then say, ﬁLook, let™s convert this now to a joint Board and 
FOMC meeting.ﬂ 
MR. LACKER. 
Okay.  I ask because it has been a while since this group gathered in a 
briefing format.  I think we did it back during the crisis.  There are some rules about not saying 

something that matters, or has substance, orŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN. Well, we can™t deliberat
e. 
MR. LACKER.  That™s not quiteŠ 

CHAIR YELLEN. We can™t deliberate. 

MS. MEADE.  It is really a distinction, I believe, between asking questions and 
discussing among yourselves. 
MR. LACKER. 
If we have something to say
, like ﬁI think this means we should do 
X,ﬂ then we have to convert it to a meeting to say that? 
MR. 
POTTER
.  Well, you could pose it as a question. 
MR. ROSENGREN
.  Like in 
Jeopardy!
  You have to ask a question.  [Laughter] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I see Scott 
Alvarez is 
fretting
 back there. 
MR. 
ALVAR
EZ.  A briefing is an interaction with the staff, and you can ask questions, 
and it is for the purpose of disseminating information.  If the Committee wanted to have a 

discussion in which they are deliberating about a decision, that would be a meeting itse
lf. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 
      
          
          
                MR. ALVAREZ
.  We could set it up so that it could start as a briefing and be converted 
into a meeting, if that seemed to be the direction the Committee wanted to go in.  We can, 
as the 
Chair says
ŠI think the thought process is 
that 
we will have a pretty good idea before we set it up 
whether there is going to be a discussion, and we will just start from scratch as a meeting if that
™s the case. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Just a 
follow-
up to 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley™s question.  For how 
many of the short-term credit markets is it important to know about the closing in Europe?  A
s we think about the timing of the meetings, are there a bunch of short-
term instruments 
that
 would 
make it 
relevant to 
act
 in the morning, 
because of when Europe closes? 
MS. LOGAN. 
For the repo markets, most of that is going to be U.S. activity, and that is 
going to be early in the morning.  For unsecured fed
eral
 funds and E
urodollars
, there is going to 
be some very active trading in the ea
rly morning hours from Europe.  We saw this during the 
crisis when there was a lot of volume done early, and then there is some late-
day volume as well 
in the 
United States
.  It is going to be a mix.  We are going to do more analysis on the full pattern 
of volume data in the unsecured markets before we recommend a time of 3:30 or 4:00 or 4:30 in 

the late afternoon.  But you can think of the unsecured markets as having two trading periods, 

and the repo as being mostly very early in the morning. 
MR. ROSENGREN
.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  I was looking for a clarification.  In the context, the memo offers that 
both the 
IOER or ON RRP 
rates might be subject to these technical adjustments if we delegate 
them.  When I go back and look 
at the normalization principles, as they are described, they talk 
        
     
                 
              
          about IOER as being the primary mechanism by which we will move the funds rate into the 
target range. 
Let™s say we delegate on a technical adjustment basis 
the 
ON RRP rate
.  That 
seems to 
take care of itself.  But by delegating some adjustment to 
the 
IOER 
rate
, does that 
signal a change in policy stance in any way?  Or will it be understood that you are trying to move 

the spread in lockstep? 
MR. POTTER.  I have gotten this question quite a few times in public.  I use an idea that 
Jamie came up with, which is 
that 
everything we are doing in terms of the mechanics of lifting 

rates comes from interest on excess reserves.  We are trying to keep the overnight RRP as small 

as possible, and that me
ans it is just trying to get better trading in the arbitrage relationship 
in 
which 
you are getting interest on excess reserves. 
I view it as the primary way we are lifting 
rates.  But it is not really a measure of the stance of policy.  The stance of policy is the federal 

funds target range. 
MS. GEORGE.  Okay.  In the context of these basis points we have talked about, it 
would be understood these are technical moves, and thatŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN.  The Committee has set the target range and decided to make small 
adjustments to keep the funds rate there. 
MS. GEORGE.  All right.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Yes.  This is just a logistical question, Madam Chair.  Do I understand 
correctly that what you anticipate doing is, if we agree with the concept of having these 

prearranged 
briefings, that all of our calendars will need to be kept open for two weeks following 
each of the next I-don™t-know-how-
many FOMC meetings? 
       
     
         
                    
 MS. MEADE.  I think we were thinking initially about the liftoff 
meeting.  Oh, well, yes, 
of course. 
MR. TARULLO.  Unless you know something I don™t know.  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You™d have to prepare for the earliest meeting you might 
liftoff for, right? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I suppose
ŠI mean, people will have some conflicts,
 right? 
MR. TARULLO.  They have major ones. 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
We can™t for the next whatever meetings
ŠI mean, we can try to 
block out 
those times.  But
 some people will have trips presumably that they can™tŠI suppose if 
somebody can™t participateŠ 
MR. TARULL
O.  There are already a number of international meetings that several of us 
on the Board, 
I think
, are going to haveŠand 
Vice Chairman Dudley will have conflicts with as 
well. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s my point.  I™d prefer to get this nailed down 
sooner rather than later, so we can block out the time as efficiently as possible.  That would be 

my preference. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Maybe we can call in
ŠI mean, we normally have videoconferences, 
but conceivably we can 
call. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In the old days, 
we had telephone calls, right? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. 
Maybe we could have some telephone calls that people could 
take fromŠ 
MR. POTTER.  As long as they were secure.  That would be the 
issue. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Well, we need to work this out for sure.  Governor Brainard. 
             
               
             
      
  
  MS. BRAINARD. 
This is just 
from a communications point of view.  Would we 
communicate at the outset that the FOMC is going into the mode of daily briefings with the 
possibility that they could take intermeeting action?  Or would we simpl
y be silent on that until 
such time as we found it necessary to take an action? 
MS. MEADE.  The minutes of this discussion will reflect that you have discussed some 
of these issues. 
MR. POTTER.  I take your question as, 
ﬁLet™s be very careful,
ﬂ and I agree
 we should be 
very, very careful.  Maybe we want to think hard about how this is described, because we don™t 

want everyone thinking every day the FOMC is meeting at 4:00 p.m., and we are waiting for this 

thing to come over the wires 
about what the rates ar
e going to be the next day.  That is probably 
notŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  This is contingen
cy planning. 
MR. POTTER.  Yes.  This is a contingency plan. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
This is contingency planning for something that doesn™t 
work as well as we think i
t is going to work.  I think we want to present it in that manner. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. 
My question 
is in terms of contingenciesŠdo you anticipate that we could 
do this by notation vote?  Possibly, 
if there was a conflict
 and you 
were
 traveling, you missed the 
videoconference and 
maybe a staff member was sitting in
Šthey could give you a quick 
executive summary and then the notation vote could be done by a BlackBerry anywhere, right? 
MR. POTTER. 
Again, we would have to look at the timing exactly and tell you what that 
window is, because the meeting could go quite long.  Then we would still have to put out the 

announcement or switch to 7:00 a.m. in the morning or something. 
         
             
      
  
  
                  
     
  MR. EVANS. 
You anticipate making an adjustment in the middle of the dayŠI mean, 
for the market. 
MR. POTTER.  No, no.  After the meeting, it is probably pretty good practice to 
announce the decision.  I would feel more comfortable announcing quite soon after the 
conclusion of the meeting, rather than waiting, 
but
Š MR. EVANS.  That does put a premium on the turnaround. 

MR. POTTER. 
Šyou could have some time gap there and 
instead 
do it earl
y in the 
morning.  To 
Governor Brainard™s question, there 
are 
a lot of complications
Šif this is the way 
you want to goŠ
that w
e would need to describe to you, so you understood exactly which way 
you wanted to go. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Presumably, Simon, you would want to announce this 
the day before, because the money market trading starts very early they need to have this 

information, so they can digest it. 
MR. POTTER.  We are actively checking so you have the full information to 
make 
that 
choice. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let™s begin the go-
round.  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the first question, m
y answer 
is ﬁY
es.ﬂ It™s as simple as that. 
On the second question, regarding approaches, I actually think you laid 
out 
the approach we should take really well in your comments just a moment ago.  W
e hope we 
won™t need to do any of this, but having a 
serious meeting 
to 
discuss what is causing the 
funds 
rate to 
trad
e outside 
the target range, understanding what the effects of moving the two different 
administered rates would be, and having 
FOMC
/Board of Governors 
decisions seems like the 
right 
approach.  But once things haveŠ
I think ﬁsettled downﬂ is the phrase 
you usedŠ
I think it 
                
          
                  
      
       would be completely appropriate to delegate to you any further tweaks, plus or minus 10 basis 
points, say, to the two administered rates.  I fully support the approach that you laid out today.  
I do view this as representing prudent contingency planning more than something that I would 

expect to happen.  I am still pretty confident that we won™t have problems keeping the fed
eral 

funds rate within the range, but I think it is goo
d planning. 
I do think that one of the issues that came up 
in the questions 
asked 
in the 
past minute or 
two is really important, and that is about the communication
s in connection with 
this.  
One of the 
Committee™s long
-standing principles is that, to th
e extent possible, policy decisions regarding 
monetary policy really should be separated from technical issues associated with the 

implementation of policy.  
I™m thinking back to the good old days when the Desk had wide 
latitude to adjust the amount of 
reserves in the 
System
 in order to achieve the 
target fed
eral
 funds 
rate.  I think it would be very useful, if we canŠand this is going to be 
the 
challengeŠ
frame 
the 
communications regarding 
these adjustments t
o the administered rates so 
that 
we indicate t
hat 
these are just mostly technical decisions reflecting, of course, the decisions of the FOMC and the 

Board of Governors on the policy decisions, but really communicated as technical means to 

achieve the policy goals that we have agreed on.  
We really wan
t to avoid this perception that 
moving around these administered rates reflects some kind of shift in the stance of policy or 

creating some noise 
in connection with
 that.  I think we are doing prudent planning.  It is April 

now.  Thinking through these iss
ues now 
makes a lot of sense. 
Again, I support the approach 
that you laid out.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am in favor of delegating to the C
hair 
certain tactical decisions that en
sure that we attain the policy goals voted on by the FOMC.  This 
             
        
  
      
   
   
  
        
          is consistent with the FOMC setting strategy 
but delegating tactical implementation of monetary 
policy.  However, determining the scope and timing of that delegation should wait until we have 
a better understanding of how the constellation of short-
term interest rates will respond to our 
setting of IOER and overnight RRP 
rates 
at, and immediately following, liftoff.  I am still 
somewhat uncertain about how successfully we will be able to targe
t the federal funds rate and 
other short-
term rates at liftoff.  As a result, I could imagine a wide variety of adjustments that 
may be necessary following liftoff. 
While the federal funds rate and other short-term rates may be comfortably bounded by 
the IOER and overnight RRP 
rates
, I can easily imagine situations 
in which 
that is not the case. I 
can also imagine circumstances in which some market rates do not adjust as expected to changes 

in our policy rates. In addition, it is difficult to predict how variable policy or market rates will 

be at liftoff. 
My preferred approach, 
in light of
 my concerns, would be to have frequent briefings, 
initially following liftoff, 
along 
with the flexibility to turn those 
into 
joint FOMC
Board 
meetings, if necessary.  Once the relationship of the funds rate and other market rates to our 

tools, as well as the variability of those rates, 
is better understood, we could agree on the 
appropriate delegation of tactical decisions to the 
Chair.  
Predetermining 
our arrangements for 
delegation at this time serves little purpose
, if they are quite likely to change after liftoff. I 
recommend being humble about how much we know now about liftoff and plan appropriately to 

have significant consultation and adjustments as we develop a more practical understanding of 

the challenges of lifting interest rates from the zero lower bound. 
Similarly, it is probably premature to determine the normal relationship we expect for the 
primary credit rate.  The current spread of 50 b
asis points above the IOER rate seems an 
           
   
                  
             
  
    
    
     
appropriate spread at liftoff. We can decide to alter the spread once it is clear where the federal 

funds rate and other short-
term rates are likely to trade relative to our policy tools. 
In summary, I suggest a highly flexible policy that is highly consultative.  Once 
relationships are better understood after liftoff, we can discuss delegation of tactical decisions for 

achieving our goals.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank 
you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable with a governance 
approach that involves prescheduled staff briefings for a period 
of time after liftoff and then
, after the initial period when things appear to have settled down, delegating authority to the C
hair 
to ma
ke small technical adjustments to the ON RRP and IOER rates between FOMC meetings. 
These technical adjustments would be for the purpose of keeping the funds rate from moving 

persistently outside the FOMC™s target range.  If the Committee agrees on the del
egation 
governance structure, then this delegation of authority should be communicated at the time of 
liftoff. 
It is important that the Committee be aware of the developments in financial markets and 
the effectiveness of policy implementation after the li
ftoff announcement, and the briefings 
would be very useful in that regard.  Whether two weeks is the appropriate time for the initial 

period isn™t clear to me at this point.  If we opt to prearrange daily briefings for two weeks, we 

might also prearrange a weekly briefing for the remainder of the intermeeting period.  Of course, 

the briefings could be converted to meetings, if necessary. 
I do believe it is important that we demonstrate after liftoff that we have the tools to bring 
the fed
eral 
funds rate int
o our target range.  That may necessitate making modest changes in the 
ON RRP rate or IOER rate in a nimble way.  Delegating the decisions for these technical 

changes to the 
Chair seems appropriate. I believe we should treat the IOER rate and the ON 
      
        
   
    
   
     
         
   
   
                  
RRP r
ate symmetrically with respect to delegation.  That is, if we delegate to the 
Chair, we 
should delegate the authority to make technical changes in both rates. 
Changes that are strategic policy decisions should remain under the purview of the full 
Committee
.  These would include decisions to deploy the auxiliary policy tools, like term 
deposits and term RRPs, as well as making larger changes in the IOER and RRP rates and, of 
course, changes in the federal
 funds rate target.  
Particularly if liftoff doesn™t g
o as planned and 
the funds rate is trading persistently outside its target range, the full Committee needs to be 

responsible for making those hard choices and helping to communicate them to the public.  The 

Chair shouldn™t have to go it alone. 
The Committe
e hasn™t had a full discussion of what constitutes successful liftoff.  This 
will help inform whether a technical adjustment is needed.  Let me offer 
the view 
that liftoff will 
be successful if the federal 
funds rate is within the target range
 on most, but not necessarily all, 
days.  In my view, successful liftoff does not require that the funds rate be at the midpoint of the 
range.  
We plan to operate with a target range of 25 basis points because we don™t expect to have 
precise control over the funds rate.  Under those conditions, I don™t think we should require the 

funds rate to be close to the midpoint of the range. 
Communication of any technical adjustments is an issue.  We have indicated to the public 
that at liftoff we will continue to target a range 
for the funds rate that is 25 basis points wide and 
set the IOER and ON RRP rates at the upper and lower bounds of the funds rate target range, 

respectively. 
If we find that adjustments are necessary to keep the funds rate in the target range, 
we must 
depart from these plans in one way or another.  Presumably, this can better be handled 
if, at the time of liftoff
, we acknowledge to the public that technical adjustments to the two rates 
might be necessary and that
, as we proceed with liftoff and normaliz
ation
, the Board of 
             
       
    
                
     
 Governors and FOMC have delegated authority to the Chair to make those adjustments, and 
also 
that any technical adjustments would not constitute a change in policy.  Thank you, Madam 

Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE
 CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable 
prescheduling the staff briefings during the first few weeks following liftoff.  They can be 

canceled if they are not needed
Šall is working smoothly, for example, and the federal funds rate 
is tr
ading within 
its
 target rangeŠor they could be converted to 
joint 
FOMC
Board 
meetings 
if 
adjustments to the overnight RRP and IOER rates are needed to keep the federal funds rate in its 

target range.  Obviously, we have to retain some flexibility about how 
long this period lasts
, depending on what our experience is. 
Turning to the governance approach beyond this initial period, I very much favor 
distinguishing between changes that are tactical, such as small shifts in the overnight RRP rate 
and the IOER rat
e to achieve the federal funds rate target selected by the Committee 
and changes 
in policy, which 
are 
shifts in the target federal funds rate
Šthis 
goes to President George™s 
question. 
I think there is a long history that tactical changes needed to implement the monetary 
policy stance that has been selected by the Committee can and should be delegated either to the 
Chair or to the Desk.  If you consider how policy was implemented prior to the crisis, the Desk, 

in close consultation with Board staff, decided 
how much 
in reserves to add or drain each day in 
order to keep the federal funds rate close to its target.  For many years, presumably as a 

governance measure, there was also one FOMC member on the call
, essentially to keep an eye 
on the proceedings. 
             
               
  
        
         
          
     The d
ecision on the amount of intervention and the means of intervention was left during 
normal times to the staff, the New York Desk, and the Division of 
Monetary Affairs at the 
Board.  In unusual circumstancesŠfor example, August 2007Š
the staff consulted clos
ely with 
the Chair in making those reserve adjustment decisions.  The issue in my mind is whether 

changes in the overnight RRP and the IOER rates that are small and designed to keep the federal 

funds rate in its target range meet this tactical criteria, an
d I think they do. 
The changes contemplated would be to implement the monetary policy stance that had 
already been mandated by the Committee.  
So t
his argues for delegation.  One could even argue 
for delegation to the Desk and the Division of Monetary Affairs staff, but I don™t see any reason 

to go this far.  I would favor delegating it to the C
hair to make clear that it is receiving the 
attention it deserves by senior policymakers.
  Also, delegation to the Chair might be more 
appropriate in this particular 
case
, because such 
decisions are about the level of interest rates 
offered 
on our facilities rather than
 as in the past, on the amount of reserves we might add or 
drain. 
To implement this after the initial period, I would give the C
hair the discretion to 
move 
the overnight RRP rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points, so a range of 20 basis points, 

and the IOER rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points 
as needed to keep the funds rate 
within its target range.  The adjustments could either be in tandem to maintain a constant spread, 

or the spread could be widened or narrowed subject to those criteria. 
In contrast to the delegation of modest IOER and overnight RRP rate changes to the 
Chair, I think any other changesŠ
such as implementing 
the time depo
sit facilit
y and things like 
that or changing the size of the cap on 
the overnight RRP facility
Šshould be left to the full 
Committee. With respect to the overnight RRP 
cap, this is pretty consequential because it will 
                 
      
     
                 
         
affect
 the composition of money market flows, and also it is unlikely that changes in the 
overnight RRP cap are going to be needed on a day-by-
day basis. 
So having the Committee 
make
 these changes is not going to be particularly arduous
; they
 will probably be made on a 
much more irregular ba
sis, if at all.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Yes, I™m comfortable scheduling a bunch of 
briefings that can be converted at short notice to meetings.  I think that adjustment of the IOER 

or the overnight RRP rates 
in the first few weeks following liftoff should clearly require an 
FOMC meeting. 
I would point out that it took us almost a year to figure out how we wanted to set the 
IOER and the overnight RRP rates relative to the funds rate.  Committee members brought 

different considerations to the tradeoffs involved, and the initial settings involve a co
mpromise 
among different views about those tradeoffs.  New information about performance of thos
e settings after liftoff is likely to inform Committee members™ views about those tradeoffs and 

likely require recalibration of that compromise. 
For me
, it™s hard to imagine a routine adjustment. 
The analogy has been drawn to the 
Desk™s draining and adding reserves through open market operations
. I™d point out that it has 
taken decades for those to become as routine as they 
did.  A
nd at times 
when 
the FOMC has 
changed its operational regime, those things have been tricky at first, 
and the Committee has 

likely
, in many of those instances, been very involved.  I™m thinking about the early 1980s and 
times in the 
1970s, 
when
 the instructions to the D
esk were very different.  
It™s going to take a 
while for changes to the IOER or overnight RRP rates to be seen as routine or technical rather 

than something 
like: 
ﬁAll right, we™ve set up a new regime, w
e™re trying to calibrate the settings 
          
       
  
     
  
                        
   of these things,
ﬂ and
 the Committee needs to be involved.  W
hat I™d advocate is that we 
plan to 
make all the decisions at meetings until the first meeting at which a decision 
that is made 
appears
, in hindsight, 
to have been 
clearly 
routine; from then on we 
can delegate th
e routine of 
changing 
it. I don™t think routine changes are likely
, to my mind.  If you think about it, what™s at stake 
here is the spread
: the 
arbitra
ge margin between the funds market and 
the 
IOER 
rate
.  It seems 
like 20 basis points, 15 basis points, somewhere in there.  That doesn™t seem like something 
that™s likely to fluctuate the way the need for adding or draining reserves fluctuated on a daily 

basis.
  If it fluctuates, that™s big news if it goes to 30 or 40 basis points.  I™d be kind of surprised 
about that, and I think we™d want to get to the bottom of it.  I don™t think we have an 

understanding of those markets in which it looks like, 
yes
, they should routinely fluctuate by 10 
or 20 basis points.  I™d urge us just to plan on making these decisions at meetings.  I™m happy to 

delegate if it comes to pass that these turn out to be routine decisions that the Committee feels 
like 
delegating.  Let™s go and make one of those decisions at a time like that and then delegate 
thereafter. 
I also wanted to talk about the discount rate spread.  The discount rate spread is 50 basis 
points, and it™s irrelevant to monetary policy right now in the sense that it doesn™t limit spikes in 
the federal funds rate when reserve supply is unexpectedly shortened.  It™s not going to be 

relevant to monetary policy implementation in that sense until
Š2020, I think
, is the latest staff 
projection.  I
ts relevance now is basically for small banks that come 
up short on reserves due to 
poor planning or some unforeseeable contingency t
hat they could claim is outside their control 
but probably isn™t.  Now, large banks have 
a ton 
of reserves 
that i
nsulate them against shocks, 
and they don™t come to the window.  Right now, in our current situation of 
large reserve 
             
             
      
     
         
  
     balances, this is basical
ly about giving the incentive to small banks to manage their accounts 
sensibly. 
I think our old normal spread of 100 basis points would provide a more appropriate 
incentive, given the amounts of money involved if you actually do the overnight calculation.  
I think we should move back to 100 when we lift off.  I would favor that.  It was there.  We set 

that in 2002. We did some analysis.  There was some thought given to the tradeoff involved.  I 

think it makes sense. 
It would also signal normalization in a 
way that would be useful.   
When you talk about discount window borrowing, the word ﬁstigmaﬂ inevitably comes 
up, and the idea is advanced that, well, keeping 
the primary credit rate 
low helps reduce stigma.  
That is certainly true in the only model we have of stigma and discount window lending, but the 

survey research we™ve done as part of the a group looking at discount window issuesŠthey did 

some survey work on stigma, and what they found is that it is not a relevant consideration for 

small banks. Small banks don™t feel stigmatized. Maybe they feel stigmatized already, but they 
don™t feel as if stigma inhibits their borrowing from the window.  It™s just a big bank or 
a too-
big-
to-fail 
bank 
kind of issue, and large banks don™t borrow now.  In the 
last 
crisis
, we lowered 
the primary credit rate
 when it looked as if there was a rationale for big banks borrowing at the 
window.  It turned out they were getting all of the money they needed from 
Federal Home Loan 
Banks anyway, s
o it didn™t seem to be particularly relevant to large banks either. I don™t think 
stigma is a reason to keep the discount rate spread at 50 basis point rather than 100.  That™s the 

import of that.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank
 you.  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My reaction to the questions posed is that 
they™re really matters of pragmatism.  I agree that planning for daily briefings with the option of 
                  
          
            
         
  
         
   invoking an FOMC meeting is sensible and 
worka
ble.  I™m certainly fine with that. 
I™m a
lso 
comfortable with the approach that you laid out
, with
 the Committee and Board making the 
decisions 
the first two weeks
, and then after that
, the delegation of small adjustments. 
So I™m comfortable in both 
cases
.  There are some details yet to be worked out, and under certain 
scenarios
, we may have time to work them out.  We could hear a second version of this possibly 
down the road. 
I haven™t given a lot of thought to the discount rate question, but I™m gla
d that President 
Lacker raised it and talked about it a little bit. 
With regard to
 trying to figure out what that 
spread should be, I want to throw out one thought, 
and that is a recollection that during the crisis, 

the Federal Home Loan Banks became a so
rt of surrogate discount window.  And the 
relationship of our setting of the rates to their operations and their settings may be relevant for us 

to consider. Those are my thoughts.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
First Vice President P
richard
. MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m entirely comfortable with the 
approach described by 
the
 staff and yourself to be used for informing the FOMC on the 
effectiveness of policy implementation during the initial period after liftoff.  
I™m al
so entirely 
comfortable with the approach 
described as that
 to be used for delegating authority to the C
hair 
on tactical matters once we have declared victory on a successful liftoff. 
As it concerns the spread between 
the 
IOER 
rate 
and the discount rate, I think it™s 
actually probably best to 
quiesce 
and minimize the variability at
, and immediately after
, liftoff. 
My preference would be to stay with the 50 basis point spread until we have some separation of 

these events.
  I think the number of moving parts 
at the 
time of liftoff could work against us, 
            
   
      
           
          
       
        especially as we try to understand all of the different things that could be happening, and one 
more change, I think, that isn™t 
necessary might best be saved for later. 
I will add to the earlier discussion on 
the median and midpointŠ
a behavioral issue that I 
would just like 
the staff to consider to the extent that we talk about changing the definition of the 
fed
eral
 funds rate.  I don™t know what the behavioral reaction to that would be
.  It seems like 
when we 
whisper
, people think we shout.  I just don™t know whether people would make more of 
that than is needed, again, at the time of liftoff.  I understand we™re not contemplating the 

definitional change then, but even announcing the plan of a change could have a behavioral 

effect.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  F
irst
, with respect to the meetings and 
briefings, I guess I™m having trouble seeing what the utility of daily briefings for a couple of 

weeks would be in the circumstance 
that 
we think is likely to obtain, which is that 
there™s a 
reasonably successful liftoff. 
It seems to me more likely that 
we would want a briefing or a 
meeting on the Friday following liftoff.  T
hereafter
, I™m just not sure how much there will be to 
say unless things are going wrong, in which case, as everybody says, we™re going to actually 

need meetings and not just briefings.  
But I just note that in passing.  I know this Committee can 

fill up virtually any
 meeting that is set with questions and conversation, but I™m just not sure how 
much there will be to say other than getting emails from Simon and Lorie telling us what has 

happened on day three. 
With respect to governance, like everybody, I think, who™s spoken on this point, I favor 
giving discretion to the Chair, but actually I think I would go further than the staff though.  

Indeed, I™m going to disagree with the Chair in the interest of giving her more discretion than she 
         
   
     
                     
      
     
          
  asked for.  I guess I don™t quite understand why we wouldn™t give her discretion for this kind of 
modest change in the IOER 
rate 
or the 
ON RRP 
rate
 or both, even in the immediate post-
liftoff 
period.  It is new, but we have spent most of the p
ast year talking about how important it is to 
have a smooth and credible liftoff.  And, notwithstanding my substantial uneasiness with the 

potential medium-
term effects of a large ON
 RRP facility, I™ve joined the consensus that our 
dominant goal should be that smooth and credible liftoff, and presumably that smoothness and 

credibility are going to be most importa
nt in the immediate post
-liftoff period, which is to say the 
first couple of days.  I
t seems to me that if we regard the adjustments as 
fine
-tuning 
in pursuit of 
a particular federal funds target rate range, it would be useful to give her the discretion in that 

first couple of days to make such adjustments in an effort to get, as Loretta says, to at least the 

bottom of that range. 
If there™s a major pro
blem with liftoff, we™re going to need another full FOMC meeting.  
But suppose, for example, there™s a little bit of softness in the floor on the first day or two after 
the announced liftoff, and that softness might be firmed by a modest adjustment in the 
IOER 
rate. 
A quick action of that sort might actually buttress the credibility of our tools and intentions 
right from the outset and thereby make the whole process smoother.  
I don™t think
, in any case, 
it represents a policy change, 
because we can talk a
bout it beforehand.  Now, it™s possible that 
markets might read such a quick adjustment as indicating that we lack confidence in the efficacy 
of the decision we had just made a day or two before.  But that™s a judgment that the Chair could 

make in consultation with those best able to discern what market sentiment and intentions may 

be. 
Just by indicating that nimbleness is a 
desideratum
, I think I™ve already explained 
why an 
FOMC decisionmaking process 
won™t 
do the trick.  I just think the logic of what we™re talking 
            
    
    
                 
           
              
     
     about here argues for giving the C
hair this kind of very limited discretion to adjust those two 
rates that we™ve been talking about and 
we will set at the time of liftoff in the period 
in which 
they might be most efficacious in changing or shaping perceptions of how this whole process is 
going to go. 
As to communication, it does seem to me proper to indicate in advance that small, 
operational adjustments might be made in the IOER and ON 
RRP rates between meetings. 
Characterizing those as op
erational adjustments beforehand and contemplating them
, I think
, helps reinforce the sense 
that 
these are technical changes rather than policy changes. 
The 
suggestion that any actual changes be noted by the D
esk, as opposed to 
the Chair or 
the 
Committee 
as a whole, also seems to me a good idea since it would reinforce the fact that these 
rates are more or less operational changes rather than policy changes. 
On the primary credit rate spread, I thought 
President Lacker
™s comments were very 
interesting.  No
twithstanding the fact that they are interesting and we should think about them, 
particularly this difference between 
small
 and large bank stigma when we do discuss this, I 
personally would prefer to wait until the staff thinking about stigma effects and perhaps other 
elements of the discount window are done and maybe a more fulsome memo 
has been 
produced 
and circulated so 
that 
we can have a discussion of that.  It seems to me we™ve got plenty on our 

plate right now, and we might usefully put that conversation off just a bit. 
I want to end by saying I hadn™t thought about it this way, but I fully endorse what 
Loretta said about the criteria for success in how we regard the meeting of the target range post
-liftoff, and I think if we all subscribe to that, it 
would be useful for us, through appropriate 

mechanisms
, to get that expectation out as well so that we™re being evaluated by commentators 
and markets in a manner consistent with what our actual intentions and aims are.
  Like 
President 
      
                    
       
  
      
          
       
    Mester
, again, this is another reason why I think 
these little adjustments even right after liftoff 
are fine for the 
Chair to make
.  And, 
like 
President Mester
, I think using any of the other tools is 
something that should involve the entire Committee.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Did I see a two
-hander?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Like Governor Tarullo, I came to the 
meeting prepared to support delegation in the first two weeks.  I interpreted your earlier 
suggestion as, 
one, respect for governance in a critical period and, 
two
, maybe a desire to have 
more of a group decision than an individual decision.  Could you maybe speak more for another 

moment or two on what your thinking is regarding that? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I feel 
that 
in the days after liftoff, if things are not going exactly as 
we intend, and the funds rate is drifting outside the range, I do really think it™s appropriate for the 

entire Committee to meet, discuss what is happening, try to get 
to the bottom of what the 
problem is, and decide on what the approach is. 
Now, we 
could make the decision 
that
 this is no big deal, the funds rate 
is just fluctuating 
around relative to the target range 
by 
more than we had anticipated and this is the ﬁnew normal.ﬂ 
If we 
want
ed 
to address it 
not by moving the band or changing the spread, but by moving one or 
more rates around to deal with this when we see persistent movements outside the range, and 

early on the Committee says, ﬁLet™s just do this. It™s not that big 
of 
a deal
.  That™s the way to 
address this
ﬂŠand at that point you regard those adjustments as essentially routine, and 
it™s early
, and then you want to delegate it along the lines of what Governor Tarullo said, 
I am 
perfectly comfortable with that, and
, of course, 
that makes life easier.  But I think the Committee 
needs to feel comfortable that we have established procedures that have been determined by the 

Committee that we think are workable and appropriate. First Vice President Holcomb. 
             
        
       
                
MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the staff briefings issue, I say by all 
means they should be useful and perhaps important.  If it should turn out that between the 
regularly scheduled FOMC meetings the funds rate begins to trade frequently below the 

overnight reverse repo r
ate for a reasonably sized ON RRP facility, I support the 
Chair having 
limited discretionary authority to restore 
funds rate control by raising both the IOER and the ON 
RRP rates while maintaining the spread between the two rates.  I agree with Governor Ta
rullo 
that this could be within the first days as well. 
That these rate changes are not to be subject to a 
vote would signal that they are technical adjustments designed simply to implement previously-

agreed
-upon policy.  The main focus would stay on the 
target band for the federal funds rate set 
by the FOMC. 
The simplicity of a system in which the IOER and the ON RRP rates are set equal to the 
top and bottom of the target funds rate band, respectively, is appealing and easily communicated.  

Deviations from that simple system should be temporary with 
reserve
-draining tools
, like term 
deposits and term RRPs, being brought to bear 
whe
n systematically greater interest rate control 
is required. 
I understand that we are entering uncharted territory and may need to act nimbly.  
Therefore, a good solution is for the FOMC and the Board to give the C
hair discretionary 
authority to adjust the IOER
ŒON RRP band relative to the funds rate target range between 
meetings while maintaining the width of the band at 25 basis points.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The staff has laid out a perfectly reasonable 
plan for prescheduled briefings during 
the first two weeks after liftoff.  I expect the process will 

go smoothly and these will end up like routine morning calls.  
If problems arise, I am 
                             
      
          
   
              comfortable with turning the briefings into formal teleconference meetings to handle any policy 
decisions we may have to make. 
After the initial burn
-in period
Šperhaps two weeksŠI also favor the Board and the 
Committee delegating a
uthority to the 
Chair to adjust the IOER and ON RRP rates by up to 5 to 
10 basis points, if necessary, to keep the funds rate within the target range.  I am comfortable 

delegating this authority as early as you™d like.  Even at the outset would be all righ
t with me. 
Basically, these are efficient ways to tweak the dials as necessary, and I see a communications 
advantage to this approach, 
as it reduces the odds of small technical adjustments to 
the 
IOER or 
the ON RRP 
rates being misread as changes in the st
ance of policy.  I completely trust that if any 
major issues arise
, the Chair will not hesitate to bring us in on the decisionmaking process. 
I did have a question.  I can™t remember if this was in the documents or other people have 
mentioned this, but at the time of the first liftoff, would we be comfortable preannouncing that 

we have no intention of adjusting the stance of monetary policy before the next policy meeting 
so that any intermeeting adjustments would be seen as nimble adjustments, just technica
lly to get 
the funds rate in the range? I mean, I can™t imagine that we would really think that we are going 
to have to have a policy tightening in between the first and the second meeting.  But it would be 

unusual, I understand that. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Certainly
, we should make clear that we have an intended target 
range that reflects policy and stand prepared to make adjustments in the administered rates
, and 

that we 
may need to do that. 
MR. EVANS. 
You can say that in your press conference rather than 
it finding its way 
into the statement. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
           
   
              
    
                   
     
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m not entirely comfortable 
with the 
pre
-commitment
 approach that President Evans outlined.  As the Vice Ch
air
man
 talked 
about in some of the remarks he made 
publicly in the intermeeting period, we don™t know 
exactly what is going to happen to financial market conditions necessarily at the time of liftoff.  

If we saw a 
very abrupt tightening in broader financial market conditions, there might be a 
reason for the Committee to think about retracing the steps they have taken, even 
within
 the 
intermeeting period.
  I thought it was an interesting idea, but I, myself, wouldn™t be comfortable 
with that.
  Thanks. 
CHAIR 
YELLEN.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would be happy to set my calendar for 
prescheduled staff briefings during the first two weeks to offer some insight, and I would be 

equally happy to remove them [laughter] 
if the staff judg
es that everything is going smoothly and 
there is nothing to report.  I am also comfortable delegating to the Chair a degree of authority to 
make technical adjustments, and I think we will know whether those are technical or more 
substantive as we go along
. On the issue of the 
discount rate spread, my comments here really are along the lines of 
President Lacker™s
ŠI think this issue doesn™t have much effect right now on overall financial 

market conditions.  But we did make changes to the discount rate during 
the crisis to narrow the 
spread and then widened it to its current 50 basis points.  
Smaller banks do regularly use this 

facility, and Boards of D
irectors 
of the 
Federal 
Reserve 
Banks 
are required to make 
recommendations about the rate. 
It seems worthwhi
le to me to clarify how this rate is going to 
work as we contemplate normalization so that we minimize confusion and perhaps even mixed 

signals at the time of liftoff. 
Thank you. 
              
           
       
       
    
       CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank 
you, Madam Chair.  I appreciate the thoughtful 
analysis and the memos that discuss the intermeeting governance of the IOER 
rate
, ON RRP 
rate, and other policy tools during the early weeks of liftoff.  I thought that the approach 

described of scheduling dai
ly staff 
briefings during those first few weeks is prudent and should 
meet our needs initially, given that we could convert them to official meetings as needed. 
One thing I would note is that it might not always be clear what it would mean to ﬁ
settle 
down,ﬂ so if liftoff takes place, say, in mid-
June or mid
-September, things might settle down 
after the passage of 
quarter-end and then you might have this issue of whether that is really 
settling down from the point of view of being able to deal with quarter-e
nd.
  You might want to 
have staff briefings, again, scheduled for the end of the following quarter, which I guess, 
if we 

raised in September, would be at the end of December.  
I think just the passage of time is not 

necessarily going to tell you 
that this 
is going to be working and working fine.  I think that is 
something to keep in mind as we go forward. 
The staff memo noted that there are quorum rules for the Committee.  Those might be 
useful in the context of these staff briefings.  Not everyone needs to be here for every meeting, 

and the Committee still can operate. 
That might come up in this situation.  I didn™t say this at the 
very beginning, but I should say that I am very confident that this is all about contingency 

planning.  
I am confident the too
ls are going to work.  I think these 
meetings 
are going to 
become
 boring very quickly.  It is going to be like the call.  Not to say that™s boring, butŠ 
[laughter]Š
I misspoke.  But it will become routine
, at least
.  T
hat™s our base
line 
scenario, but I 
do think it™s useful to engage in this contingency planning. 
      
                 
   
      
            
              
   
  I think I am going to be in the minority on my next point, which is, can we trans
ition 
to a 
situation 
in which 
we simply delegate so
-called technical decisions to the 
Chair? 
Here I am not 
supportive of that delegation, and my answer there is shaped by three considerations. First, when 
my staff and I thought about the context in which increases in the ON RRP rate would be 

considered, we weren™t sure that those situations would be that technical 
per se 
or tactical.  It 
seemed like those would be situations 
in which the effective fed
eral
 funds rate would be below 
the bottom of the target range, and that seemed likely to occur in conjunction with the cap on the 

ON RRP volume being binding.  Then there would be some interaction, 
at least
, in your 
discussion about raising the ON RRP rate, and also discussion about raising the cap.  Now, the 

cap is a big deal.  We have talked about that at length.  The Committee certainly has strong 

views about that.  I
t just 
immediately seemed to bring substantive issues into play. 
The second con
sideration is that, a
s I listen to people talk about analogies with the past, if 
we were talking about delegating to the staff, I would almost be more comfortable 
with that 
than 
delegating to the C
hair.  
[Laughter] 
I say that because 
I think 
if 
it is routine enough to be 
delegated to staff, we can delegate it to the staff.  This is clearly not routine enough to delegate to 

the 
staff.
  This is about the Committee deciding tha
t a decision
, which is not sufficiently routine 
to delegate to the staff
, is being delegated to the Chair instead.  T
hat is not something I feel as 
comfortable with. 
Third, basically, there is an issue here of precedent.  This is not about this C
hair.  I f
eel 
perfectly comfortable with you, Madam Chair, and your 
discretion in this matter.  But future 
Committees may not have that level of comfort with future 
Chair
s in related situations.
  Getting 
together for meetings is hard and challenging.  It is always easy to delegate, and I think we want 
             
    
    
                      to fight that tendency, especially in view of how easy modern technology makes it to pull 
together a quorum of the Committee for substantive discussion and deliberations. 
For these reasons, Madam Chair, I recommend that 
the Committee not delegate authority 
for intermeeting adjustments to the 
Chair.  Again, this is all about contingency planning, but I 
think the Committee could make contingency plans to vote, as needed, between scheduled 

meetings, be it by telephone, vide
oconference, telepresence, secure lines
Šall of the other 
suggestions that are out there. 
A quick comment on the primary credit spread.  I thought the idea of doing more research 
and work on this was a very interesting one.  At liftoff, especially if we are going to be doing 

liftoff in the near term, 
the JuneŒ
September 
time frame
, I would favor keeping the 50 basis point 
primary credit spread at that time, then continuing 
to do work on the issue before we decide.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President 
Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I just want to mention 
that 
there has been some loose talk about 
comparing the timing of th
ese briefings
 to the morning call, and I am not in favor of tying them 

to the morning call.  Let me be clear on that. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Notice 
when I was faced with that
, I devised a way to end the 
requirement thatŠ 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I call that leadership by
Š CHAIR YELLEN. 
Thank you.  [Laughter] 
MR. EVANS.  So it can be done?  That™s what you™re saying? 

CHAIR YELLEN.  It can be done.  It only took 50 years, butŠ 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It can be done. 
       
    
                
          
  
  
        CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Generally speaking, I™m comfortable with 
the 
prescheduled
 staff meetings.  Based on the discussion here, I™m wondering whether we need 
one every day.  Maybe twice a week
ŠI™m picking up on some of the comments of Governor 
Tarullo.  I™m not sure how much information you™re going to get from Tuesday to Wednesday.  

You could probably review this a couple of times a week. 
Also, picking up a little bit on themes 
Vice Chairman 
Dudley was talking about, could 
you do this with a subcommittee of the FOMC? Do you really have to have the entire 

Committee reviewing what is s
upposed to be a technical issue?  You could bring the whole 
Committee in
, if necessary, but if everything™s going okay, 
it seems that it
 could be done by 
subcommittee.  That™s something to think about. 
On the governance approach, the 
first part 
was
, should 
we have a vote of the FOMC to 
adjust ranges
? I view this as pretty cumbersome for something that™s supposed to be a technical 
issue.  It sounds nontechnical
. It makes it sound like it™s a policy change regardless of what we 
say, and so I see that
 as a difficult way to go. 
Now, for the C
hair™s authority o
f 5 
or 10 basis points, first of all, I think that moving 
these ranges should be subject to a high bar.  That™s one of my main comments.  
You 
really don™t 
want to do this unless you really have to 
because of
 the communications issues that we™re going 
to encounter.  The payoff to doing this is ultimately pretty low.  
For instance
, maybe the 
fed
eral 
funds 
rate is trading a few basis points below the range
, and now you make this move.  Now the 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate 
moves into the bottom part of the range.  So you™ve 
gained a few basis points, 
but at the expense of markets asking, ﬁWhat are you guys doing?  Are you changing policy?ﬂ 
      
             
  
    
         
     
      
  
   
   
                
 Another question I have that has not come up yet is the authority to go 5 to 10 
basis 
points over what time horizon.  Would you be able to go 5 basis points and then the next week 
another 5 
basis points
, and the next week another 5 basis points? 
I don™t think that™s the intent, 
but that™s something you™ve got to think about here.  And if you went the full 10 basis points and 

it didn™t work
, then I guess the whole Committee would have to come in at that point. 
I see a core problem here
, which we™ve talked about before in our discussions.  The 
Committee insists o
n saying that the f
ederal funds rate is the policy rate, but relatively few trades 
are occurring at that particular rate. 
According to the Committee, 
the IOER rate 
is not the policy 
rate, but, on the other hand
, that is the rate that affects the largest banks in the country
, and it 
affects their funding costs.  And, in other contexts, we have said IOER is our workhorse rate. 
And then you™ve got overnight RRP, which we™re also saying is not a policy rate, but 
which 
is for a market that 
has many traders and 
that 
is potentially 
large at the time of liftoff.  So 
we might say that the 
policy rate is the federal funds rate, but what does 
that 
mean to markets? 
It™s really the markets that are saying what the policy rate is, and if they think moving these other 

rates is more importa
nt than where the fed
eral 
fund
s rate is trading, then we
™ve changed 
policy in 
a macroeconomic sense. 
So, I think this is a conflict, but that is part of the situation we™re in
, given the way we™ve 
decided to do this.  I think it does have potential to sound like a policy move to people inside 

financial markets even though we™re saying, well, the federal funds rate range has not changed 

and so we haven™t done anything different.  The bottom line is 
that I am worried about 
communications issues. Because of t
hat, I don™t think you want to do this unless it™s absolutely 
necessary.  You know, overall I would say 5 to 10 basis points 
per inter
meeting period is okay 
             
             
                           
  
 with me.
  I would agree with President Rosengren that 
it might be premature to decide on this 
today.  You could make the delegation decision later around the time of liftoff, 
if necessary. 
Let me finish with one story that 
old-
timers
 here around the Fed
eral Reserve 
will 
remember from the early 1990s.  I am going to mention ﬁHe-Who-Must-Not-Be-N
amed
,ﬂ who 
is 
former Chairman Alan Greenspan.  At the time, 
it was considered that the 
Chair
man
 had 25 basis 
points on the federal funds rate target and that the 
Chair
man
 could make that adjustment during 
an inter
meeting period without consulting the Committee.  And the Chair
man 
at that time made a 
bunch of those moves and then came into the meeting and said, ﬁNow that I™ve made the move, 
now we don™t have to move at the meeting.ﬂ  This was extremely hot and divisive on the 

Committee in the early 1990s.  We don™t want to get into any kind of situation like that, and I 

know that™s not your intention, but it is a bit of a slippery slope:  What™s going to be delegated? 

Who™s agreed to it?  How much have you agreed to?  Under what circumstances? 
It is a very 
tricky issue
, and it has been a situation in the past on this Committee that has been problematic 
from a collegiality perspective. 
I know we™re not really thinking about anything like that, but I think 
it is a bit of a 
slippery slope.  You™ve got this issu
e about what rates really matter versus what rates 
we are 
calling the policy rate, and you™ve got this precedent in the past 
whe
n it didn™t go so well.
  Thank 
you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 
MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Cha
ir.  I™m comfortable with the governance 
approach in the first two weeks of scheduling daily staff briefings, but I assume that we™ll 

quickly work out whether we need them every day and we can probably unschedule a few of 

them within a day or two.  S
o I th
ink there™s some flexibility the
re.                 
          
           
    
   
  With regard to the governance approach for technical adjustments in the IOER or ON 
RRP rate
s, I don™t know about previous Chair
men
.  I™ve only had one Chair in my life on the 
Board, and my experience with th
at Chair is t
hat if there is going to be any question about a need 
for discussion, she will call for it.  I haven™t detected her trying to get around the FOMC or the 
Board, and I think we can rely on that.  So I™d be perfectly willing to give the C
hair 
an 
adjustment up to 10 basis points.  I agree that 
we need to specify that 
the discretion would be 
granted 
between meetings. 
I™m not sure about the wisdom of constraining the gap between the 
ON RRP and IOER 
rates to 25 basis points. We may find reasons 
why
 we need to move one without moving the 
other, and my general approach is, don™t constrain yourself if there™s no need to constrain 

yourself, because the law of unintended consequences is very powerful. 
On the primary credit rate, I agree with those who think we should t
ry to minimize the 
number of adjustments we make at the time of liftoff, and that this issue is sufficiently important 
for banks to which we give a lot more 
attention than their size would imply.  I™m not sure why 
we would want to start by raising the cost of borrowing by 50 basis points for the smaller banks 
who do borrow at that rate, and we™d need to look at what would happen when we raise the rate.  

And so, for both reasons, 
I favor examining that after liftoff. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  T
hank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m very well aligned with the 
Chair™s 
original comments and additional comments and response to Governor Tarullo™s and 
President 
Lockhart™s points, and with many others around the table as 
well. 
As for the briefings, I think it is fine to schedule them, and if we have them I™ll attend 
them, but I think the only case in which we would actually want to have them is if things are 
         
    
      
              
                 
    
    really not going well.  A
nd I don™t expect that that is likely at
 all in a world in which 
we have 
taken the cap off the overnight RRP or, for that matter, put a very high cap on. 
As far as delegation is concerned, if 
the test is adjustments that are 
routine or 
technical 
in nature
, I completely trust the 
Chair™s instincts on that. I will say that 
if what we™re dealing with 
is a very difficult and failed liftoff situation, I don™t think
, in real time
, that™s going to feel either 
routine or technical.  I think it™s going to feel like something that all of us ought to be involved in 
and accountable for.  I also would not constrain ourselves by holding this space between the 

IOER and 
the 
ON RRP rates
 at 25 basis points.  It might make sense to do something different, 
again, in real time. 
So, for all of that
, I think it™s essentially impossible to anticipate all of these 
things, and I would just say 
that 
I will do what is reasonable at the time. 
In terms of the primary credit facility, it is 
an interesting subject on which 
we can have a 
lot of debate.  I would
n™t touch it until well after liftoff. 
In my view, it™s just not a complication 
that we
, in my view
, need to be taking on right now.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 

MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
the proposal. I think it™s very 
important for us as Committee members to take responsibility for actively being engaged in 

assessing the effectiveness of monetary control and the relative roles of the IOER and the ON 

RRP rates 
in maintaining the federal 
funds rate in the target range for some initial period.  The 
length of that period, I think, should be determined by events.  My guess is 
that 
if the decision to 
lift off is made coincident with a meeting with 
a press conference, as seems very likely, I wo
uld 
expect that period of active involvement to span that quarter-end, but beyond that, 
I think it 
would be unwise to be too prescriptive at this point. 
         
   
  
             
                 
  
    
   
  
  
       
                                                         
  
 When market functioning has settled down, it will be appropriate to delegate to the C
hair 
the authority 
to make the necessary changes to the levels of the IOER and the ON 
RRP 
rates
, or possibly to the spread between them, 
in order to maintain effective monetary control.  I think the 
Committee can make that decision once it judges that the frequent briefings
 and meetings no 

long serve 
the
ir purpose, along with the parameters of the delegation.  
It™s very important that we 
carefully manage communications 
regarding the heightened vigilance and possible activity of the 

Committee and the Board during those initial weeks so that 
our 
communications bolster 
confidence in the normalization process and contribute to smooth market functioning. 
With regard to the appropriate level of the primary credit spread, I would be open to a 
recommendation from the 
staff as to retu
rning it to 
pre-
crisis levels
.  But like many others around 
the table, I would want to put some distance between the timing of liftoff and the 
timing of 
possibly changing that spread so as not to further complicate our 
already challenging 
communications around the time of liftoff.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
I think this has been a very useful discussion.  Let me 
say the Board meeting is now adjourned.  We™re ready to go on to item 3, and I suggest 
we have 
the economic briefings and then 
we™ll 
take a coffee break before going into our round.  L
et me 
turn things over to Bill Wascher
. MR. WASCHER.
3  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll be referring to the top exhibit 
on your pile, which is labeled ﬁMaterial for the U.S. Outlook.ﬂ  The data on spending, 
production, and hiring that we received since the March Tealbook were all weaker 

than we expected.  On the spending side, the February PCE data and March retail 

sales report led us to make a sizable reduction in our estimate of first
-quarter real 
PCE growth.  This downward revision to consumer spending accounts for much of 

the downward revision to first-quarter real GDP growth shown in panel 1 of your 

forecast summary exhibit.  In addition, a number of other categories of spendingŠ 

particularly business investment and residential construction
Šhave also surprised us 
to the downside in recent months, as have the incoming data on factory output.  I 

would note that after the April Tealbook was closed, 
we received the advance report 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
         
        
     
     
   
              
   
  
                
          on capital goods orders and shipments for March, which was also weak but broadly in 

line with our expectations. 
One of the crucial questions that we faced
Šand that you face as well
Šwas how 
to interpret this batch of disappointing news, and wheth
er, in particular, it is best seen 

as just another 
hicc
up in a recovery that fundamentally remains on track toward 
achievement of your policy objectives, or the leading edge of a more serious 

slackening in the pace of recovery.  For the most part, we have 
leaned toward the 
former interpretation.  Accordingly, our projection calls for near-
term real GDP 
growth to return to a pace that is not too different from our March forecast.  In 

particular, although it is difficult to quantify their influence precisely, 
we believe that 
several transitory special factors
Šincluding unusually severe winter weather and 

production disruptions related to labor disputes at West Coast portsŠ
were a small 

drag on first-quarter real activity.  In addition, we think that measured fi
rst
-quarter 
GDP growth will be held down a bit by seasonal adjustment issues that affected 

estimates of state and local construction spending and by a distortion in the BEA™s 

translation of retail sales to PCE associated with the steep decline in gasoline prices 

and the increased share of gasoline sales at large retail establishments such as Wal
-Mart.  We do not judge any of these factors to be exerting a large influence on their 

own, but as a group, our 
back
-of-the-envelope calculations 
put the effect at a
bout ¾ percentage point. 
That said, we have not completely discounted the weaker-
than
-expected incoming 
data.  Specifically, we trimmed our estimate of consumption growth in the second 

quarter a bit as a result of the weaker
-than-
expected March retail sale
s report, and we 
made a noticeable downward revision to our projection 
of 
near
-term residential 
construction activity in response to the lack of a significant pickup in starts and 
permits in March.  We also lowered our forecast for nonresidential structures 
spending, as the latest data on drilling activity suggest that the recent drop in oil 

prices is having a larger effect on drilling and mining investment than we had 

previously anticipated.  Because we believe that the fundamentals underpinning 

household spending remain solid, we continue to expect that real GDP will rise at a 

pace that exceeds our estimate of potential output growth over the remainder of the 

year.  Even so, the 
level 
of real output at the end of this year is almost ½ 
percent 
lower than in our March forecast. 
As a way of providing another perspective on the near-term outlook, panel 2 
presents the results from the Board staff™s dynamic factor model.  This model uses the 

information from a large number of activity and price indi
cators to generate forecasts 

of near-term real GDP growth, and it was among the specifications we showed you in 

the April Tealbook box on nowcasting models.  As you can see, using the data that 

we had available when the April Tealbook was closed, the model 
also predicts a very 
low GDP growth figure for the first quarter followed by a modest pickup in the 

current quarter.  Of course, the model does not know about any of the special factors 

that we think will unwind and provide an additional boost to growth this quarter.  And 

I would note that the range of predictions for first-quarter growth coming from the 
                  
      
              
              
           
         various nowcasting efforts across the System is quite wide, underscoring the 

uncertainty surrounding the interpretation of the pace of activity last quart
er. 
To wrap up the discussion of the near-term spending data, I would remind you 
that we will receive the BEA™s advance estimate of first
-quarter real GDP tomorrow 
morning.  Given how low our current point estimate isŠ
and in light of the relatively 

large degree of uncertainty that surrounds these estimates
, even on the eve of a 

release
Šit would not be especially surprising from a statistical point of view if we 

were to see either a small decline tomorrow or a noticeably stronger increase than we 

have pencil
ed in.  And, of course, the BEA™s initial estimate is itself subject to 
substantial revision over time. 
Moving to the middle panels, the labor market has continued to improve, but here, 
too, the data point to somewhat less momentum than we had anticipated in our 

previous forecast.  In the establishment survey, March total nonfarm payroll 

employment growth was considerably weaker than the very strong pace that we had 

expected
.  I
ncorporating revisions to previous months, the average monthly change in 
payroll employment over the first quarter now stands at about 200,000, which is 

70,000 less than we had written down in the March Tealbook.  The news from the 

household survey also came in a little weaker than we had anticipated:  The 

unemployment rate held steady at 5.5 
percent in March
Šwe had expected it to tick 
down one-
tenth
Šwhile the participation rate, which we had expected to hold steady, 
edged lower. 
To summarize the information from the various pieces of labor market data that 
we have received, panel 3 shows our labor market conditions index, or LMCI.  As 

you can see from the inset box, the LMCI was basically flat last month
.  For the first 
quarter as a wholeŠthe rightmost 
bar in the main chart
Šthe index did increase, but 
at a slower pace than what we have seen in recent quarters.  Just as we did with the 

spending data, we took a modest signal from the incoming labor market news and 

reduced our projected pace of monthly payroll job growth by about 40,000 over the 

current quarter.  We also nudged up our forecast for the unemployment rate in 

coming months. 
Over the remainder of the medium term, our projection 
of 
real GDP growth is 
little revised 
from
 March.  The main conditioning factors that we built into the 
baseline forecast this round
Šparticularly
, the low
er projected path for the exchange 
value of the dollarŠare, on net, expected to be slightly more supportive of real 

activity.  By the end of the medium term, the effects of these changes offset roughly 

half of the downward revisions we put through to the near term, leaving the level of 

real GDP just a little lower relative to our March projection. 
Although it had only a small effect on our projection regarding 
real activity, I 
would point out that we now assume that the federal funds rate will lift off from 
its effective lower bound in September, one quarter later than in our previous forecast.  

Our revised liftoff assumption is broadly consistent with both the ﬁflashﬂ primary 

dealer survey that was taken after the March FOMC meeting and the latest dealer 
        
   
    
  
     
                     
                                      
                                                           
 survey, and 
it is more consistent with the timing suggested by financial markets. In 
addition, as best we can tell, a September liftoff date does not appear to be sharply at 

odds with FOMC participants™ March SEP submissions, in which the median 

participant 
pointed to the third quarter as the most likely quarter for liftoff.  After 
liftoff
Šand consistent with our usual practiceŠthe projected path for the funds rate 
is set by mechanically applying an inertial version of the Taylor (1999) 
policy rule. 
Panel
 4 gives our projected path for the unemployment rate.  With the level of real 
GDP at the end of the medium term only a little lower relative to March
Šand with no 
change to our supply-side assumptions this roundŠthe unemployment rate is 

expected to be 5.1
 percent at the end of 2017.  T
his is 
one-
tenth 
higher than its level 
in the March Tealbook and one-
tenth 
below our estimate of its natural rate.  The slow 
pace of decline in the unemployment rate reflects both the modest pace of GDP 

growth projected over the medium term and our assumption that the strengthening 

labor market will draw more individuals back into the labor force. 
Panels
 5 and 6 summarize the inflation outlook.  The incoming data on price 
inflation have been a touch above our expectations and supp
ort our projection that 
both total and core inflation will step up in the second quarter.  Further out, the 

inflation projection is little revised
.  A
s in previous Tealbooks, we expect 
that 
inflation 
will 
gradually move higher as resource slack diminishes, 
energy prices rise, 
and prices for imported goods turn up again. 
Finally, I wanted to call 
your attention to a change we 
made this round to how we 
characterize forecast uncertainty 
in the Tealbook.
 Specifically, we have revamped 
the methodology that we use to compute confidence intervals 
based on our historical 
projection errors and have also reworked our presentation of these intervals to include 

a comparison with the historical 
range of key forecast variables.  The new intervals 
are typically a little w
ider than the ones we reported previously, and they tend to 
show 
more asymmetry, which is most notice
able in the prediction 
interval 
surrounding the unemployment forecast.  When we 
miss big on unemployment, it 
tends to be because unemployment turns out to have been much higher 
than expected, 
not much lower.  Additional details 
on this new 
methodology were presented in a box 
and associated technical 
appendix in 
the Risks and Uncertainty section of the 
Tealbook and in Jeremy Nalewaik™s pre
-FOMC briefing.  The
se new intervals 
complement our other methodology of using stochastic simulations from the FRB/US 

model to produce confidence intervals around our projection, and we intend to show 

both sets of 
uncertainty measures in future Tealbooks.  I would note 
that 
the 
confidence 
bands shown in my exhibit today continue 
to use the FRB/US 
measures, 
but our intention is 
to eventually extend the new 
methodology to compute confidence 
intervals 
around our quarterly forecasts as well.  Steve will continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.
4  Thank you, Bill.  The harsh weather we endured last winter left 
many potholes in U.S. roads and, as Bill 
Wascher has described, helped create one 
large pothole in U.S. GDP growth.  Interestingly, as shown in panel 1 
of my 
4 The materials used by Mr. Kamin are appended to this transcript (append
ix 4). 
                
    
        
         
          
  
    
                      
    presentation on the international outlook, a pothole also appears in the path of foreign 

growth in the first quarter.  Incoming data have been surprisingly weak in countries as 

diverse as Canada, which shared our harsh winter
; China, which was 
actually 
warmer 
than usual
; and Malaysia, which arguably has no winter at all.  As shown in panel 2, 
the downturn was also evident in global trade, suggesting some underlying malaise 

that was sweeping the globe. 
As indicated by the yellow bars in panels 1 and 2, we faced a very similar p
icture 
exactly a year ago, with U.S. growth, foreign growth, and global trade all turning 

down in the first quarter of 2014.  Accordingly, I went back and looked at my 

remarks for the April 2014 FOMC meeting for lessons that we might apply here.  

First, I 
found that I used the same tired pothole metaphor a year ago.  [Laughter] 
Second, at that time, I also predicted that foreign economic activity would clamber 

out of its pothole and resume moving along the path to recovery, just as Bill 
Wascher 
did for the United States.  Unusually enough, we both turned out to be right, and we 

are making the same call today. 
Certainly, the fundamentals favor a return to solid growth abroad:  Monetary 
policy is generally very accommodative, oil prices remain low, and most c
urrencies 
have weakened considerably against the dollar since last summer.  Moreover, many 

of the factors that pushed down global growth in the first quarter appear to be 

transitory.  Canada™s economy is estimated to have flatlined on account of unusually 

harsh winter weather and a step
-down in oil investment, but with oil prices bottoming 
out, growth should bounce back in the coming quarters.  Mexican output is estimated 

to have decelerated sharply in the first quarter along with U.S. manufacturing, and we 

anticipate that the projected rebound in U.S. activity will boost growth in Mexico as 

well. 
China also accounts for some of the pothole in foreign growth, but its situation is 
more complicated.  As shown in panel 3, GDP growth fell from 7 percent in the 

fourth quarter to only 5.3 percent in the first, well below expectations, as exports and 

industrial production dropped sharply.  It is difficult to parse out how much of the 

first
-quarter shortfall reflects reduced external demand, how much reflects the 
ongoing correction in the property sector, and how much reflects longer-
term 
developments such as the rebalancing of the economy and decline in potential output 

growth.  In any event, the authorities had been easing monetary policy even before 

the weak GDP 
reading
, and they
 have now stepped up this stimulus, including 
reducing the required reserve ratio 100 basis points.  In our projection, the 

combination of heightened policy stimulus and rising external demand pushes growth 

back up to over 7 percent later th
is year before it edges down thereafter. Like the 

booming Chinese stock market, however, this forecast is somewhat speculative, and 

we have revised down our projection a bit in response to the recent weakness. 
Ironically, nearly the only bright spot in the global economy has been the euro 
area, 
for which strengthening industrial production, retail sales, and PMIs point to a 
rise in first
-quarter GDP growth to 1¾ percent (panel 4).  Notably, financial 

conditions are becoming more of a positive for the econo
my, in part reflecting the 
                        
                          
  
  
     
                     ECB™s asset purchase program.  Bank lending standards are loosening, credit to 

nonfinancial corporations is finally picking up 
a bit
, interest rates are extremely low, 
and the real trade
-weighted euro is at its weakest level sinc
e 2001.  Accordingly, we 
see euro
-area growth firming to 2¼ percent in the next few years, provided that 
spillovers from Greece™s crisis remain contained, as we assume in our baseline. 
That, however, is a big ﬁ
if.
ﬂ  The Greek government is struggling in it
s efforts to 
negotiate additional financial assistance from European authorities and the IMF, even 

as it is running arrears to suppliers and raiding the accounts of local governments in 

order to stay afloat.  More than •10 billion in payments on its medium- and long-
term 
debt are coming due in the next four months.  Although the Greeks have reshuffled 

their negotiating team in an apparent effort to ease tensions with their creditors and 

strike a deal, there is still a good chance that the government could miss one or more 

of these payments.  Such an event could trigger a run on Greek banks, and unless the 

ECB stepped up its liquidity support by a substantial margin, the government would 

have to declare a bank holiday and impose capital controls, with a much-heightened 

chance of Greece eventually exiting the euro area altogether. Had such developments 

occurred at the height of the euro crisis in 2012, spillovers to the rest of the euro area 

would have been very destructive.  However, as Simon noted, the regio
n™s financial, 

institutional, and policy framework has strengthened in recent years.  Accordingly, 

we are building into our euro-
area forecast only a small drag 
due to 
spillovers from 
Greece™s intensifying crisis.  Nevertheless, we recognize that, as descr
ibed in the 
Tealbook, far more dire scenarios are possible, not just for the euro area but for the 

global economy more generally. 
While the pace of economic activity abroad remains quite unsettled, two key 
external drivers of U.S. economic prospects have been a bit more quiescent of late. 
First, oil markets have not yielded any big surprises.  To be sure, spot prices, shown 
in panel 5, are up more than $8 per barrel since the time of the March Tealbook, as 

falling rig counts and other signs of declining in
vestment have led markets to expect 
lower U.S. oil production.  However, prices for futures contracts further out on the 

curve are up by less, so that our projected path for Brent prices has been raised just a 

bit and remains well below 
levels prevailing l
ast summer. 
Second, for the first time since last July, the dollar has come down over the 
intermeeting period, as shown in panel 6.  This depreciation likely reflected weak 

data and the fall in expected policy rates here in the United States.  However, I would 

like to remind you that, starting with the March Tealbook, we decided to deviate from 

our standard random-
walk
-oriented model and project
ed a further rise in the dollar
.  That also must have contributed to the dollar™s subsequent decline.  [Laughter] 
In the 
event, from its lower starting point, we assume the broad real dollar will still move up 

some 2
¼ percent between now and the end of the year as the U.S. economy bounces 
back and markets refocus on the policy divergen
ces among major central banks. 
Your next exhibit puts movements in the dollar and their implications for 
economic growth into broader perspective.  As shown by the black solid line in 

panel 1, even at its projected peak early next year, the broad real dollar would be well 
                           
     
                                                                                                
 below its previous two peaks.  The black solid line in panel 2 shows the contribution 

of net exports to real U.S. 
GDP growth
.  We project it at negative ¾ percentage point 
this year and next.  This is the largest drag on growth since the early 2000s, and it 

almost entirely reflects the appreciation of the dollar.  It may seem strange that the 

dollar should depress the net export contribution to such an extent when it remains so 

far below its previous peaks.  However, what matters for the contribution of net 

exports to GDP
 growth is not the level of the dollar but how much it moves, and the 
dollar has appreciated sharply since last summer.  Additionally, the share of trade in 

the U.S. economy has grown over time, amplifying the effects of dollar movements 

on net exports and growth. 
Were the dollar to rise further than we are currently projecting, it would exert 
even stronger effects on the economy.  Returning to panel 1, the dashed line shows 

the 10 percent rise in the dollar described in the ﬁStronger D
ollar
ﬂ scenario in the 
Tealbook.  As shown below, the contribution of net exports to GDP would fall to its 

lowest level since the early 1980s.  Additionally, as indicated in panel 3, core 

inflation would fall below 1 percent on a four-quarter basis before rebounding.  Josh 

wil
l now continue our presentation. 
MR. GALLIN.
5  Thank you.  My material 
is titled ﬁFinancial Stability 
Developments.ﬂ 
My remarks draw on the recent QS financial stability report.  In sum, valuation 
pressures in asset markets have increased since the January assessment and remain 

notable.  In addition, vulnerabilities related to maturity and liquidity transformation 

remain moderate, but leverage in both the financial and the nonfinancial sectors, 

overall, remains relatively low.  Taken together, we think that 
conditions in the 
financial sector are moder
ately prone to amplify shocks. 
I begin with valuations in fixed-income markets.  The yield on the 10-
year 
Treasury noteŠ
the blue line 
in the upper-
left panel
Šand 
term premium measures
Š the red and black lines
Šhav
e remained quite low since the January 
financial 
stability 
briefing.  The possibility that term premiums will move up sharply remains a focus of 

staff analysis
.  I will return to this issue
 near the end of the briefing. 
In corporate bond markets, yield spr
eads to comparable Treasury securities have 
moved down a bit in recent months.  As shown by the red line in the panel to the 

right, the far
-term forward spread for high-yield corporate bondsŠone measure of 
risk premiumsŠ
remains near the middle of its histo
rical range, which suggests that 
valuations are reasonableŠ
relative, that is, to seemingly richly valued Treasury 

securities.  In addition, as shown by the light blue bars in the middle-left panel, 

issuance of high
-yield bonds, a nonprice measure of hot ma
rkets and thus valuation 
pressures, remained robust through the first quarter of the year.  Somewhat in 

contrast, issuance of leveraged loans
Šthe dark blue portion of the barsŠ
has 
declined
, on net, in recent quarters.  Although supervisory analysis of completed 
5 The materials used by Mr. Gallin are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
              
    
       
               
          
      
   
      
   
 deals suggests a modest improvement in underwriting quality, fairly lax nonprice 

terms were reportedly still prevalent in recent deals. 
Moving to the stock market, the expected real return on 
corporate equities
Šthe 
black line in the middle-right panelŠ
has fallen significantly since the 
previous 
stability briefing, as stock prices have advanced and expectations of corporate 

earnings have been revised down
.  The low expected return suggests that valuations 
are quite high.  The equity risk premium, which is the difference between the 

expected return on stocks and the expected real yield on the 10
-year Treasury note, 
shown in teal, has also moved down sharply, though it remains closer to the middle 
of 
its 30
-year range.  Our overall assessment is that equity valuations are somewhat 
more stretched now than they were just a few months ago. 
A variety of changes in the structure of fixed-income markets may add to the 
volatility of interest rates, and, perhaps, to the volatility of volatility.  FirstŠand I™m 

not referring to any panel quite yetŠ
increased electronification of the Treasury 
market could contribute to occasional and surprising spikes in volatility, such as that 

which occurred on October 15 of last year.  In addition, the continued decline in 

intermediation by dealersŠas illustrated by gross and net dealer borrowing, shown in 

the lower-left panelŠis consistent with anecdotes that new regulations have made 

dealers less willing to provide market
making liquidity, even in normal times.  A bond 

market selloff could also be temporarily amplified if investors in bond mutual funds 

rush for the exits, forcing funds to sell into an illiquid market.  The rapid growth in 

assets under management at such fun
dsŠshown in the lower-right panelŠincluding 
funds that hold less-
liquid assets, suggests that the scope for such an amplification has 
increased in recent years. 
The first panel of the next exhibit shows an estimate of the level of ﬁrunnableﬂ 
private money-
like instruments.  This measure of maturity and liquidity 
transformation includes cross
-holdings of money 
market instruments, such as when a 
money fund holds repo.  It is therefore an indicator of the vulnerability of the 

financial system through intermedi
ation chains that rely
Šat one link or more
Šon short-term funding.  The level of these runnables has been fairly stable at a relatively 

high level during the past two years, as growth in uninsured depositsŠ
the light blue 
regionŠ
has offset a decline in repo
Šin red
Šwhich suggests that the financial 
system remains moderately vulnerable to runs. 
A fairly bright
Šor should I say, 
green
Šspot on the financial-
stability map is 
leverage in the banking system.  As can be seen in the upper-
right panel, capital 
cushions at bank holding companies, as measured by both the Tier 1 common equity 

ratio
Šin blackŠ
and the leverage ratio
Šin red
Šhave increased notably.  This 
reflects both Basel III requirements and the resilience required in annual stress tests. 

As you know, no CCA
R bank fell below the stress test™s quantitative benchmarks in 
the most recent round, although three firms had to adjust their 
planned capital 
distributions. 
                  
    
    
      
        
    
                        
    As far as we can tell
Šwhich
, admittedly
, is not very farŠ
leverage in the 
nonbank financial sector continues to be a vulnerability.  As summarized in the 

middle-left panel, overall margin credit has moved down in recent months but 

remains quite elevated, and hedge funds appear to be using a fairly large amount of 

portfolio margining from prime brokerages to lever up in equity markets.  In addition, 

responses to the March SCOOS provided some evidence that counterparties have 

been demanding more leverage to fund non-agency RMBS, high-yield corporate 

bonds, and securitized CRE loans.  Unfortunately, leverage embedded in derivatives 

is hard to measure, so it remains difficult to assess the overall leverage of hedge 

funds, mutual funds, and other investment vehicles. 
Moving to the private nonfinancial sector, the middle
-right panel provides the big 
picture for
 households: Modest increases in household debt continue to be driven 

mostly by prime borrowersŠ
the orange line
Šthough debt of subprime borrowersŠ 
the black line
Šticked up in the fourth quarter.  Student loans and subprime auto 
lending have remained rapid 
even as 
delinquencies on these kinds of debt have 

moved up.  Although we do not currently consider student and subprime auto debt to 

be direct vulnerabilities for the financial system, we are alert for potential spillovers 

to other debt markets. 
As can be seen in the lower
-left panel, the debt
-to-assets ratio for all nonfinancial 
corporate businesses
Šthe black line
Šand for high-yield and unrated firmsŠthe red 
line
Šmoved up further in the fourth quarter, which suggests a continued buildup of 
the vu
lnerability of this sector. 
The lower-right panel provides a very brief roundup of the potential shocks to the 
financial system
 that appear most proximate.  A sharp rise in term premiums could 
precipitate a sudden drop in a variety of asset prices, especia
lly for those with 
stretched valuations.  Moreover, for reasons mentioned 
previously
, these shocks 
could be temporarily amplified if liquidity were to deteriorate just when it is needed 

most or if bond mutual funds were to experience large and disruptive outflows.  That 

said, the risk of a sustained amplification is mitigated by the apparently modest 

amount of leverage in the financial system.  We are also attuned to the possibility of 

damaging spillovers from a rate spike here to emerging market economies. 
As we 
concluded in a special memo, although blowback to the U
nited States 
through 
financial connections would likely be limited, a significant EME recession and a 

presumed increase in risk aversion would damage the U.S. 
economy as well. It is 

worth noting also that term premiums could, instead, stay low for longer than 

anticipated.  Such an outcome would be a shock to investors who have positioned 

themselves for rising yields and could also lead to a further buildup of vulnerabilities 

if investors are dr
iven to 
ﬁreach for yield
.ﬂ  Other potential shocks of note that have 
been around for 
a while
 include a disorderly Greek exit from the euro zone, 
significant geopolitical disruptions, or distress 
at a large global financial firm brought 
about by, say, 
legal penalties. 
I will conclude my prepared remarks by noting a few policy initiatives that the 
staff are pursuing related to specific financial vulnerabilities
, which appear at the top 
         
           
                       
      
       
     
    
    
       of the final exhibit.  
With regard to interest 
rate risk, 
the 
staff 
are in
dependently 
measuring the risks at banks and working with those banks to manage their 

exposures.  On market liquidity, the 
staff are undertaking a variety of projects to 
better understand changes in the structure of bond markets, including increased 

electr
onification, and are working with other agencies to prepare a public report on 
the Treasury market.
  Regarding 
asset managers, 
the staff have begun evaluating the 
potential for 
the growth of 
managers™ activities, perhaps through the use of leverage 
and 
liquidity transformation, to contribute meaningfully to systemic risk and 
whether 
reforms are needed. 
Finally, on leveraged loans, supervisors continue their 
monitoring efforts and will begin a more comprehensive Shared National Credit 

review in May.  
Tha
nks.  That concludes my remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.
  Questions for any of our presenters? 
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m look
ing 
at 
exhibit 2, 
ﬁAlternative 
Scenario
:  Stronger D
ollar.
ﬂ  What are the confidence bounds around these dotted lines? 
MR. KAMIN. Well, the simulations come from a DSGE model, but it™s not an estimated 
model.  So we don™t compute those, although I assure you that an estimated version of 
SIGMA 
that would allow us to compute those is on our long-
ter
m work agenda. 
The most tenuous thing is whether or not you will actually get a 10 percent additional rise 
in the dollar
.  As you can tell from the chart, that™s not a common occurrence.  That™s something 
that, broadly speaking, we think 
there 
might be a 1 in 10 chance of for a couple of years.  So that, 
in some sense
, is the most tenuous. 
In terms of thinking about the 
effects
 on net exports and then on U.S. 
real 
GDP, that™s 
actually a little bit more straightforward in the 
sense that the results from SIGM
AŠ
particularly 
for what I™m showing here, which is the 
net export 
contribution
Šare broadly consistent with our 
estimated trade models, and those don™t give you very different results.  So the 
effect 
of a higher 
dollar on exports and on imports is relatively straightforward, and obviously there are errors, but 
they™re probably not subject to huge errors. 
A larger area of uncertainty comes in 
when 
translating the effect of the change in net 
exports into GDP
, because there is some uncertainty there about the m
ultipliers
.  And there™s 
           
                       
   
          also some uncertainty about to what extent you want to build in a monetary policy response and 
what 
impact
 that has.  
So, for
 the net export contribution itself, I would guess that, 
relatively 
speaking, 
is 
not a huge confidence error.  The confidence errors would rise as you then translate 
that through 
to 
real 
GDP growth. 
MR. BULLARD.   Let me follow up with a 
slightly
 different question.  Over the p
ast 
25 years
, firms have become more globalized and 
have learned how to handle 
global currency 
fluctuations.  They adopt hedging strategies, and they put production in various countries and 

switch production in response to currency movements.  In light of those changes, should we be 

estimating effects of real exchange rate movements 
using 
data 
for the 1980s and 1990s? 
MR. KAMIN. Well, that™s an excellent question.  Let™s just say we periodically do revise 
our import equations, and we do look for signs of parameter instability.  So we™re alert to that 

issue, and we haven™t found any s
trong evidence of these changes in coefficients. There are 
other 
factor
s that, of course, are naturally parsed in.  They kind of correlate with what you 
mentioned, which is that, over time, 
the share of trad
e in the U.S. economy has grown, and that is 
ful
ly taken into account in our estimations because our models do incorporate the fact that, 
as the 
dollar changes exports and imports, those have a larger 
effect 
on GDP. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.
  Any other questions?  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you.  I have a question for Bill 
Wascher 
related to the Tealbook 
inflation outlook.  I think in your presentation you mentioned that the inflation outlook is 

trending up 
because
ŠI think you saidŠenergy prices are going to be going up, res
ource slack 
will be diminishing, and maybe imported goods pricesŠ
I can™t recall the entire list. 
Could you 
                
   
   
                       
      refresh my memory on the contribution of changes in longer-
term inflation expectations for 
delivering that increase in inflation? 
MR. WASCHER.  So
, over the medium-
term forecast
, our view is that the underlying 
rate of inflation is 1.8 percent, and that 
serves as an attractor for the inflation rate. 
MR. EVANS.  Inflation expectations, is thatŠ 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  We call it underlying inflation, but in some sense you may think 
of it as inflation expectations over the medium term. 
Over the longer run, 
that drifts up to 
2 percent because the FOMC says the target is 
2 percent, and 
because 
tightness in the labor 
market 
is pushing inflation up.  
So it doe
s serve as an attractor
, as one reason inflation moves 
back up toward 1.8 percent in the medium term and toward 2 percent in the longer run.  
But
, in 
addition, these other factors are important in getting there over the medium term. 
MR. EVANS.  All right. That™s helpful.  That is different 
from 
the way I was 
remembering it.  I thought that underlying inflation was pegged to your assessment of longer-
term inflation expectations
, and that they were still about 
1¾ percent
, but you™ve got aŠ 
MR. WASCHER.  That
™s right. I think that™s right.
  But maybe I™m not quite getting 
your question.  Over the longer run, we have those inflation expectations 
drifting
 up from 1¾ 
percent 
to 2 
percent. 
MR. EVANS.
    Right.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Yes, I want to compliment the staff on the new charts on uncertainty.  I 
think they are very helpful in thinking about the uncertainty 
associated with the forecast. 
Now, 
going on from what President Evans 
was asking
, maybe, the PCE inflation in Tealbook A, page 
69Šif I look at that, it looks, 
from
 the way the errors look on that forecast, 
like 
the staff has been 
                        
             
      
      underestimating PCE inflation.  Should I interpret this as being that we have upside risk to the 
staff™s inflation forecast? 
MR. WASC
HER. 
Which chart are you looking at?  The top one? 
MS. MESTER.  I™m looking at PCE inflation. 

MR. WASCHER.  That™s largely because of the energy price run-up in the mid-2000s.  I 
think we didn™t 
projec
t that, and I think that™s why the solid line, 
the median
, is above the data 
there. 
MS. MESTER.  But even the distribution looks likeŠ 

MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  Again, I think that™s because of the energy price shock.  
This is a 
relatively short sample with which 
we calculate standard errors around for PCE inflatio
n, for two 
reasons.  One is
, we don™t have data going back a long way, and two is, 
we think that this is 
a period over which inflation had different propertiesŠ
it was more stable recently 
than in previous 
periods.  
So, because of that, I think the influence of energy prices is more prominent here than 
it might be in the longer run. 
MR. ENGEN.  If I could add just one thing that amplifies that point, if you look in the 
middle right at core PCE, the median and the 
projected
 paths are virtually on top of each other, 
which is another way of showing that the total is being influenced by the run-up in energy prices 

and how it feeds into total inflation. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERL
AKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to follow up on 
President Evans™
s line of questioning.  During the 
intermeeting
 period, President Rosengren 
suggested the possibility 
of rais
ing 
the inflation target. 
If the FOMC were to introduce a new 
                 
           
       
              
     
  
        infla
tion target that was higher, would that have a higher gravitational pull 
in the staff™s model 
that we™d 
be pull
ed back to that higher target? 
MR. WASCHER.  In terms of modeling and the way we do it in 
the 
FRB
/US model, 
I think the answer 
is 
ﬁyes,ﬂ 
because we do have a small term that reflects the FOMC
™s stated target 
relative to current underlying inflation.  I think it would be gradual, but I think in 
the FRB
/US model, it would be a stronger attractor than a 
2 percent target. 
Also, i
f I used the Taylor ru
le, 
I think it would imply a much easier 
policy as well. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That™s true, 
a different
 reaction function.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Okay.  I suggest we take a break 
for 
15 minutes 
to get some 
coffee. 
When we return, we have a few 
people who would like to comment on financial 
stability
, and 
then we™ll go to the economic round. 
[Coffee break
] CHAIR YELLEN.  We now have an opportunity for people to comment on financial 
stability, and 
three
 people have indicated they would like to.  
President Rosengren, do you want 
to start 
us off? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank yo
u, Madam Chair. When I talk to asset managers in 
Boston, the biggest concern raised is the problem of liquidity in the secondary market 
for 
corporate bonds.  They worry that when we b
egin to raise rates
, a rush to sell positions in 
corporate bonds will occur, and a crowded exit with few buyers could lead to a rapid increase in 

the yield on corporate bonds.  At least some elements of this concern probably deserve greater 

attention. 
Firs
t, the average size of trades in corporate bonds has fallen significantly relative to the 
average size of trades prior to the financial crisis.  This may reflect an actual or perceived 
          
                            
   difficulty in transacting large trades 
due to
 weakened liquidity in the 
market.  This raises the 
concern that if a significant portfolio rebalancing were to occur, it may be difficult to sell large 
positions in a timely manner. 
Second, there has been a significant decline in the corporate bond holdings of broker-
dealers.  Acc
ording to the 
SEC™s FOCUS reports
, while J.P. Morgan held $29.5 billion in 
corporate securities in 2007, those holdings had plummeted to only $11.3 billion by the end of 

2014. Similarly, Credit Suisse held 
$30 billion in corporate securities in 2007, and their holdings 
collapsed to only 
$4.4 billion by the end of 2014.  
Such sizable declines in corporate securities 
holdings among these key liquidity providers lends some credence to the concern about potential 

liquidity problems in this market. 
Third, 
bond mutual funds
Šwhich were shown in the earlier charts on financial 
stability
Šand bond exchange-traded funds have grown significantly since the financial crisis.  
The exchange-traded funds pose a particular problem if investors view them as highly liquid.  
At the end of 2008, assets under management at exchange-traded bond funds totaled $57 billion.  
By the end of February this year, 
assets under management at 
exchange-traded bond funds had 
soared to $320 billion.  I
f investors assume that the corporate b
ond market is liquid and, more 
specifically, that their exchange
-traded fund shares will always be liquid
, and if they choose to 
sell as we tighten
, they may be surprised at the price at which they transact. 
In summary, the concerns with corporate bond market liquidity as we approach liftoff 
bear
 watching.  The degree of movement out of bonds is likely to be highly sensitive to the 
projected pace of tightening as well as 
to the timing of tightening.  An oversized reaction in this 
market could result in a bumpy exit from the zero lower bound.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you
.                   
  
        
     
           
   
          MR. TARULLO.  May I ask Eric a question? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sure. 

MR. TARULLO.  Eric, can you take it a step further and 
say what the implications of 
your concerns 
are 
for policy? Is it for monetary policy?  Are you advocating a relaxation of 
capital requirements? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  No, I am not advocating a relaxation of capital requirements.   

MR. TARULLO.  I didn™t think so. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I think it highlights that how we communicate around the time of 
liftoff actually is critically important for whether people decide that this is something they need 

to doŠ
to rebalance their 
portfolios quite quickly.  
I think the way that fi
nancial stability interacts 
with monetary policy is, 
it highlights 
that the communication issues become pretty important. 
MR. TARULLO.  That™s helpful.  Thanks. 

MR. LACKER.  Also, 
if it happens, we can say we talked about it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  All right.  Pre
sident Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to thank the staff for the 
excellent assessment of financial stability.  It™s my reading 
that 
the assessment again indicates 
that current policy has not produced any material signs 
of 
financial instability.
  Indeed, it appears 
that the main 
financial
-instability consideration for monetary policy at the moment is 
that a 
near
-term increase in the target range for the fed
eral
 funds rate could lead to financial instability.  
As the report says, 
ﬁTerm premiums
 in benchmark U.S. and other advanced economy bond yields 
are again near historical lows reached 
before the taper tantrum, raising the risk of similarly 
outsized market reactions at liftoff.
ﬂ             
                  
                        The s
taff also identified 
a vulnerability that could propagate this shock from the increase 
in rates.  Specifically
, page 4 of the assessment notes that changes in the structure of the 
Treasury market could amplify the effects of an initial rate move and lead to sudden swings in 
prices 
and liquidity. 
Now, how can we best mitigate this risk?  President Rosengren, I think, highlight
ed one way to think about this
, which
 is through communication, but I have a slightly different 
perspective on the answer to this question.  To answer this question, I think we have to 

understand why long
-term rates might rise dramatically in response to a small increase in short
-term rates. And here I believe that a key consideration is the policy signal associated with such a 

move in the near term.  Raising t
he fed
eral 
funds rate in the near term would mean 
they™re 
initiating liftoff when inflation is far below target and the growth outlook has been weakening.  

Liftoff in such an environment would indicate 
that the FOMC is considerably less willing to 
provide accommodation to respond to adverse shocks than financial market participants currently 
anticipate. 
As a result, they would expect less accommodation in general but especially so in bad 
times, and this expectation of higher interest rates and lower bond p
rices in bad times translates 
directly into higher term 
premiums
. Now, 
it™s tempting 
to conclude that we can somehow mitigate this potential financial 
instability only through 
reassuring verbal communication at the time of liftoff, but I think it™s 
difficu
lt for words to trump the communication content of our actions.  
So, in my view, 
we can 
best mitigate this financial stability risk by ensuring that our actions are always clearly connected 

to our pursued, 
declared objectives. 
In the current context, that
 would mean deferring liftoff 
until the economic data clearly indicate that raising interest rates is necessary for the FOMC to 

achieve its declared objectives of 
2 percent inflation and maximum employment over the 
       
  
                
    
       
               
  medium 
term. I™ll sa
y more about what this conclusion means for our policy deliberations 
tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I™m going to pick up on the same topic that President Rosengren 
introduced and President Kocherlakota discussed.  However, I will not be expressing my views 

on monetary policy at this time.  [Laughter] 
I think Governor Tarullo asked a great question:  
What do you do with this information? I™m going to go a slightly different direction based on 

something Josh said, which I found very interesting. 
I was struck by two sentences on page 17 of the QS report.  
The
y are 
right 
after each 
other.  O
ne is
 that large banks™ liquidity ratios continue to improve.  The next sentence is 
basically that there is less liqui
dity in markets.
  These two sentences are 
right next to each other, 
and immediately
, when I read this
, I said, ﬁWhat™s the connection here?  To what extent is the 
liquidity requirements or the capital requirements, for that matter, affecting the willingnes
s of 
broker-
dealers to basically make markets and provide market liquidity, especially in 
a stressed 
environment?ﬂ  But it also led me to what Josh pointed out, which 
is that this 
is apparently a 
longer-
term research project 
about market liquidity and understanding what™s happening there, 
and how much amplification we may see
, whether it™s in corporate bond or Treasury bond 

markets
, in response to shocks. 
My comment is that I think this is a really important subject not just for thinking about 
our policy decisions or policy communication, but more generally, to understand what™s 

happening in those markets and understand to what extent it is changes in regulation, changes in 

technology, 
or other things.
  Really
, my comment is wanting to see more on that sooner, 
because 
I think this is a key issue, 
as others have mentioned.
  Thank you. 
                   
         
                    CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Does anyone else want to comment?
  [No response]  Seeing 
no hands, let us begin the economic go-round 
with 
President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Fourth District economy continues to 
expand.  In April, the diffusion index of business contacts reporting better versus worse 
conditions was 23 percent, up from 18 percent in March.  Retail freight and both residential and 

commercial construct
ion firms reported improved conditions.  All manufacturers and energy 
firms reported worse conditions. 
Anecdotal reports suggest some slowing in the pace of growth in the first quarter.  
Factors cited by contacts reporting slower growth earlier this year i
nclude the harsh winter 
weather, spillovers from the 
West Coast port strikes, declining energy prices, and the 
appreciation of the dollar. 
The effects of weather and the strike are transitory.  Almost all of our contacts reported 
that the 
effects
 of the wi
nter weather 
have now passed, although I should note that it snowed in 
Cleveland last week
.  The effects of the port strike are expected to dissipate by the fourth quarter. 
The fall in oil prices continues to challenge firms engaged in energy development or 
extraction as well as their suppliers, like steel producers.  Suppliers of raw materials that use 

petroleum
-based products report a 
falloff
 in orders as customers run down 
their inventories in 
anticipation of further price reductions.  
My business contacts believe that oil prices have likely 

bottomed out, and that the effects of lower oil prices are likely to be temporary for most exposed 

sectors.  Of course
, that remains t
o be seen. 
Conditions in 
District 
labor markets continue 
to follow national trends.  The D
istrict™s 
unemployment rate, at 5.2 percent, 
is below the national rate 
of 5
½ percent and below the 
5.7 percent 
District average over 
the 2001Œ07 expansion.  Contacts 
in all 
sectors except energy 
                    
          
     
   
  
       reported increasing staffing in the previous six to eight weeks, although, except for construction, 
the additions were somewhat smaller than previously reported.  So far, 
wage pressures remain 

limited to occupations such as tr
ucking, skilled construction trades, and quantitative white collar 
jobs.  Prices of finished goods continue to be stable despite more businesses reporting declining 

costs for 
nonlabor inputs. 
Turning to the national economy, we have received a number of disappointing data 
reports since our previous 
meeting across several sectors, including manufacturing, business 
fixed investment, and consumer spending, and including the employment report for March.  
As 
was the case last year, there was very harsh winter we
ather, but this year we also had the port 

strike, the sharp drop in oil prices, and the sharp appreciation of the dollar.  Similar to last year, 

we have seen a growth slowdown in the first quarter, and we are trying to extract the signal about 

future growt
h from the incoming data.  This is difficult to do in real time. 
A good case can be made that this is a temporary setback
, just as it was last year
, and 
that 
is forecast in the Tealbook.  The effects of bad weather and the 
West Coast port strike are 
transi
tory.  Using a Bayesian VAR model augmented to include weather indicators, my staff 

estimates that the unusually cold weather reduced GDP growth by 0.9 percentage point, and 

there will be some rebound in the next couple of quarters. 
We have seen the negative effects of lower oil prices on energy
-related firms but not 
much positive effect on consumer spending, although that is likely to come, and oil prices appear 

to be stabilizing.  Dollar appreciation has been a drag on exports and the profitability of fir
ms with multinational operations.  But as the rate of appreciation slows, the drag can be expected to 

diminish as well.
  The slower growth seen in our trading partners might be a reflection of the 
slower growth in the United States
.  If our growth picks up
, it could be that theirs will as well. 
                     
             
            
      
    In addition, not all of the incoming data were negative.  The rate of job openings reached 
another cyclical high, and initial claims are very low, just below the trough reached in the last 
economic expansion.  
These 
indicators suggest that the weakness in payroll jobs in March could 

be temporary.  Although the Conference Board™s 
consumer confidence measure was down in 
April, consumer sentiment came in high, and underlying fundamentals for consumer spending, 

including improved balance sheets, remain quite good. 
The news on inflation was also a bit better over the intermeeting period. Core inflation is 
modestly firming.  Both headline CPI and core CPI increased 0.2 percent in March for the 

second month in a row, and core CPI inflation edged up to 1.8 percent on a year-
over
-year basis. 
The Cleveland Fed™s median CPI measure, which helps predict headline inflation over the 

medium term, has remained near 2
¼ percent since April of last year.  The Federal Reserve Bank 
ofCleveland™s measure of the 
10-year expected inflation rate was essentially unchanged in April. 
So t
his is the positive view of things.  Of course, there is also the possibility that the 
slower growth will be more persistent and inflation developments will 
worsen.  I don™t believe 

we have enough information right now to reach a firm conclusion today, and we don™t have to.  

We can remain agnostic until we see more data over the next couple of months.  Incoming data 

will help us determine whether the slowdown 
in the first quarter is proving to be temporary, like 

it was last year, or whether it is pointing to something more fundamental. In particular, we are 

going to get two employment reports before our June meeting.  These are going to be quite 

important in m
y own thinking about the economic outlook.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Recent economic data have had a 
distinctly weaker tone since our 
previous 
meeting.  The March emplo
yment report indicated little 
              
       
                      overall improvement in labor markets, the unemployment rate was unchanged, and payroll 
employment growth was surprisingly weak.  Similarly, wage and price data have yet to show a 

clear trend toward our 2 percent inflation goal
. While some of the weakness can be attributed to 
the severe weather in some parts of the country, many of the higher-frequency data before and 

after the harsh winter weather have also been on the soft side. 
As a result, in my view, neither of the conditi
ons for liftoff articulated in the March 
FOMC statement 
has 
been sufficiently met at this time.  The March 
Summary of 
Economic 
Projections reflected some significant changes in longer-
run variables.  The central tendency of 
the longer-run unemployment rate has slipped from a range of 5.2 to 6 percent in June 2012 

down to 5 to 5.2 percent in March.  
Similarly, participant estimates of the long
-run equilibrium 
federal funds rate have declined.  The central tendency in June 2012 ranged from 4 to 

4½ percent, bu
t now it is down to only 3½ to 3¾ 
percent.  Our assessment of these key variables 

has changed significantly, which, 
in retrospect
, is not surprising, 
considering changes in 
demographics and productivity since the financial crisis. 
While I and many other participants have lowered our estimates of one of our dual 
mandate goalsŠthe natural rate of unemploymentŠwe have not engaged in any comprehensive 
discussion of our other goal, the inflation target.  That target has remained unchanged at 

2 percent since it w
as adopted in 2012. 
We have learned a great deal about conducting monetary policy in a low-
inflation 
environment since 2012.  I am fully aware that we should have a high threshold for changing our 

inflation target, 
as frequent changes would undermine its usefulness.  But the accumulated 
weight of economic experience suggests, in my view, that a reexamination of our inflation target 

is warranted for several reasons. 
                          
     
                
         First, the choice of an inflation target was largely b
ased on research both here and abroad, 
indicating that the likelihood of reaching the zero lower bound and the cost of being at the zero 
lower bound was small.  This research suggested a relatively low probability of reaching the zero 

lower bound, typically below 5 percent, and relatively brief spells at the lower bound once 

reached, usually a couple of quarters. 
In part, this optimistic read could have been based on faith 
in the efficiency of alternative monetary policy tools.  However, the experience of 
the past 
decade has been less favorable.  Today most major developed countries are at the zero lower 

bound, and, despite employing alternative policy tools, none has yet exited, even though we are 

now more than six years past the financial crisis. 
In shor
t, the research on the expected cost of 
hitting the zero lower bound has not been consistent with the economic outcomes we have 

observed. 
Second, we have revised our assessment of variables that should affect 
the probability of 
hitting the zero lower bound.  The most obvious example is the lowering of the equilibrium 
federal funds rate.  With the same inflation target, a decline in the equilibrium federal funds rate 
should 
increase
 the probability of hitting the zero lower bound.  
The most recent SEP 
submissions, for example, report a decline in the equilibrium real rate of more than 50 basis 

points, a
nd this assessment is echoed among private forecasters and market participants.  If one 
of the rationales for setting a positive inflation target is to reduce 
the frequency of hitting the 
zero lower bound, a lower equilibrium real rate implies the need for a higher inflation target to 

reduce this probability. 
On a practical note, the fact that Japan, the 
United Kingdom, Europe, 
and the United States have each h
it the zero lower bound and have remained there for a very long 
time should make us wonder whether the global convergence to a value of 2 percent for the 

inflation target was misguided. 
       
  
              
                
      Third, we have learned more about the cost of being at the zero lower bound.  After more 
than six years, we have still not returned to the 5 to 5.2 percent unemployment rate range that the 
SEP central tendency currently indicates is consistent with longer
-run unemployment rates.  
While the new tools of quantitative easingŠpurchasing mortgage-
backed securities and 
lengthening the maturity of our holdingsŠhave resulted in growth faster than we otherwise 

would have experienced, we have missed both elements of our mandate for more than 
six years 

now. 
This is not an acceptable outcome.  The consequences of not being able to exit the zero 
lower bound more quickly have been a long period of underutilized resources and 
below
-target 
inflation that risks eroding the credibility of the central bank.  A higher inflation target would 

surel
y have given us more room to lower real interest rates 
using
 our conventional policy tools, 
likely saving hundreds of thousands of jobs. 
Despite our willingness to alter other variables, we have not recently had a 
comprehensive review of our choice for the 
inflation target.  In light of the accumulating 
evidence that inflation targets globally may have been set too low, this choice may have resulted 

in a great cost to the global economy in terms of lost economic output and employment.  Thus, 

we should have a fuller discussion of our choice for the inflation target before we set our longer-

run strategies at the beginning of next year. 
In addition to the longer-run implications of the inflation goal for monetary policy, a 
higher inflation goal would have more 
immediate policy implications.  Entertaining a higher 
inflation target would imply an even larger inflation shortfall, compelling us to wait even longer 

before lifting off. 
A weaker version of this proposition suggests both that we should delay liftoff 
until we see clear evidence that inflation is increasing, and that we should be willing to entertain 
      
          
      
       
             
      an inflation rate that exceeds our current target. This strategy would
, of course
, be akin to price-
level targeting, a notion that President Evans and other
s have previously discussed. 
In summary, we should recognize that the economy™s performance over the previous six 
years has a bearing not only on our estimates of full employment and the equilibrium federal 
funds rate, which many of us have adjusted in the SEP, but also on the inflation target.  I 

understand the concern with shifting an inflation target that we set after years of deliberation and 

following years of success in bringing inflation down.  
But our failure to hit either of our 

mandated goals for six years and running demonstrates the potential cost of an inflation target 

that is too low.  Recognizing the many complications that a change in the target would entail, I 

believe we should have a more fulsome discussion about what the 
previous 
decade of
 economic 
history has taught us about the optimal inflation rate.  Should we be willing to entertain an 

increase in the inflation goal, this would, of course, 
have implications for the timing of liftoff, 

which we will be discussing tomorrow.  Thank you, Ma
dam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would 
like
 to ask President Rosengren a question.  You 
are implying that the only margin for adjustment is on the inflation target rate.  Presumably there 

is another margin for adjustment, t
aking a lot of steps to make a future financial crisis of the type 
that we experienced in 2007, 2008, and 2009 less likely, right?  Because you could argue that 

one reason why we are in this position is because we had a really, really bad financial crisis.
  So, 
in principle, one could take steps to make the probability of a financial crisis l
ower
, and that 
would presumably lessen the need to change the inflation target.  How do you think about that? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If you think you can significantly change 
the probability or 
amplitude of those shocks, then you are right.  But the equilibrium federal funds rate has come 
              
            
    
   
      
         
         
   down quite a bit.  Our own internal estimates of what that implies for how frequently we will hit 
the zero lower bound are that it is substantially higher given that most of the time the equilibrium 

federal funds rate that many of those models were estimated on was 4
½ percent.  We are now at 
3½ percent
ŠI actually think you could make an argument that it is lower than 3½ percent.  
So if 
you have 
an equilibrium federal funds rate that is lower, the implication is that 
you hit the zero 
lower bound more frequently unless you think you can dramatically alter either the frequency or 

severity of having the kind of shocks that we experienced. 
CHAIR YELL
EN.  Isn™t it the case that some of the steps we would take to reduce the 
odds of a financial crisisŠ
strengthening capital and liquidity
Šmay actually
, by raising the cost 
of intermediation
, lower 
the 
equilibrium real rate? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, I 
think that™s right.  But my point is just that the 
room you need depends on the size of the shocks that you are dealing with.  And if you do other 

things and reduce the size of shocks, that also should be a factor.  
I don™t really disagree with 
a lot of th
e points that you made, but it seems to me that that™s not the only potential marginŠ 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I™d just raise one other countervailing argument 
that
, certainly
, the experience around October 15 of the very sharp movement in financial markets a
t a 
time when no real economic news was 
occurring makes me wonder
ŠI am not convinced yet that 
all of the actions we have taken have necessarily
, dramatically changed the probability or likely 
severity of shocks 
in the future from 
what we experienced before
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
In that shock, though, implications for the real economy 
were 
trivial. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  In that case. 

MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair? 
              
    
                
       
      
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  I appreciate you
r bringing this up, President Rosengren.  Just one 
comment
 about your rhetoric on this.  Missing the inflation target over six yearsŠif you look at 
headline inflation year over year, it was above target in 2011 and 2012, and it came back down.  

I know you like to think in terms of core inflation, but I think this is an issue for that piece of the 

puzzle.  When you 
evaluat
e the Committee over that kind of a 
time 
frame
, I think you have got 
to look at headline. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I would say 
that 
hitting an inflation target temporarily 
because 
of an oil price shock is a P
yrrhic victory.  You care more about the underlying rate of 
inflation. 
MR. BULLARD.  These are the prices people pay. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  No doubt we will return to this.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART. 
Moving right along.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the 
intermeeting
 cycle, my staff conducted 56 interviews separate from our board 
meetings. We 
focused the interviews on any indications in their businesses that would confirm the weakness 

indicated by first
-quarter data and, more to the point, suggest 
that 
first
-quarter weakness might 
persist. 
We found that overall business sentiment remains quite positive, somewhat at odds with 
our reading of the incoming data.  On balance, our contacts and directors portrayed demand a
s continuing to improve at a steady pace.  We noted, however, that compared 
with
 the previous 
cycle, their optimism is accompanied by a hint of caution.  We heard more reports of negative 

effects of the dollar.  Exporters, port operators, and firms with significant foreign operations all 

noted market or other challenges that they attributed to the 
dollar. 
         
  
            
           
           
        
   As expected, we heard reports 
of investment 
pullback and layoffs in oil and gas 
exploration and production firms as well as in 
oil services companies.  That drag is being 
partially offset by greater investment activity in business sectors benefiti
ng from low energy 

prices. 
We also continued to hear reports that firms are trying to hold on 
to margin improvement 
coming from fuel and other commodity cost declines. 
Declines in gasoline prices have yet to translate into a meaningful boost in consumer 
spending.  A director with knowledge of consumer markets commented that product categories 

that historically have been leading indicators of stronger consumer activity
Što wit, apparel, 
eating outside the home, and moviesŠhave not yet signaled an upturn. 
We received positive reports on real estate investment activity, both commercial and 
residential. Architects and contractors indicated improved pipelines.
  Our banking contacts 
report that new mortgage and investment activity is strong. 
Regarding employment, we heard continued concern about turnover and retention.  At the 
same time, we detected little change in reports this round regard
ing wage inflation.  On that 
subject, although most data indicate that the trend in nominal 
wage growth remains flat, a 
measu
re constructed by my staff from the C
urrent 
Population Survey 
does show an acceleration 
in 
year
-over-
year
 wage growth in the first quarter.  Wage growth increased to a 3 
percent pace in 
the first quarter, up from 2.8 percent in the fourth quarter and up fr
om 2.4 percent a year earlier. 
Continuing on employment, I™ll mention something we heard for the first time from three 
large employers in quite different businesses.  All said they have begun shifting their work forces 

away from part time toward full time.
  They all cited the high managerial and logistical cost and 
quality challenges of a large, part-
time workforce. 
              
               
                
             
  We™ve been struggling to reconcile these generally positive anecdotal reports with the 
hard data on the first quarter and early indications of 
second
-quarter performance.  Our tracking 
estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth is just marginally above zero, at the low end of the 
spectrum presented in the Tealbook. 
Our tracking model is a straight statistical model with no 
judgmental overrides.  We wo
uld not claim it™s the most accurate read of the first quarter, but it™s 
what the raw data are telling us, and we™ll have an official reading soon enoughŠtomorrow 

morning.  
At this point
, I™m holding to the view that weather and other factors played a 

sign
ificant role in first
-quarter weakness, and that significant payback can be anticipated in the 
current quarter. 
We also observed
Šand this is nothing more than an observationŠthat weak 
first
-quarter growth has been a pattern during the recovery, normally giving way to a stronger 

rest of the year. 
We™ve made a small adjustment to our full
-year GDP growth forecast to reflect a weaker 
first quarter, but otherwise 
we have kept our forecast for growth and inflation unchanged from 
the March meeting.  We made no m
aterial change to our outlook.  We have growth resuming a 
run rate between 
2½ and 3 
percent
, with second-quarter growth above 3 
percent. 
A strengthening of consumer activity from the first quarter is a key factor in our outlook.   
We currently judge the risk to our growth and inflation outlooks as tilted to the downside.  
With the greater uncertainty I perceive at this juncture, the Tealbook alternative scenario titled 

ﬁPersistent 
Slowdown in 
Economic A
ctivityﬂ captures my concern that my outlook may be 
overly optimistic.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As many have already noted, the recent 
data have been disappointing, but it is worth noting, 
as Preside
nt Lockhart just did, that over the 
                      
               
   
      
past four years, 
first
-quarter GDP growth has averaged more than 2 percentage points lower than 
growth during the rest of the year, and there is no single smoking gun that can explain this string 

of seasonal aberrations
. E
ach year
, the winter slowdowns have proved to be temporary. 
So, if past is prologue, I expect the same pattern will occur this year
, with an anemic Q1 
followed by above-trend growth for the rest of 2015.  
I™m confident that the underlying 

momentum in th
e economy once again will be more apparent as the first quarter fades in our 
rearview mirror. 
This is consistent with what I™ve been hearing from my business contacts.  In particular, 
the fundamentals of the economy remain quite positive.  Solid job growth should lift income and 

consumer confidence further, helping to pave the way for continued consumption growth.  In 

addition, highly accommodative monetary policy will continue to boost spending, and these 

factors are very evident in my 
District.  In fact, 
some sectors of the economy, 
the 12
th District 
economy, are red hot.  An executive in the tech sector recently mentioned that to retain talent, 
some tech firms are now offering 20 percent or more pay raises. 
And if that wasn™t enough, 
they™re also throwin
g in housing for good measure, and in the Bay Area, housing is something 
that is very hard to come by and obviously very dear.  The other thing that we heard was that you 

can be vested
 in stock options 
after 
one month.  So this is an amazing time in the Silicon Valley 
economy, and about half of my staff ran off to apply for jobs. 
In addition, I will mention that some of my contacts in different sectors, including 
commercial real estate
, have emphasized the abundance of financing that can be obtained at very 

generous terms.  It™s an issue that I noticed
 was highlighted in both the S
LOOS
 and the QS 
reports, and we™re hearing about that in our D
istrict, too.
  Of course, continued low inflation 
remains a key issue.  I view the recent low inflation readings as being consistent with an 
                                 
              economy still operating below potential and facing temporary disinflationary factors.  Important 
questions remain.
  In the remainder of my remarks, I™ll focus on two of these issues.  
The first 
is, what signal should we be taking from the market-
implied measures of inflation compensation
?  And, second, what™s the empirical relationship between wage growth and inflation? 
The softness 
in inflation of late would be a lot more troublesome to me if it was also 
accompanied by a clear decline in inflation expectations.  This kind of scenario is discussed in 

the Tealbook alternative scenario simulation.  But so far, the weight of evidence sug
gests that 
this isn™t happening.  Long-run survey expectations from households and professional forecasters 

remain well anchored. 
In addition, as I pointed out in the past, long-run inflation expectations 
implied by a Phillips curve model estimated over the past 15 years, a period during which our 

credibility was firmly established, were also 
well anchored 
at 2 percent. 
Now, of course, the one discordant note comes from the market
-implied measures of 
inflation compensation.  Inflation compensation has fall
en significantly since the middle of last 
year, and while much of the focus has been on longer-
horizon measures
, there™s also a question 
about what signal we should take about the nearer-term inflation outlook. 
My staff looked at this question, and they conducted a forecasting comparison between 
measures of inflation compensation and five other competing forecasts, among them a random 

walk forecast and also the survey from the Survey of Professional Forecasters.
  We wanted to 
avoid liquidity issues that are 
associated with shorter
-term TIPS
, so they looked at inflation 
compensation derived from inflation swap rates
.  T
hese typically move very closely together 
with inflation compensation derived from the 
Treasur
y market, but 
are 
based o
n trading in a 
deeper market.
  Here we™re looking at one- and 
two
-year
-ahead inflation forecasts 
for 
headline 
CPI inflation. 
             
       
  
  
               
    
  
      
         
The striking result, which is very robust in all of their experiments
, is that forecasts based 
on inflation compensation were the worst performers of all 
the measures.  Basically
, inflation 
compensation did not give useful information about where inflation was going relative to survey 
forecasts. 
So, 
really
, looking at inflation compensation for insights into the future path of 
inflation 
is not supported by 
the data. 
One problem with our analysis is 
that 
data limitations preclude doing a similar exercise 
for long-term inflation expectations.  I™m going to go out on a limb here 
and say 
that the results 
we have for one- and two-year inflation compensation not being a useful predictor for future 

inflation will apply 
also to
 longer-term inflation. We don™t have that much data right now, but in 
five years when the transcript come
s out, we™ll see whether I was right or wrong. We™ll wait for 
that. 
Again
, President Kocherlakota has highlighted the factŠin a memo that he co
-authoredŠ
that 
inflation compensation 
is not a 
reliable forecast for inflation because it reflects 
other aspects of risk associated with different inflation outcomes. 
But I want to mention another 
interesting 
finding in our work 
about inflation compensation, and that is that these one
- and two-
year
-ahead inflation compensation measures are 
very highly correlated with recent past inflation, 
especially with pa
st inflation associated with movements in oil prices.
  That 
puts into 
question 
how to interpret this. It is a very similar result that we™ve found in the past when we looked at 

household surveys.  Household surveys of inflation expectations tend to be ver
y sensitive to 
lagged inflation, especially with regard to oil price movements, and for this reason we have 

tended to discount movements in household inflation expectations when the movements are 

driven by energy prices.  M
y staff suggests using a similar 
caution when trying to interpret 
inflation compensation measures as an indicator of people™s views on future inflation. 
      
    
                     
          
       The second issue I™ll discuss briefly is that of 
nominal wage growth.  A
s has already been 
mentioned, wage growth has been stuck around 2 percent for most of the recovery.  And, 
as economic theory would tell us, employee compensation makes up a huge fraction of a firm™s 

cost
s.  Y
ou would expect 
there
 to be a pretty tight relationship between nominal 
wage 
growth 
and price inflation, b
ut thi
s connection has been remarkably hard to find.  Many papers and 

research projects have looked at this, and
, basically, if you look back at the history of the 
literature, in every business cycle there™s a whole bunch of papers written about the relationship 

of nominal 
wage 
growth and price inflation.  T
he consistent finding through this literature is that 
it™s really hard to find any relationship between nominal 
wage 
growth and future price inflation.  

Recent research by Jim Stock and Mark Watson, and also some really nice work done at the 

Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland and elsewhere
, has shown that the additional information on 
wages or labor compensation has 
done little to improve the accuracy of standard inflation 

forecast models.
  My understandin
g is that 
the 
staff™s inflation forecasting models tend to be 
these 

price Phillips curve 
model
s or models that don™t really emphasize 
nominal 
wage 
growth. 
The lack of a close empirical link between 
nominal wage growth and future inflation 
likely refl
ects several factors that have affected labor markets in recent decades
Šsome of which 

I™ve talked about in the past.  
One is that 
nominal 
wage 
growth is probably being held down by 
rigidities in wage setting
 that kept wages from falling during the downturn and have 
been 
restraining wage growth as the economy improvesŠ
that is, there is 
downward nominal wage 
rigidity. 
The second is 
that 
globalization
, changes 
in unionization, and 
changes in technology 
have affected the share of productivity gains that are go
ing to workers, and 
that distorts the 
            
      
   
      
      
      
     
  
      
       relationship between wage growth and price inflation.  Put another way, the labor share 
of 
income 
has fallen dramatically since the 1980s. 
To summarize, based on the evidence accumulated over the past several decades
 of extensive research on this topic, there™s little or no information 
to suggest that 
aggregate wage 
data should inform our medium-term inflation outlook.  Now I™m going to break my rule that I 
stated earlier
ŠI do not view a 
rise in 
nominal wage growth as a necessary condition to be 
confident in the return of inflation to 2 
percent. 
All told, our current low inflation rates, I think, 
are pretty easy to understand in the context of transitory factorsŠ
import prices, energy prices
Š and the fact that there is st
ill some considerabl
e slack in the labor market.  As the labor market 
moves back to maximum employment, and 
as these transitory factors dissipate, I expect inflation 

to move back to 2 
percent. 
President Bullard mentioned 2011.  I think we should learn a lesson from that.  We did 
see inflation rise quite a bit 
as a result of a rise in some special factors.  We were experiencing 
high inflationary pressures due to 
large increases 
in the price of oil and other import prices, and 
what we did then, 
I think
, is the right thing.  We looked past the transitory effects of those and 
looked more broadly 
at the long-term inflation outlook, and that is how I am viewing it, too.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank
 you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask an information question? 
The 
research 
that 
you mention
ed is 
very interesting, but 
I am not sure I followed the details.
  The inflation compensation measures 
were one-
to two
-year horizon expectation
sŠa
nd you also 
had survey measures of inflation 
expectations. 
       
    
  
        
                          
             
          MR. WILLIAMS.  The horse race 
was 
basically 
this:  W
e aligned the inflation swap rate 
one year ahead with 
the swaps of month
s 13 to 24 aheadŠo
ne year ahead
 with one year ahead.  
And then we looked at the 
Survey of Professional Forecasters 
and Blue Chip 
for each year. 
MR. EVANS.  At the same horizons? 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Same horizons. 

MR. EVANS.  I see, and those were helpful? Because
, if I understand some of the Board 
work, they use 
these 
long
-term inflation
 expectations for their modeling because, 
as attractive as 
it is theoretically to use a short
-term expectation, nobody can find a good measure of short-
term 
inflation expectation
s.  
Isn™t that right, Bill? 
MR. WASCHER. 
We use the longer
-term inflation exp
ectations in our models.  That™s 
right. 
MR. WILLIAMS. 
Yes
, but the question I™m asking is:  What do you think inflation is 
going to be over the next four quarters? 
The 
SPF is actually a very good forecast.  This is 
roughly as good as the Tealbook.  I
t™s
 asking what 
inflation 
is going to be over the nextŠ 
MR. EVANS.  Well, but the Tealbook won™t use any short-
term inflation 
measures, 
that™s 
my understanding. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  No, no, no.  I™m just looking at the forecast itself. 

MR. EVANS.  Oh, yes, but thos
e forecasts are lousy.  They might be better than the other 
ones, but they™re all lousy.  
MR. WILLIAMS. Well, I think the research says that the Tealbook is maybe a little bit 
better than the SPF and Blue Chip over the next year or twoŠ 
MR. WASCHER. 
Just 
in terms of forecasting? 
There™s probably not much difference. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  So it™s basically the same. 
                           
   
   
       
           MR. EVANS.  The
 Tealbook does something which is not in line with theory, to use 
long-term inflation expectations for a one-
year
-ahead inflation because, well, it kind of works, 
right? 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes
, we view the anchoring of inflation expectations as best 
approximat
ed by long-
term survey measures of inflation
 expectations. 
MR. 
EVANS
.  Yes
, that™s why I was asking the 
question about 
whether I understood you 
right, you™ve currently got it anchored at 1¾ percent and are hoping to goes up to 2 percent. 
MR. WASCHER.  Right. 
MR. 
EVANS
.  But at any rate, I™m done.  
Well, I mean, it™s interesting. I appreciate that. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Please proceed. 

MR. EVA
NS.  Okay.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  For the most part, my directors and 
business contacts expect that the recent spate of soft economic readings will be short
-lived.  The 
one report that seems to sum it up the best came from the 
chairman of Manpower who, when 
talking about soft first
-quarter numbers, said none of his clients are getting depressed about it.  
The view seems to be that there is enough momentum from last year that growth should pick up 
soon. 
Separately, I didn™t hear of any meaningful reports 
of wage or price pressures from my 
contacts.  My own outlook for the real economy continues to be for 
real 
GDP growth to run 
between 2
½ and 3 percent over the remainder of this year and next.  Our assumptions for 
potential output growth are somewhat strong
er than 
in the Tealbook, so our GDP path translates 
into a very similar reduction in resource gaps as the Tealbook™s.  By the end of 2016, we have 

the unemployment rate down to around 5 percent, which is my current assessment of the natural 

rate. 
           
      
               
                  
 My inflation forecast has not changed.  Like the Tealbook, I do not see inflation reaching 
target until sometime in 2018 or 2019.  I should again point out that my assessment of 
appropriate monetary policy underlying this forecast has lower rates than most people around the 

table. 
Now, I want to spend some time today talking about why this outlook leads me to favor a 
whites
-of-
their
-eyes approach for our policy response to rising inflation.  I have talked about risk 
management many times before.  Today I want to art
iculate three additional reasons the data lead 
me to prefer a cautious approach to raising rates. 
First, forecasting inflation is inherently 
difficult, and that™s the discussion that we were just having.  This implies a high burden of proof 

to say we are 
sufficiently confident that our currently low core inflation will move back to 

2 percent in a reasonable period of time. 
Second, despite near-
zero nominal rates and a large 
balance sheet, I am not convinced our current policy stance is all that accommodat
ive to begin 
with.  And, third, I actually see benefits to risking a modest overshooting of our 2 percent 
inflation target. 
Let me start with why it should take strong evidence to have confidence in an outlook of 
low inflation rising back to 2 percent.  Anyone who has looked at the forecasting performance of 
statistical inflation models knows that everyone™s abilities in this area are limited.  Indeed, there 

is a body of research that shows it is not that easy to be a random walk forecast
.  Even the best-
performing models seldom forecast a rapid change in inflation, and they always imply substantial 

forecast uncertainty.  That said, we do have many analytical reasons to think our current low 

inflation will rise at some point. 
Most of the commentary I hear at this table centers 
on the 
economy regaining traction, resource gaps closing, and the upward gravitational pull of high and 

stable inflation expectations, like in the Tealbook forecast. I also suspect that simple mean 
            
      
                 
  
       
   
          
         reversion probably plays a role in 
these forecasts as well. I agree that these forces will 
eventually deliver.  The question is, when?  Taking until 2019 to reach our target is not 

acceptable to me. 
Given all of these difficulties in forecasting inflation, my own preferred dashboard of 
indicators is mostly a list of factors coincident with rising inflation
.  While measures of labor 
market slack are important, I would not rely on them alone, 
as it is possible something has 

changed in the structure of the economy that makes those historical benchmarks less trustworthy.  

In addition, I will continue to look for increasing core inflation, faster wage growth, and firmer 

market
-based measures of inflation compensation to provide corroborating evidence of stronger 
inflationary pressures. 
As I sai
d, the absence of statistically strong leading indicators 
suggests 
that 
these observations are likely to be more coincident than predictive. But at least once we see 
them, we can have more confidence that inflation is moving up persistently.  Until then, 
I remain 

wary. 
Now, my second pointŠthat current policy is not as accommodative as we might thinkŠ 
comes out of the model analysis.  
A fundamental benchmark for thinking about the level of 
monetary accommodation and inflation pressures is the difference bet
ween the actual real rate of 
interest and the equilibrium
, or Wicks
ellian
, real rate of interest.
  As Milton Friedman said, low 
interest rates alone do not mean monetary policy is accommodat
ive.  The relevant question is 
whether, after adjusting for inflation, our current real federal funds rate is far enough below the 

equilibrium real rate to achieve our policy objectives in a reasonable amount of timeŠ
that is, for 

inflation to actually get up to 2 percent, 
as the forecasts embody. 
I think the answer to th
at question is ﬁno.ﬂ  There are a number of simple observations 
that suggest that the current equilibrium rate is quite low.  Namely, even with our interest rate 
         
        
       
     
  
    
    
       
      
         
and balance sheet policies in place, we still see the continued existence of resource gaps, a lack 
of any meaningful upward movement in inflation, and relatively low levels of capital spending 

despite piles of cash on corporate balance sheets. These cash stockpiles are an indication that 

expected real returns on physical investment are not very hi
gh. 
To put a number out, the Tealbook-
consistent equilibrium real rate shown in 
Book 
B, as 
circulated over the weekend, 
is negative 0.1 percent.  Some might look at the current real funds 
rate of minus 1.18 percent, as reported in the Tealbook, Book B, and 
say we have adequate 

accommodation in place.  I don™t agree.  
Recall that the Tealbook™s equilibrium real rate is 

calibrated to close the output gap in 12 quarters.  It says nothing about inflation.  In the Tealbook 

baseline, the inflation gap is still wi
th us until 2019.  That would mean that inflation would have 

to run below target for more than a decade 
and, t
o me
, that is simply too long to be considered 
the result of appropriate policy. 
I want to mention that President Bullard 
referred to the fact 
tha
t PCE 
inflation rose to 
2 percent in 2011 and 2012 on the strength of commodity price increases.  I think the reason we 

focus on core 
inflation is
 that 
core is a better indicator of what inflation is likely to be next year, 
because th
e shocks in headline PCE often are transitory.  T
he real test
, I would say
, is, when did 
the Tealbook ever forecast inflation two years out as being at 2 percent or above?  I think that 

has 
not been the case for quite some time. 
While we can 
all 
lament the 
fact that there are large uncertainties regarding the value of 
the equilibrium real rate of interest, uncertainty over inflation forecasting and the stance of 

monetary policy accommodation go hand in hand.  Logically, because the equilibrium rate has a 

str
ong bearing on the inflation outlook, uncertainty over it ought to translate into comparable 
uncertainty over inflation itself.
  In other words, how can we declare we are confident that 
         
      
    
   
                   current low inflation is headed back up to 2 percent unless we are also confident that our policy 
setting relative to 
the 
equilibrium real rate is able to return inflation to target
? This brings me to the third reason my outlook is premised on a whites-of-
their
-eyes 
policy approach.  I recognize that the usual policy lags mi
ght mean that a delay in tightening 
could cause inflation to modestly overshoot 2 percent sometime down the road.  But so what?  Is 

that such a big cost?
  No.  On the contrary, it could be a benefit.  Considering how long inflation 

has been below target, adopting a policy that allows the possibility of such an overshoot actually 

seems necessary to support the credibility of our symmetric inflation objective.  If we find 

ourselves with the federal funds rate at 1 percent or a little bit above that while infl
ation is still 
too low, we could easily regret the conservative credibility that we
™ve built up. 
I would 
also 
say that if we are not willing to allow an overshoot of our inflation objective, 
then I think we should definitely 
be having the conversation that
 President Rosengren was 
suggesting we have in terms of the appropriateness of the level of the inflation objective, if it is 
something that we are not allowed to overshoot with any reasonability.  I think that™s important.  
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR Y
ELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb. 

MS. HOLCOMB.  And now for something completely different.  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  The Texas economy has decelerated since I last reported to the Committee.  Continued 

low oil prices, the strong dollar, and a weaker national economy pushed state employment down 

by almost 12,000 jobs in March, the first decline in 40 months.  Over the first three months of the 

year, combined job growth averaged a positive but still dismal 0.7 percent, down from 4.2 

percent d
uring the fall of 2014.  Our forecast for December-over-December job growth, which is 
      
           
                           derived from the Texas Leading Index, now stands at 0.5 percent.  That™
s down from a forecast 
of 1 to 2 percent growth six months ago. 
Besides oil and gas, the manufacturing sector has seen the greatest slowing.  Companies 
in the computer and electronics industry say that they are losing opportunities as the appreciating 
dollar pushes up the relative price of U.S.-made capital equipment.  Chemical producers report 

lower se
lling prices and margins and lower exports.  Producers of primary metals have noted 

increasing import competition, too.  Companies in the professional and business services 

industry have been indirectly affected by both low energy prices and the strong dol
lar, 
particularly those with a significant fraction of their clientele in the energy and manufacturing 

sectors.  There have been some reports of adverse spillovers from energy to financial services as 

well. 
Our most up-
to-date information comes from our Te
xas 
Manufacturing and S
ervice 
Sector 
Outlook Surveys.  The latest manufacturing survey results, 
released only yesterday
, show 
production declining in April for the second straight monthŠ
the first consecutive two
-month 
decline since the recession. 
The 
New 
Orders 
Index, too, has registered its worst two-month 
performance since the recession, posting readings of minus 16.1 and minus 14.0 in March and 

April, respectively.  In contrast, our latest service sector survey 
results
, released this morning
, show the headline revenue index rising to 14.6 in April from 10.7 in March.  April™s reading is 

the highest reported so far this year, but 
it is considerably lower than levels reported through 
most of 2014. 
Despite slower job growth, the Texas unemploymen
t rat
e continues to fall, and at 
4.2 percent in March
, it reached its lowest level since July 2007. We have anecdotal reports of 
laid
-off energy workers shifting into construction, especially along the Gulf Coast, 
where skilled 
         
             
  
   
    
          
      
  
    construction workers remain
 in short supply.  The wage and benefit ind
exes from our 
manufacturing and service sector surveys indicate that upward wage pressures are somewhat less 
intense than they were last year.  Looking ahead, health-
care contacts are concerned about losing 
experienced workers in a coming wave of retirements.  In finance, our bankers report flat 

demand and unchanged standards across all major loan categories. 
Oil prices have moved irregularly upward since last month™s FOMC meeting, with WTI 
closing some of the gap 
with 
Brent.  Y
ear-to-date volatility has been driven by conflicting supply 
developments, including unexpected increases in OPEC output
Šname
ly, Saudi Arabia™s 
production was up 4 percent in MarchŠinventory buildups in the U
nited 
States
, and reports of 
slowe
r growth in U.S. oil production.  If the Iran negotiations successfully conclude in June, that 
country could ramp up its output by more than 700,000 barrels per dayŠ0.7 percentage point 
of 
world supplyŠby the end of 2016, which would be enough to lower the 
price of crude between 
$5 and $15 per barrel in 2016, all else staying constant.  The conflict in Yemen is another source 
of uncertainty.  Yemen itself is a negligible producer of crude oil.  However, the threat of wider 
conflict between Saudi Arabia and 
Iran
, and Yemen™s proximity to the fourth-
busiest ch
okepoint 
for crude oil flows in the world, have created fears of supply disruptions. 
Our energy industry contacts tell us that the number of drilled but uncompleted wells, or 
DUCs, has increased between 33 and 50 percent since the end of last year. These are wells that 

have been drilled but are kept out of production.  They are underground inventory.  
New capital 

projects are difficult to initiate, but spending continues on existing contracts.  U.S. oil production 

is expected to peak within the next two to three months.  We are also likely to hit above-ground 

storage constraints within that time 
frame.  Drilling costs are down 20 percent, partly as a result 
of real efficiency gains and partly as a result o
f cheaper labor and equipment.  
There is cautious 
                                       optimism that the worst is over, coupled with recognition that we
™re unlikely to see a return to 
$100-per-
barrel oil any
 time soon.  Repercussions and adjustments in the broader Texas 
economy are ongoing. 
We are a bit more sanguine about the national economic outlook today than we were a 
couple of meetings ago.  It appears considerably less likely now that we will blow through full 
employment at full throttle.  That revised assessment is based on predictions from a small suite 

of models we use to forecast real activity two to four quarters out.  Although each model relies 

on its own set of financial and policy indicators, all are now telling a consistent story
:  solid if 
unspectacular GDP growth, on average, in the second and third quarters of 2015 and a gradual 

deceleration in employment growth over the course of the year, with the unemployment rate 

leveling off in the neighborhood of 5 percent heading into 2016.  
We expect 
trimmed 
mean PCE 
inflation, our measure of the underlying trend in headline inflation, to average about 1¾ 
percent 

over the next four quarters.  As compared with the Tealbook, we are more optimistic on both 
halves of the dual mandate, b
ut we
™re certainly not only
 in the same ballpark as the Tealbook, 
but in the same outfield.  Hopefully, it™
s not left field. 
Although we are looking forward to tomorrow™s GDP report, we don™t expect to take a 
strong signal from it, whatever the number turns out to be.  The first est
imate relies on a lot of 
guesswork, and in any case, 
GDP growth is volatile from quarter to quarter.  As a result, we
™ve 
not found real-
time estimates of lag
ged GDP growth to be especially helpful for forecasting at 
the horizons that are of interest to us.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Data on economic conditions in the Eighth 
District have improved notably during the 
intermeeting
 period.  The pace of job creation was 
           
           
   
   
     
        revised up for 2014, and preliminary data for 2015 has generally been positive.  
The 
District 
unemployment rate continues to decline and stands at 5.7 percent today, according to the most 
recent reading
Šonly slightly higher than the national rate. 
According to the revised BLS d
ata, 
District job creation occurred at about twice the pace 
in 2014 as compared 
with
 2013, which was itself revised higher.  One of the largest revisions 
was in the Louisville MSA which was revised from an
 original estimated value of 2.3 percent 
growth to an updated value of 3.8 percent.  By sector, notable upward revisions occurred in 

transportation, manufacturing
, and professional and business services.
  Correspondingly, 
Louisville™s average hourly earnings growth is significantly faster than the national 
average. 
On the downside, one of the most notable developments in the local labor market was the 
announcement by U.S. Steel that they would temporarily idle their Granite City, Illinois, 
plant
, laying off over 2,000 employees effective in May.  Media repo
rts suggest that the layoffs are 

due, in part, 
to a rise in imports of relatively inexpensive Chinese steel
Šsteel that
, evidently, the 
Chinese do not need in their home market. 
On this dimension, 
my recent intermeeting visit to China
, combined with discussions 
with CEOs and my interpretation of some hard data, has suggested to me that trend growth in 

China may be notably slower than commonly appreciated.  I think this goes beyond the relatively 

weak reported growth rate 
in the first quarter 
to a trend rate 
of growth as low as 4½ percent.  
Chinese GDP statistics are notably opaque
Ša topic of macroeconomic discussion for the 
past 15 

years or moreŠbut corroborating data and anecdotes now seem to be diverging more sharply 

from official reports, suggesting that a 
Chin
ese slowdown is to be taken far more seriously this 
time.
  The proximate cause of the slowdown is likely the ongoing anticorruption campaign, 
                 
                       
       
     which is reportedly casting a very wide net and is likely creating a chilling effect on new 
business formatio
n and business expansion. 
Turning to the national outlook, I have five main areas for comments on the current 
narrative for the U
nited S
tates, 
as reported in the Tealbook, 
FOMC speeches
, and popular 
commentary.  The comments are in the following areas:
  one, potential over
-interpretation of the 
Q1 slowdown; two, an unemployment forecast that I think is not credible; 
three, assumptions 
about 
r* that may be suspect; four, over-interpretation of the likely effects of the value of the 
dollar on U.S. growth pros
pects;
 and, five, underappreciation of the risks of asset price bubbles 
during the next two to three years as rates remain exceptionally low.
  I™m going to comment on 
the first three of these today.  I™m not commenting directly on inflation because I think
 the 
situation in that dimension has not changed greatly during the inter
meet
ing period.  I continue to 
expect inflation to return to target and eventually overshoot 2 percent in 2016. 
On the first issue, potential over-interpretation of the Q1 slowdown, d
ata 
are 
clearly 
weaker on a tracking basis since our 
previous meeting.  GDP will be reported tomorrow 
morning, and the s
taff has penciled in an estimate close to zero. But suppose we take the median 
of the nowcasting table reported in the Tealbook, which 
is 
an 
approximately 1½ percent annual 

growth rate of GDP in the first quarter.  On that basis
, the year
-over-year growth rate would be 
3.3 percent.  I think this number gives a better sense of the underlying pace of growth in the U.S. 

economy and provides 
a better point of reference 
for 
shaping GDP expectations for the 
remainder of this year. 
In addition
, I think that seasonal factors for Q1 are being called into 
question.  We considered Q1 GDP growth averages versus averages for Q2 through Q4 over 

differe
nt time periods
, excluding recessions
, since the mid
-1990s.  Average Q1 real GDP growth 
        
                           has been notably lower in these subperiods.  This broad-
brush analysis suggest
s that low Q1 
growth rates are not occurring by accident, and that Q1 seasonals may need revamping. 
The second issue is unemployment projections balancing out at about 5 percent over the 
forecast horizon despite easy monetary policy
, by conventional definition.  I do not think that 
such a forecast is credible, and I continue to disagree with th
e labor force participation 
assumption behind it.  A key 
paper in the 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
Šby Aaronson 
and others
, published 
in 
2014Šsuggests that labor force participation has been dropping 
according to demographic factors since 2000, 
and, furthermore, that this downward trend will 
continue through the forecast horizon.  This suggests that, on balance, there will be no sustained 

upward improvement in labor force participation and, therefore, that unemployment will 

continue to drop into 
the 
4½ to 4 percent range over the forecast horizon, barring any major 

disruption in the U.S. economy.  This dynamic would be very similar to what was observed 

during the 1990s expansion and again during the 2000 expansion.  On both of those occasions, 
unemployment moved into the low 4 
percent range. 
Previous staff predictions in this area have emphasized increases in labor force 
participation but have turned out to be wrong.  Indeed, the predictions given in the S
ummary of 
Economic P
rojections have also re
lied
, in part, on this story and have also been wrong.  
The 
median SEP forecast as of September 2012 for unemployment at the end of 2014 was too high 
by more than 1 percentage point.  The same was true of the median SEP September 2013 

forecast for unemploy
ment. 
So what™s the bottom line?  We™re charting a course for very low interest rate monetary 
policy based on an unrealistic assessment of future labor market performance, and this will harm 

FOMC policymaking in the quarters and years ahead.  
We can, of co
urse, cite other labor market 
                         
  
   
  
    
        
         
         indicators and thereby bring to bear more information on overall labor market performance.  The 
Board of Governors™ l
abor 
market 
conditions index does exactly this, conveniently summarizing 
information on many different dimensions of labor market performance.  
The 
Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis calculated that the value of this index is comfortably above its long-run 

average since 1986.  This indicat
es that
, based on the totality of available information, labor 
markets are n
ot weak but instead are relatively strong viewed in historical perspective. 
I like this 
index because it brings all information
 together in one place and avoids cherry-
picking particular 
indicators that may or may not be indicative of overall labor market 
performance. 
The third issue is 
r*.  Some commentary has suggested that 
an r* parameter in a 
Taylor 
rule is 
low based on estimates of 
Laubach 
and Williams, which
, combined with relatively small 
inflation and unemployment gaps, would suggest, through a Taylor-
rule
-type calculation
, that 
current policy is approximately the policy recommended by the rule.  This argument could 

rationalize current policy settings, although it would suggest that polic
y is 
perhaps not as 
accommodative as people woul
d intuitively think. 
One comment is that the value of 
r* is highly 
uncertain
, either from a theoretical perspective or a measurement perspective.  Time
-varying 
r* Taylor rules are relatively untested and do not represent the empirical tradition behind Taylor 

rule estimation and recommended policy outcomes. For this reason
, I am skeptical of using 
time
-varying 
r* as a rationale for current policy settings. 
The value of 
r* from a broader perspective should represent the 
Wicksellian 
natural rate 
of interest
, which one might view as governed by the real rate of interest that would prevail in 
an economy without frictions and without monetary policy influence.  
In a wide class of models, we 

know what the 
real rate of interest would be.  It would be the sum of the rate of productivity 
growth and the rate of labor force growth.  These factors alone would drive the real output 
      
   
            
       
    
             
  growth rate in this class of models.  
My staff calculated an 
r* value based on such a view.  It 
turned out to be 2 percent today, and this seems like a good benchmark for 
r* from which to 
calibrate Taylor rule policy recommendations.  Such recommendations would suggest that policy 
is indeed accommodative today, which would match most people™s intuition about current policy 

settings. Interestin
gly, this value of 
r* has historically been somewhat lower than the 
Laubach
-Williams measure
.  It
 has been near zero in recent years, but as of today has moved above 
zero to 
a value of about 2 
percent. 
The bottom line is that there are many ways to look at this value of 
r*, but a sensible 
guess is that 
r* is 
2 percent or higher, meaning policy today is accommodative, 
as intuition 
suggests.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you. 

MR. TARULLO.  M
adam Chair, if I couldŠ
President Bullard
, I was a little bit confused 
by what you were saying about labor force participation, 
and particularly the staff™s assessment 
of it.  My understanding of what the staff has been saying is that while they project a downward 
trend in labor force participation because of demographics, they also assess the decline in the 

immediate post
-crisis years to have been substantially steeper than that
.  And what they were 
predicting
Šand continue, I think, to predict, 
unless Bill 
corrects me
Šis a less steep decline or a 
flattening
-out of current labor force participation
, which eventually has their projected 
demographic trendŒbased participation rate converging with the actual participation rate.  And 

that, I think, is what™s been
 happening over the p
ast year and a half or so
, during which, 
with a 
little bit of fluctuation up and down, 
the labor force participation rate 
has been 
roughly stable, 
which I think is bearing out the staff™s expectation of the convergence of their projected trend 

with actual labor force participation. 
       
        
         
                 
      MR. WASCHER.  Yes, I think that™s how I interpret it as well.  I don™t think what we 
have in the forecast is at all at odds with the 
Aaronson and others paper of 2014.  The gap we 
have in there is roughly what we estimated in that paper, and as Governor Tarullo indicated, we 
expect the downtrend in the participation rate to continue 
and the actual participation rate to 
close the gap by falling less than the downtrend we have. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  First Vice Presiden
t Prichard. 
MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Economic activity in the Third District 
slowed during the first quarter.  While still expanding, the rate of expansion has been below 

expectations.  However, it appears that the recent slowdown may be tem
porary, and that 
sentiment is widely held among contacts in our region.  Unemployment in the region ticked up to 

5.7percent in March
, with Pennsylvania experiencing a significant decline in employment, 
enough that the first-
quarter job growth in the state 
was actually negative.
  However, both our 
April 
Manufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey 
and 
Nonmanufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey 
indicate that the manufacturing and service sectors expanded employment in April and point to 

further job growth and capital expenditures over the second half of the year.  One prominent 

manufacturer in the region indicated that his businesses are poised to grow rather more robustly 

in the second half of the year once they have worked through the necessary inventory correction.  

Although he doesn™t anticipate 2015 to be as strong as last year, the second half of the year 

should see solid growth. 
In response to a special survey question on the effect of the dollar™s appreciation on the
ir manufacturing activity, respondents who ha
ve exchange rate exposure indicated that the 
appreciation negatively affected their operations. 
However, our District does not overly engage 
in foreign trade, 
with exports
 accounting for only 10 
percent of revenues and imports 
         
   
              
            representing about 5 
percent
 of nonlabor costs.  
Thus, the overall effect of the dollar™s rise was 
fairly small 
for 
Third District manufacturers. 
Both nonresidential and residential construction weakened in March.  We are also seeing 
a softening in multifamily housing.  Reflecting th
e overall weaknesses in this sector, house price 
appreciation is also slower than in the 
nation as a whole, 
with prices
 growing in the 3 
to 3½ percent range.
  Retailers in the region have been report
ing healthy sales over the inter
me
eting 
period and modera
te year
-over-
year sales growth. 
Contacts report th
at sales are starting to be 
bolstered by lower gasoline prices, and consumers in the region remain highly confident.  They 

are also paying down post-holiday debt, and debit and credit card lines are declining.  Bankers in 

the region indicate that the growth in the commercial loan segment of their portfolios has picked 

up substantially, while other loan activity has remained fairly flat. 
Thus, our D
istrict reflects 
fairly well what might be transpiring in ot
her regions 
nationally
Ša bit of a step back in labor markets, 
a falloff in manufacturing activity
, and a lack of 
any significant improvement in residential investment.  This slowdown is well reflected in one of 

the series we produce in our real
-time resear
ch center, the 
Aruoba-Diebold-
Scotti Business 
Conditions Index.  The ADS uses six high-frequency data series to construct an index of current 

economic activity.  Those series include
, one, initial jobless claims through the week ending 

April 11 of this year; two, payroll employment through March; t
hree, industrial production 
through March; four, real personal income through February; five, real manufacturing and trade 

sales through January; 
and, six, real GDP through the 
fourth quarter of last year.
  The index is 
centered on zero, which indicates normal growth rates, and the index has recently turned 

negative.  However, we are receiving indications that the somewhat slower growth we have 
              
      
       
   
   
             
  wit
nessed is a temporary phenomenon, and that economic activity is expected to bounce back to 
trend growth rates. 
As mentioned by President Bullard, we also find that, 
historically
, first
-quarter GDP 
growth may not be adequately adjusted for seasonal variation.  Over the past 30 years, 
seasonally 
adjusted growth 
in first
-quarter GDP has averaged significantly less than growth over the 
remaining three quarters
Š1.8 percent as opposed to 2.7 percent.  Additionally, if one examines 
the timing of the 10 
weakest qua
rters over that span, six occurred in the first quarter and
, 50 percent of the time
, the weakest quarter 
was the first quarter of the year.
  Observations like 
these may point us to placing more weight on GDIŠ
gross domestic income
Šor on GDPplus, 
which incorporates the income side of GDP, in interpreting current economic activity.  GDPplus 

has the advantage that, unlike GDI, it is available with the same timing as expenditure
-side data. 
With that as background, we continue to project that overall economic act
ivity will 
accelerate modestly
, that utilization gaps will continue to progressively narrow
, and that inflation 
will continue to firm. With 
a substantial amount of data forthcoming before our June meeting, I 
expect that we™ll have a clearer view of the em
erging trends and confirmationŠor notŠ
that 
first
-quarter economic performance was, indeed, a poor harbinger of the year to come.  Thank 

you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  
President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming national data suggest that the 
economy hit a soft patch in the first quarter, which is consistent with the recent information on 

economic activity in the Fifth Federal Reserve District. 
At the same time, our reports indicate 
that the weakness is widel
y viewed as temporary.  Our diffusion index of manufacturing activity, 
released this morning
, was slightly negative in April, and that followed a reading of negative 8 
            
  
                       
       
   for March
.  B
ut our index of expected shipments six months ahead was a robust plus 38, a 
level 
that has not been exceeded since 2011.  
Similarly, our 
index 
for nonretail service
-sector activity 
was also slightly negative in April, but the index of expected demand six months ahead held 
steady at a pretty positive rate.  And the indexes for employment remain positive across all 

sectors. Retail revenue rose 
5 points to plus 17. 
More broadly, commentary from our directors and industry roundtable participants was 
more positive this month than last, and we™ve heard numerous reports about transitory factors 

having affected recent activity.  An executive at an engineering firm in West Vir
ginia said that 
ﬁweather has been the primary factor in our business slowdown.ﬂ 
Several other reports cited 
production slowdowns attributable to the West Coast port strike.  For example, a manufacturer of 

industrial safety products stated that production 
was interrupted by delays in receiving shipments 
of just one critical part manufactured in China.  These reports suggest that it™s quite reasonable to 

expect a rebound in growth in Q2. 
As usual, any discussion of labor markets these days turns quickly to the subject of 
shortages of skilled workers.  It does seem as if these shortages are having noticeable effects. 

For example, the CEO of a large building materials company told of a trucking company 

refusing outgoing shipments due to a lack of drivers.  
We also continue to hear about markets 
experiencing wage pressures
, and, while not universal at this point, the scope of these 

observations appears to have broadened of late.  This was most apparent in the reports from 

representatives of several staffing firm
s, both national and regional, who serve on our 
roundtables, including a regional representative from Manpower.  
One large staffing firm is 

telling clients to expect upward wage pressure ﬁin all skill levelsﬂ later this year.  Two grocers in 

Richmond recently announced double-
digit starting
-wage increases, perhaps 
in response to Wal
-         
     
       
     
  
                 
    Mart™s announcement.  A large auto manufacturer plans to raise starting wages for assembly line 
workers at a plant in our District from $13.17 an hour to $15.85 an hourŠabout 20 
percent. 
A lumber company in West Virginia has responded to a shortage by bringing in entry-
level workers 
from Puerto Rico, renting houses for them, and hiring an interpreter, all of which raise the cost of 
labor by 10 to 15 percent.  
These reports suggest that broader wage pressures may be about to 

emerge, although I recognize that wage acceleration is not yet apparent in the monthly figures for 

average hourly earnings. 
Turning to the national economy, as I said, we™
ve clearly hit a soft patch recently. 
Some 
of that softness was due to well
-known temporary factors.  Combined, these transitory factors 
could well explain a large part, if not all, of the first
-quarter slowdown.  
Moreover, this wouldn™t 

be, as many have noted, the first flat quarter we™
ve se
en during this expansion.  So the question 
is how rapidly economic activity picks up again from here as the effect of these transitory factors 

fade. I share th
is Tealbook™s optimism on consumer spending, and that™s based on robust 
income growth, solid consumer sentiment readings, and continued improvement in labor market 

conditions.  The rebound in car sales last month was an important piece of evidence that 

consumers have the confidence to boost spending in the months ahead. 
Turning to inflation, the late
st readings have been a bit firmer than expected.  Core CPI 
inflation averaged 2.3 percent at an annual rate from December to March.  The staff™s translation 

into core PCE inflation is 1.4 percent over the same three months, and that implies that Q4 will 

be the low point for core PCE inflation.  Oil prices appear to have bottomed out and the run-up in 

the dollar seems to have lost steam, so the transitory downward pressures on headline inflation 

are waning. Thus, it seems fairly clear to me that we are eme
rging from this inflation dip
, and 
inflation will be moving towards 2 percent in coming quarters. 
                      
         
             Looking ahead, as several of you have mentioned, we will receive more than the usual 
amount of data over the upcoming intermeeting period, including, importan
tly,
 two employment 
reports and two reports on personal income and consumption.  
If the data come in consistent with 
the Tealbook forecast, we would have solid evidence in hand at our June meeting that consumer 

spending growth had rebounded and that inflation was moving up.  If so, I believe the case for 

raising rates would be strong, s
o it seems premature to make any statements at this meeting or in 
the days immediately ahead, I believe, that could be interpreted as taking June off the table.  

Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Unemployment in the 
Tenth 
District remains 
very low at 4.2 percent, and recent employment growth has been modest but is mixed across 

states and industries.  Several 
District 
states are seeing sizable oil and gas layoffs, and negative 
spillovers are showing up in regional factory and transportation activity as well as in consumer 
spending 
areas 
and 
those that are 
energy dependent.  
Through the first quarter of this year, 
District energy jobs were down 4½ 
percent
, and firms in our latest energy survey expect 
their 
employment to fall by 12 percent this year.  District manufacturing is also feeling the 
effect, as 
the last time our manufacturing survey composite was lower than 
its April reading was in early 
2009. Firms responding to our energy survey, however, note 
that 
breakeven oil prices have 
fallen considerably as services costs have dropped, providing some encouragement for future 

activity as oil prices edge higher.  On the other hand, D
istrict states with virtually no oil and gas 
activity have seen a solid start to 2015.  Colorado, in particular, continues to grow rapidly, driven 

by strong tourism and construction activity.  
As a result, total employment in the region is up 
       
      
       
         
  
     
              slightly this year, and overall services activity in the District continues to grow despite the 
energy layoffs.  In agriculture, drought has worsened, although winter wheat production is 

shaping up to be similar to its recent five-
year average, and corn a
nd soybean planting intentions 
are generally strong.  Still, persistently low crop prices and elevated input costs continue to 

increase farmers™ short
-term financing needs. 
For the national economy, my outlook for growth over the medium term is little chan
ged
.  I assume that 
the softness in first
-quarter GDP proves transitory, as it has for the past several 
years.  Weather effects and the sharp decline in energy investment look to be important factors 

holding down first-quarter growth.  However, more persis
tent factors 
producing softer export 
growth and a broader slowing in new investment bear watching.  
Alternatively, personal 

consumption appears to have some upside potential, 
as there is yet to be a significant boost to 

spending from lower gasoline prices. 
March™s payroll numbers were clearly below expectations, though the labor market 
continues to improve in several aspects.  The services sector continues to perform well.  In the 

first quarter of this year, services added
, on average, 
179,000 additional jo
bs per month.  This is 
better than the 134,000 
average in the first quarter 
of 
last year.
  Overall, I expect average 
monthly payroll growth to drift down from the rapid pace of 260,000 per month last year to 

200,000 this year before settling down to a pace 
of around 150,000 next year as the labor market 
continues to tighten and growth moves to its trend level. 
Research by my staff also indicates improving labor market conditions, 
as reflected by 
the number of workers moving from lower-
to higher
-paying sect
ors
Šthat is, the extent of 
cyclical upgrading.  Their analysis shows that the rise in the quits rate over the past two years is 

primarily due to a higher quits rate in sectors with lower pay, like wholesale/retail trade and 
           
        
               
  
      
   
      
      leisure/hospitality.
  Tracking individual workers in these sectors using C
urrent 
Population 
Survey data shows 
that 
they have recently been moving into higher-
paying sectors, like 
education and health services, at rates similar to those before the recession. 
Turning to inflation, I expect
 inflation to remain somewhat below target due to lagged 
effects from low energy prices and a stronger dollar.  Inflation in some sectors, such as health 
care, have also notably slowed.  In addition, 
because of some of the current factors affecting 

inflation, year-over-year core could drift lower as stronger readings from a year agoŠ
core PCE 
readings from March to June of last year were 
running at a solid 2 
percent pace
Šdrop out of the 
12-month window.  
Such base effects have not affected 
my overall confidence regarding the 
medium
-term outlook for inflation, assuming 
there are 
continued improvement in the labor 

market and stable longer-
term expectations.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  I will start with a few observations 
about the Ninth District economy.  It™s generally robust, but the decline in oil prices is certainly 

creating challenges in some areas.  I will then turn to the national economy, 
where I see 

continued shortfall
s in aggregate demand relative to supply. 
Labor markets are tight in many parts of the Ninth District, 
with contacts reporting 
significant swaths of unfilled openings.  There are signs of growing wage pressures in some 

economic sectors and geographical are
as.  However, overall, wage pressures remain muted. 
Importantly, many businesses report having little or no ability to pass on wage increases to 

consumers in the form of price increases.  So this is actually a flip side of the argument that 

President Will
iams 
offered
Šhe indicated that he didn™t need to see wage increases to feel 
confident in the 
return 
of 
inflation to 2 percent. 
The flip side of this is that we might see wage 
      
       
             
   
    
           
   increases happening and still not see inflation
, because the question is whether those businesses 
experiencing the wage increases have 
the pricing power to pass that on.  The contacts 
that 
we talk
ed to in the intermeeting period suggested they do not. 
Contacts at businesses with an international footprint expressed concern during 
the 
intermeeting period about how the high value of the dollar would affect the demand for their 

products, especially in light of overall softness in global demand conditions.  And so
me of
 the 
comments that 
President Bullard
 offered about China echo things we heard from our contacts 
during the intermeeting period. 
Not surprisingly, economic activity has slowed greatly in the oil-producing areas of 
North Dakota.  However, overall confidence in the B
akken region remains high.  Many, if not 
most, of our contacts r
eport seeing the currently low level of economic activity as a welcome 
opportunity to shore up critical infrastructure needs in the western part of North Dakota. 
Let me turn to the national economy.  Both real and nominal variables are telling us a 
similar story, I believe:  
There is insufficient aggregate demand to use available resources in an 
effective fashion.  In terms of real activity, if we look back over the past five years since the end 

of 2009, real GDP growth has averaged 2.3 percent.  T
here is l
ittle sign of this pace 
quickeningŠl
ast year
, real GDP growth was only 2.4 percent.  H
ere I
™m using annual averages 
to get away from some of the seasonal adjustment factors that have been highlighted in previous 

interventions.  
This year
 now looks like it may be even worse than this weak average 
performance.  In the wake of the data that we
™ve 
received from the first quarter, Tealbook
, Book 
A, has downgraded its outlook for 2015 economic activity, and it now projects growth in this 

calend
ar year to be less than 2 percent.  We will get more information
, of course
, tomorrow 
morning along these lines. 
            
          
            
                      
  The persistence of these patterns has led some to conclude that they reflect a permanent 
downward shift in the productive capabilities of the United States.  I think we should be very 
cautious before accepting these claims. We saw significant improvement in all labor market 

metrics in 2014.  This improvement seems to have had 
little 
effect
 on the excess supply of 
human resources in the economy. 
We saw little upward pressure on compensation or on the 
inflation outlook.  This conjunction of low price pressures and strong employment growth 

suggests 
that the 
ﬁRoom to Growﬂ 
scenario i
n Tealbook, Book A, might be quite relevant.  And 
if you look at th
e implications of that scenario, the weakness of aggregate demand relative to 

supply creates concerns with respect to nominal variables. 
The outlook for inflation in 
Tealbook, Book A, 
is 
that it will be below target until 2019, well over four years from n
ow. 
Just to follow up on some of the discussion we heard earlier about inflation over the past 
few years, headline 
inflation 
did go above 2 percent in 2011, but I think if you go back over 
2008, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013, and 2014, in all of those years, 
it was below 2 percent.  In 2011, it 
was above 2 percent.  On average, over that time frame since the end of 2007, 
it™s been
 about 
1.3 percent. Market
-based longer-
term inflation expectations remain low. 
I want to
 say something about the prediction issue.  It™
s absolutely true
, I think
, that if 
you do horse 
races of th
e kind 
that President Williams talked about
, market-
based measures 
don™t really fare that well. I think it
™s actually because they™re 
of value to policymakers, not just 
to statistical 
forecasters, because we
™re interested in a different loss function.  We
™re not 
interested in just minimizing mean square
d error
, we™
re actually interested in trying to mitigate 
low inflation, especially when it
™s going to be costly to households.  And I th
ink that 
monitoring 
these market
-based measures of inflation expectations 
is helpful along those lines. 
         
             
   
    
  
    
          
     
       
     Tealbook, Book A, notes that we™
ve seen some slippage in Michigan survey measures as 
well
ŠI don™t want to put too much weight on that at this stage, but 
it™s something to watch.
 I think there are signs in these data that we may be facing a prolonged period of inflation running 
substantially below our target.  Now, why should we care about a possible downward slippage in 

inflation and inflation expectatio
ns? 
This builds on some of the remarks that 
President 
Rosengren already made, that p
ersistently lower inflation expectations translate to lower nominal 

interest rates.  Lower nominal interest rates translate into little recession
-fighting capacity for the 
central bank.  And such a reduction 
in policy capacity would be especially troubling because it 
would build on the policy capacity associated with a significant decline in the neutral real 

interest rate noted by President Rosengren.  
So this decline in inflation expectations really 

creates a first
-order loss in terms of what we are trying to accomplish 
because it increases the 
probability of hitting up against the zero lower bound. 
As President Rosengren 
suggested, the decline in the neutral rate of intere
st should lead 
us to consider raising the inflation target.  I see a great deal of possible merit in this
 suggestion.  
More generally, I think that it would be useful to have discussions about the long-
run goals that 
we have established.  We learn 
more 
over time
, and it™
s useful to take 
that
 on board.  
We d
on™t 
want to do it every year, certainly, but I think at intervals we should be taking on information and 

reevaluating the long
er-run goal statement.  
The 
Bank of Canada does this on a five-
year basis
.  Every five years they go back and relook 
at their framework and what they™
ve learned
, and 
I think there
™s something to be gained from that kind of systematic reevaluation of our framework.  
So I would be very supportive of further discussion of President Rosengren™s suggestion. 
With that said, first things first.  We actually need to forestall a possible decline in 
inflation expectations 
today 
generated by a failure to hit the current low target. 
During the 
               
          
           
         
  
  intermeeting period, Governor Haruhiko Ku
roda of 
the Bank of Japan visited Minnesota 
and 
gave an excellent speech.  He described the aggressive efforts of the Bank of Japan to stimulate 
an increase 
in inflation expectations.  As I listened to him, I was reminded yet again of how we 
need to do all that we can to avoid leaving our successors with the kind of tough situation that 

Governor 
Kuroda now faces. 
I don™t see that determination reflected in 
alternative B, but I won™t 
talk about that until tomorrow.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
  In terms of the economic 
outlook, I™m of two minds.  On the one hand, I™m more uncertain about the growth outlook and 

more concerned about the potential downside risks to growth.  On the other hand, I think the 

downside risks on the inflation side have lessened considerably.  A
t the last meeting
, I would 
have said that I expected further labor market improvement but was not yet reasonably confident 

that inflation would return to our 
2 percent objective ov
er the medium term.  Now, I would at 
least partly reverse things.  Conditional on further improvement in the labor market, I™m getting 

closer to being reasonably confident that inflation will return to our 2 
percent objective
, but I am 
less confident about when I will see further labor market improvement and how quickly it will 

occur. 
Turning first to the growth side
, it strikes me 
that 
there 
are 
a lot of crosscurrents right 
now, and it™s really difficult to assess the net 
effect
.  To me, this sharp slowing 
in payroll growth 
in March should not be a big surprise, however.  As I noted in my comments at the March 

FOMC meeting
, a big gap had opened up between payroll growth and GDP growth, so unless 
one thought that the productivity growth trend would remain ex
traordinarily poor, it seemed 

reasonable to expect 
either 
GDP growth to pick up or payroll growth to slow down.  A
s it turns 
      
        
           
   
              
            out, GDP growth slowed rather than picked up, s
o that left payroll growth to bear the brunt of the 
adjustment. 
As I assess the firs
t quarter, I do think there are both transitory and more persistent 
factors responsible for the slowdown.  On the transitory side, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of 
New 
York™s staff analysis
 does suggest 
that 
severe winter weather did have a sizable effect
. We 
put the 
impact
 at about 1½ 
percent on 
the
 annualized growth rate, slightly less than last year.  Having 
said that, I wouldn™t take that point estimate too literally. 
Also
, I do think the West Coast port 
slowdown did disrupt economic activity.  We had a small business advisory group meeting, and I 
was surprised that two out of the eight or nine businesses that attended referenced the port 

slowdown as hurting their businesses 
in the first quarter
Šthis is 
around upstate New York and 
New Jersey, and that™s not really where I would expect 
the 
port slowdown to actually manifest 
itself
, so I thought that was meaningful. 
There 
are
 also some more long-
lasting components as well. As Steve Kamin made clear, 
the dollar™s sharp appreciation has led to a deterioration in U.S. net exports, and the 
Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York staff estimates that a 15 percent appreciation of the broad rea
l trade
-weighted 
dollar, which is a little bit m
ore than we have right now in hand, would cut about 0.6 
percentage point from the level of real GDP after one year, and I think that™s pretty consistent 

with the Tealbook estimates.
  And I think it™
s important because that™s just the partial 
equilibrium effect.  If you have a trade drag, it also drains real income from the economy, so 

there™s also the risk of second-
order effects. 
Now, the second thing 
is that 
oil and gas investment is plunging.  I™m not sure how 
severe the knock
-on 
effects will be, but I d
on™t think we™re done yet.  Firms have been protected, 
in part, this year by hedging their future forward production by selling oil forward, and they™
ll           
        
       
                      
       
     
   
become more exposed to the current oil prices as time passes
, so I expect a downward trend in 
investmen
t to continue.  As Helen Holcomb pointed out in her comments about the Texas 
economy, the effect does seem to be quite a bit larger, I think, than expected.  
Richard Fisher 

said
Šin January, I 
believe it was
Šat th
at time he thought that employment growth in 
Texas, 
which was well above average compared 
with 
the country, would slow down to the national 
average.
  But if you look at the payroll data in March for states on a seasonally adjusted basis, 
payrolls in Texas fell by 25,400 people, which is pretty sizab
le for Texas. 
And it™s interesting 
that Oklahoma was the state with the second
-largest decline in payroll. So
, clearly
, the fall 
in oil 
and gas investment is having a significant 
effect
.  It™s rippling through to incomes
, and i
t™s rippling through into c
ommercial real estate construction
, so I think it actually has a more sizable 
effect than just looking at oil and gas investment itself. 
Third, I think the inventory accumulation, which I don™t think anyone has mentioned, 
looks to me like it™s poised to be a drag on growth.  If you look at the inventory-
to-sales ratios, 
they have been drifting up, and if you look at the rate of inventory accumulation in the first 

quarterŠ
well, we™ll see what we get tomorrow
, but it looks to be on the high side in terms of 
what™s sustainable over the medium term.
  So if you had to ask yourself, 
ﬁAre inventories going 
to contribute positively to growth or negatively to growth over the next year
?ﬂ 
They are 
almost 
certain to be a drag on growth.  In the face of 
all 
of these cro
sscurrents, I think the next few 
months of data are really important.  I™m really looking at what April and May look like.  And 

even if we get strong April and May data, I™m not really sure what to make of itŠi
s this just a 
bounce after first
-quarter weakn
ess, or is this the new trend? 
In contrast to the growth side, I am getting more comfortable that inflation is starting to 
stabilize and is likely to start dri
fting back up toward our 2 percent objective.  When I look at the 
         
                  
  
      
    
     inflation data and all the other factors that feed into the inflation outlook, I think most suggest 
that inflation
Šdespite a stronger dollar, lower energy prices, and still-
sizable slack in the labor 
market
Šactually seems to be stabiliz
ing.  So let me run through the evidence very q
uickly.  If 
you look at the three-month change in the core CPI, it™s now above 2 percent compared 
with 
a 12-month change of 1.8 percent.  Inflation compensation, 
as measured by the five
-by-
five 
forward TIPS versus nominal Treasury has moved up a bit.  
Surv
ey measures of inflation 
expectations are generally stable, and I would argue that wage compensation growth trends are 

stable to slightly higher. 
So the fears I had of inflation getting unanchored to the downside seem to have 
diminished.  I could imagine that things could have worked out quite differently.  We™d have 

lower headline inflation feeding through into core inflation
.  T
hat, 
in turn
, would 
depress 
nominal 
wage 
growth and cause 
inflation expectations to be anchored 
to the downside.  And the 
fact th
at we haven™t seen that at this point, I think, makes that dynamic much less likely.  So I™m 
much more confident now that inflation will return to our 2 percent objective, subject to having 

sufficient growth to continue to close the output gap.  Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This discussion has appropriately focused on 
the significantly weaker
-than-expected incoming data on first-
quarter economic activity.  The 
staff forecasts a r
eturn to higher growth of around 2 percent or more in the second quarter and 
the second half of the year, and we™ve heard similar forecasts during this round of discussion 

from several of the 
Reserve 
Bank presidents.  The Tealbook forecast is, not surprisingly, 
consistent with what we see in the charts given 
to 
us by Bill Wascher
Šin particular, the two real 
GDP forecasts and their fan charts
.  S
o there™s a fair probability that will happen, but it™s not a 
      
    
               
         
       
    guarantee that we™re going to bounce right back in the coming quarter and there 
have been some 
weak data in April. 
In terms of elementary textbooksŠlooking at C + 
I + G + NXŠthe Tealbook forecast
s expect the bulk of the rebound in the second quarter to come from consumption, which is a 
reasonable forecast i
n light of expectations for employment and real disposable income.  
The 
Tealbook also expects government purchases to rebound significantly, net investment to decline 

more slowly than it did in the first quarter, and net exports to decline at the same rate 
as in the 
first quarter.
  This is all very interesting, but of course, we™re waiting for tomorrow™s first 
estimate of first
-quarter growth to clarify
, perhaps, 
what happened in the first quarter. 
When you focus on recent growth rates, you get a fairly pes
simistic picture of what™s 
happening, and we need to remind ourselves that the overall position of the economy is good.  

Let me start with the labor market.  The unemployment rate remains at 5.5 percent, a level that is 

not that much above many estimates of the natural rate today and is not above estimates of the 
natural rate that we had going into the March meeting.  A year ago we didn™t think we™d reach a 
rate that low until 2016
.  A
nd, importantly, some, though not all, 
of the other labor market 
indicato
rs whose behavior suggested that the U-3 unemployment rate understated the extent of 
labor market problems appear to be returning to pre-
recession levels. 
So, from the policy 
viewpoint, the basic question on output and employment is whether employment wil
l continue to 
grow at a rate sufficient to bring further improvement in the labor market in coming quarters. 
The inflation rate remains below target, and that is a problem.  However, one gets the 
impression that while we are committed to looking through tr
ansitory factors
Šparticularly dollar 
appreciation and the decline in oil prices, 
and gasoline prices in particular
Špopular discussion 
both here and in Europe has not focused on what that means.  It does not mean focusing solely 
      
     
           
          
            on core inflation, because both energy and import prices affect core inflation.  Core PCE 
inflation was 1.3 percent over the 12 months through March.  According to Board staff estimates 

in the Tealbook, increases in the dollar, which are very unlikely to persist indefinitel
y, 
are 
holding down that figure by 0.3 percentage point this year, bringing what could be called 

nontransitory core inflation to something like 1.6 percent.  And current energy price changes are 

reducing core inflation by another 0.1 percentage point, which brings you to a nontransitory core 

inflation rate of 1.7 percent. 
Now, you might be concerned about this if the low core numbers were being reflected in 
declining inflation expectations, but the survey measures seem to be relatively well anchored.  

And a
ll this, again, seems consistent with the data presented in the 
bottom two charts in Bill 
Wascher™s handout
, which show inflation coming back rather quickly to just below 2 
percent. 
I expect that the transitory factors
Šwhich are, fundamentally, 
oil and th
e exchange rate, which 
may or may not turn around reasonably soonŠwill gradually abate and possibly begin to reverse 
themselves.  We only need them to abate.  And labor market slack will continue to diminish, 
putting inflation on a path that, over the medi
um term
, will take us very close to our inflation 
target.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  A lot of people have talked about Q1 and 
have posed the question, 
ﬁWas Q1 an aberration?
ﬂ I certainly
 hope that it was an aberration, and 
I expect that it has been an aberration. 
And I don™t think, personally, that 
we™re going to learn 
that much from the GDP number tomorrow morning.  I
f it
™s kind of low or really low, it may not 
tell us very much because
 we had a really low number in the first quarter of 2014, and that didn™t 

seem to mean very much a quarter or two later. 
       
      
  
           
   
         
    
              
         I actually think the question is not so much 
ﬁWas Q1 an aberration?ﬂ 
but more the 
question that was implicit in some of 
Vice Chairman D
udley
™s analysis a minute ago
: ﬁAre 
there 
things at work in the economy that will give us a growth path for the rest of the year that
™s somewhat lower than what many of us expected toward the end of last year
?ﬂ Not that it will in 
any way resemble Q1, bu
t that somehow there are forces that are restraining growth a little bit 
more than we would have anticipated.  
Vice Chairman Dudley
 suggested one in his presentation.  
Another possible explanation of that phenomenon, should it occur, is the one that 
I think lies 
behind the Tealbook™s alternative scenario of a persistent slowdownŠ
that is, 
that there is a kind 
of confidence problem that™s inhibiting consumer spending despite the extended improvement in 

income fundamentals because of job growth and mayb
e a little bit of wage growth
, as well. 
I think for that reason one has to be a little agnostic right now in awaiting data over the 
next couple of months
Šas President Mester
, Vice Chairman Dudley, and several other people 
have said
.  A
lthough, as someoneŠI 
think it was 
Vice Chairman Dudley
Šalso said
, even then, 
it™s not clear how much some of the questions we™
ve been asking will be clarified because 
there
™s going to be a certain degree of snapback.  So instead of trying to speculate about all of 
that, I wan
ted to put on the table in a little bit more detail something 
Simon had an exhibit on in 
his presentation at the beginning of this meeting and that is the phenomenon of negative interest 

rates on European sovereign debt.  This phenomenon may be relevant to 
an assessment of the 
most likely medium
-term U.S. growth trend because of 
its potential 
effects
 on financial markets 
and the dollar, potential downside risks, andŠ
and I
™m not going to talk about this, but it may be 
relevant to the 
great debate about s
ecul
ar stagnation. 
There have been negative interest rates on some shorter
-term European sovereign debt for 
several years now, but the last six months or so have 
seen a qualitative change in the 
       
     
             
   
       
                    phenomenon in a number of respects.  First, negative rates have m
oved down along the yield 
curve in European countries with the strongest credit reputations to the point that, as in the chart 
that Simon distributed, we now see negative interest rates in a nontrivial portion of 5-
to 7
-year 
debt in the stronger European sovereigns.  Second, yield curves, as he mentioned, are quite flat in 

these countries.  I just checked this morning, and the spread between German 
2-year and 10-
year 
government bonds is about 40 basis points.  That compares to a spread of about 140 basis points 

for U.S. T
reasury securities.
  The 30-
year 
bund is still trading positively but 
at 63 basis points, 
which is a pretty low number for a 30-year.  As everybody knows, the Swiss 10-year sovereign 

issue earlier this month went out at negative rates, and 
I believe that™
s the first time 
in history 
that any sovereign debt of that duration has been priced negatively.  
And 
so, as 
far as Thomas 
Jordan knew, he was setting a precedent, or at least his country™s government was setting a 

precedent. 
Currently, 
as S
imon™s chart shows, more than 35 percent of all euro-zone government 
debt carries a negative interest rate. As recently as two weeks ago
, I think
, it was up over 
40 percent. There
™s been a little bit of an interest rate change since then, which has affec
ted the 
yields in some of those medium
-term tenors.
  Substantial portions of some non-euro-zone 
sovereigns, notably Denmark and Switzerland, also are priced at negative rates, and some 

shorter-duration corporate bonds of the highly rated European firms are 
also priced at negative 
rates now. 
Clearly, this is all related to long
-standing European economic problemsŠand, 
more 
immediately, first the prospect and now the reality of the ECB™s QE program.  It
™s also related
, I guess, 
to the relative scarcity of sov
ereign debt instruments 
issued by countries like Germany 
that continue to run tight fiscal policies and large current account surpluses, notwithstanding 
                                 
  
   
  
           
 economic conditions in the euro zone more generally.  
The unprecedented nature of this 
phenomenon has caused most thoughtful analysts to offer only tentative v
iews of the relative 

importance of various 
stories that explain
 why investors would hold longer-
term sovereigns with 
negative yields.  
Logically, I think the explanations fall into three 
categories. 
First is gloom 
about the long
-term prospects for the countries in question.  Now, it™s true, there™s not a whole 

lot of high optimism to be found about European growth prospects, but almost everybody 

discounts this as a dominant explanationŠ
that is, the idea that there
™s going to be negative 
growth 
or deflation
 for 10 years in Europe. 
The s
econd group of explanations are based on investor inertia, basicallyŠwhether 
forced, as in the case of pension funds and some other institutions, which may be required by 
law 
or regulation to hold certain percentages of extremely low-risk bonds, or unforced, as in the case 

of other investors who are themselves unsure of what all 
of 
this negative rate stuff means and are 
waiting right now to see what happens, and maybe 
chan
ge their investment decision if things 
don™t turn around relatively soon. 
The third set of explanations is that, in an environment that doesn™t offer 
a lot of 
appealing investment options, 
there may be some plays available here.  For example, you may 

get capital gains if yields go even further into negative territory, or you may get exchange rate 

gains whether from short-
term developments that cause quick swings in currencies or from 
longer-term appreciations of currencies with very low inflation or even deflation.  That is, if you 

think that there
™s going to be very low inflation in Switzerland for a long time to come and you 
are a U.S. investor, and you think that there™s going to be inflation in the United States, you 

might actually end up profiting by that play.  
As an example of th
is search for an investment 
play, I took note of one analyst™s advice to his clients that the best play may be in bonds with a 
        
           
  
       
           good bit of convexity so as to m
aximize the chances of catching the wave of large market 
movements when these trends reverse. 
To date, as a very good 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Market
Source 
report 
indicated, there have been relatively few discontinuities observed in European debt markets.  But 
I think this is the point at which Herb Stein™s memorable aphorism comes to mind, because 

unless the medium
-term prospects for Europe are a lot worse than most people think, there™
s going to be a reversal of negative rates at some point.  Even 
if there
™s no near
-term reversal 
resulting from sufficiently enhanced growth prospects or from sufficiently significant policy 

moves, a nontrivial number of investors might, over time, 
overcome their inertia and start 

seeking positive nominal yields elsew
here. 
There are 
a lot of potential outcomes here, some of which are relatively benign.  Others, 
though, are of potentially greater concern.  For example, if enough investors were caught flat
-footed by an unexpected change in ECB policyŠand, paradoxically, an unexpected 
improvement in European economic prospectsŠ
there could be some pretty significant turmoil in 
relevant markets, although there we would have to ask ourselves how much the financial turmoil 

would be offset by the prospect of improvement in the real economy.  I think of 
even greater 
concern to us would be a decision by those investors who did not initially move out of European 

sovereign debt that they couldn™t take the uncertainty or the negative rates any longer.  The 

natural destination for the
se investors is
, of course, U.S. T
reasury securities
, and I think that 
some of the dollar strengthening we™
ve seen this year has been attributable to 
the existence of 
investors
 who have already made such a move.  And it is possible, though very hard to judge 
how likely, that many more could follow.  If they were to do so, the recent modest retracing by 

the dollar could itself be halted and reversed pretty significantly. 
                  
       
      
                  On this last possibility, it™s worth mentioning that, notwithstanding the notable spread
s between 
bunds and T
reasury securit
ies, some European investors have apparently concluded that 
the roughly 80 basis point difference between German and U.S. two-
year 
bond rate
s is 
insufficient to compensate for currency
-hedging costs and other risks.  And 
this calculus is
, I think, what may be contributing to some of the otherwise-
hard
-to-explain changes in the yield 
curves of some of the stronger European sovereigns, since fundamentals are not really changing 
there but you™re seeing some movement in those yield curves, which I take to be everybody 

repositioning
, trying to figure out the best defensive place to be right now.  So investors may be 
moving around within bonds that are either euro-denominated or effectively tied to the euro. 
But if that spread b
etween 
U.S. T
reasury interest rates 
and rates on European sovereigns 
were to widen, either because we raise rates or because QE and other developments in the EU 

drove yields down even further there, then more European investors might be tempted to take the 

Atlantic plunge.  And this, in turn, could cause some market dislocation in Europe, a renewed 
unwelcome strengthening of the dollar, or both.  This is pretty speculative right now, but 
certainly in a context in which the trajectory of U.S. economic perfor
mance is at least in some 
question after the 
past few months, I think this situation is another reason for us not to be in a 
hurry to raise rates, at least not until we
™ve had a chance to see how investors are adapting, and, 
most importantly, what their adaptation means for the dollar. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming data for the first quarter have 
been weaker
, overall, than expected, including data for household and business spending, 
industrial production, and housing starts and permitsŠ
a little bit different but quite similar to the 

first quarter of 2014.  In addition, the initial BLS report on the employment situation for March 
              
   
   
        
      
     
       was also much weaker than expected, and 
that™
s different from last year
, when payroll gains 
continued 
to be 
very strong right through the first quarter.  And the question, of course, is how 
much signal to take.  
One reason to discount these data somewhat are the transitory factors that 
are likel
y to reverse, including bad winter weather and the West Coast port disruption 
as well as 
the technical factors that have been discussed.  Another is that GDP data may eventually be 

significantly revised and is a noisy signal
Šand I thought that the new exhibit in Tealbook, 
Book A, on prediction intervals was interesting and useful on that point.  
In any case, it makes 
sense to me to take some signal from this year™s weak first quarter, both for labor markets and 

for GDP
.  I think the baseline staff forecast 
strikes a reasonable balance for the rest of this year 
by assuming higher GDP growth, but not a significant catch-up quarter like we had in the second 

quarter 
of 
2014. On inflation, I would tentatively say I feel a little better about inflation, which is n
ow 
forecast to run at about 1½ 
percent
 for Q2, well above the Q1 readings.  Survey expectations 
remain stable.  Breakevens have moved up modestly across the curve since the March meeting, 

seemingly driven more by oil prices and liquidity rather than changing expectations.  
In light of 
all of the recent market readings that suggest concerns about low inflation, it™
s an improvement
, for a change, 
to read stories that fixed
-income traders are seeing a greater likelihood of inflation 
getting back to mandate-consistent levels and less risk of very low inflation.  
Of course, we may 

overread these market movements, and it may simply be that TIPS got a little cheap relative to 

nominals, and traders acted on that.  The underlying story of a return to 2 percent inflation over 

the medium term, given GDP and labor market outcomes as forecast, continues to make sense to 

me.  And I look forward to gaining more confidence from the incoming data on that.  I would 
      
  
   
    
                        
   worry more about lower inflation in the case that the economy does slip into a lower gear in 
growth and labor markets. 
Looking forward, the positive narrative is that consumer spending will increase to healthy 
levels supported by low energy prices, high confidence, and much better labor market conditions. 

In fact
, going back to 
Stan
™s basic equation, you could say that the U.S. economy has grown at 
about 2.7 percent over the last two years, with net exports at around zero.  With net exports now 

contributing negative 0.7 to negative 0.8 percentage point, you have to ask, where is growth 

going to come from?  It™s not going to come from government spending
, it™s not going to come 
from housing investment, and it™s not going to come from business investment in a world in 

which
 drilling is being significantly reduced.  So it really has to come from consumption.  And, 
in fact, in the medium
-term forecast
, PCE growth accounts for well more than 100 percent of the 
growth.  That narrative, I have to say, makes sense to me, but it does amount to an airplane 

flying on one engine.  S
o far
, the combination of the weak spending data and high consumer 
confidence says that the consumer, 
in effect
, is now 
ebullien
tly saving. 
In terms of the risks, one, of course, is that PCE growth does disappoint.  Another one, 
frankly, is that
, in a 
world of still
-slow growth, a return to stronger growth here could well lead 
to a tightening in financial conditions not so much through the rate channel as through the dollar 

channelŠi
t may not be a rate tantrum that is really the threat this time.
  We will see
, by the time 
of the June meeting, 
whether there is progress in addressing Greece™s fiscal crisis or whether 

Greece, instead, is headed for control
s on capital flows
, sovereign default, and the like, with 
potential disruption for the U.S. economy.  
We™ll see two more
 employment reports and 
a lot 
more data.  And we™ll know, I think, at that point, something about whether the first quarter™s 
      
               
      
  
  
  
   
         
        
    disappointment is transitory
 and anomalous or, instead, marks some kind of real loss of 
momentum. 
Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to reflect briefly on the quarterly 
assessment of financial stability and then turn to the outlook. 
Although overall risks to financial stability in 
the United States remain moderate, one 
area that 
bears 
heightened scrutiny is the potential for spikes 
in volatility due to changes in 
market liquidity.  In particular, we should be asking whether episodes of severe volatility, 
like 
the wild swings we saw
 in T
reasury 
bond yields on the morning of October 15, 
are likely to 
become the new normal.  Bond inventories held by broker-
dealers have declined
, in some part 
due to regulatory changes.  Separately, and predating the onset of Dodd-Frank, changes in 

marke
t structure may be at least as important in some markets
, for which automated and high-
frequency traders may now account for a majority of the activity.  Coupled with the big run-up 
we™ve seen of investments in bond mutual funds, this raises the specter of amplification of 
volatility and fire
-sale dynamics at times when investors looking to cash out could be surprised 
by lower-
than
-expected liquidity.  Together, 
these changes to the structure of financial markets 
could increase the volatility of asset price 
responses. A modest increase in the average 
level of 
volatility shouldn™t be a concern, particularly if market participants respond with more rigorous 
risk management
.  But a lack of liquidity that leads to large and self
-reinforcing swings in prices 
and market freezes during periods of stress could pose threats to financial stability and would be 

especially concerning in the case of the U.S. T
reasury market, with its traditional benchmark 
status. 
                 
          
               
  
   
     I think it
™s premature to draw conclusions for financial 
stability.  Some of the 
preoccupation with the decline in dealer inventories may, 
in fact
, be misplaced, and I think 
focusing too much attention on the critical role of dealers as reliable providers of liquidity during 
severe stress episodes suggests a ver
y high degree of amnesia.  Moreover, bid-
ask spreads are in 
line with historical norms. 
As we
™re learning from the investigation of October 15, we also do 
not yet fully understand the implications of the growing role of high-
frequency traders in these 
mar
kets. 
With heterogeneity across their size, business models, and trading strategies, some of 
their activities may
, in fact
, contribute to market liquidity, 
while 
some 
may be destabilizing. 
And, finally, it™s unclear how much leverage or high-
quality liqu
idity is embedded in bond 
mutual funds and how vulnerable they might be to liquidity mismatch and fire-
sale dynamics. 
The Dodd-
Frank requirement for mutual funds to undertake stress tests holds some promise, but 
only if deployed rigorously.  In short, I a
m very pleased that we are putting intense focus on this 
issue, and I think it will only rise in importance as the date of liftoff approaches. 
Now let me turn briefly to the outlook in the United States.  The recent data on the labor 
market, aggregate spen
ding, and industrial output have been disappointing.  The key question 
that we are wrestling with around this table is how much of this unanticipated weakness 

represents a slowing in the underlying momentum of activity and how much is due to transitory 

dis
turbances
?  The preliminary conclusion I would draw from the surprises in the recent data is 
that the negative impulse to U.S. aggregate demand from the combined effects of the plunge in 

oil prices and the surge in the dollar seem to be at least as strong as we had expected, while the 

expected positive effects have not materialized so far. 
Turning first to the positive effects, recent shocks were expected to be reflected primarily 
in stronger consumption growth, but the recent data have been disappointing.  Some of the 
               
   
  
  
   
            
      
  preliminary indicators of consumer spending are often substantially revised, so we perhaps 
should not take too much signal from them.  Indeed, auto salesŠamong the most reliable of 

indicators
Šrebounded strongly in March.  Nonetheless, subpar data on retail sales have now 
persisted for four months, suggesting that temporary infl
uences or statistical noise 
are 
not fully to 
blame.  On balance, it™s possible that the forces boosting consumer spending may not be as 

strong as we might have hoped.  
Weaker
-than
-expected consumption would be very unfortunate, 
because strength in other ca
tegories of aggregate demand remains elusive.  The recent data on 
housing starts and permits, for example, suggest that this sector continues to struggle. 
On the negative side of the ledger, the drop in oil prices was expected to curtail business 
investment related to drilling, while the dollar™s rise was anticipated to reduce net exports. A 

broad variety of indicators suggests that these effects are materializing with greater force than 

had been anticipated.  Drilling investment looks to have dropped at an annualized rate of 

50 percent in the first quarter
.  And orders and shipments of capital goods, as well as business 
sentiment, have also been weak and suggest that overall business investment will edge lower 

over the first half of this year.  
A variety o
f indicators also suggest 
that the 
stronger dollar is 
weighing significantly on activity.  Net exports subtracted 1 percentage point from growth in the 

fourth quarter, and the staff estimates 
a contribution of minus 
 percentage point in the first 
quarter.
  The national manufacturing purchasing 
managers™
 diffusion index of new export orders 
has been in contractionary territory for the past three months.  Manufacturing production 

declined at an annual rate of 1 percent, and the outlook for internationally or
iented firms has 
worsened significantly in recent days. 
       
               
  
                
       
      
In parallel, the recent labor market data suggest a slowing in the 
take-up 
of slack. 
Average monthly payroll employment gains were 200,000, down about 60,000 from last year™s 
pace
, and all of the indicators of slack have moved sideways in the last month. 
Of course, there™s a danger in reading too much into this data.  It™s entirely possible we™
ll see the stronger trend in underlying activity that was apparent in the second half of the year 

reassert it
self.  But it
™s important to keep in mind the international context.  On the one hand, we 
have seen some encouraging data from the euro area
Šdata on retail sales and industrial 

production, in particularŠwhich holds out some promise that aggregate demand wi
ll strengthen. 
And the dollar™s sharp ascent seems to have stalled, at least for now.  On the other hand, 

negotiations between Greece and its creditors remain challenging.  And although the macro data 

are
 notoriously unreliable, Chinese GDP growth looks to have slowed noticeably in the first 

quarter.
  On balance, the foreign economic outlook suggests continued weak demand in some 
important advanced foreign economies and signs of faltering growth in some important emerging 
market economies.  In this context
, the threat to price stability from stronger demand growth in 
the United States seems quite limited. 
Let me close by touching briefly on inflation.  Recent data have provided some 
reassurance that underlying inflation is not moving lower.  Oil prices have moved up somewhat 
further since March, and the 
3-month moving average of core PCE inflation has increased from 

the very low level reached in January.
  Even so, current estimates of both the 3- and 12-month 
changes in core PCE prices point to an underlying trend rate of only 1.4 percent.  And while it™
s reassuring that survey
-based measures of inflation expectations are remaining stable
, and there 
has been some improvement in market-
based measures, th
e latter 
are still materially below the 
levels 
that preva
iled
 until the middle of last year. 
The overall picture should suggest at least 
              
     
         
        
                
        
some caution about attributing all of the recent softening to transitory factors and puts a high 
premium on incoming data as we assess the timing of liftoff, which is 
the topi
c for tomorrow™s 
discussion.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, thank you.  Thanks to everyone for another interesting and 
thoughtful round of observations.  As usual, I™
ll try to summarize a couple of main themes and 
add a few remarks of my 
own. 
Starting with real activity 
and 
the labor market, everyone agreed that the news has been 
generally disappointing since our last meeting, although views 
differed 
about its implications. 
With respect to employment, the March employment report show
ed unexpected weakness in 
payroll gains, but many of you emphasized 
that 
one shouldn™t make too much out of one month™s 
report.  And, still, average gains in the first three months of the year are running 
at about 
200,000, which is a respectable pace, especiall
y given how weak output growth looks to have 
been in the first quarter. Other labor market indicators during the intermeeting period were 
mixed but generally, 
I think
, imply little change in resource utilization.  The unemployment rate 
stayed at 5.5 percent.  Broader measures of labor underutilization ticked down one-tenth, but 
the 
labor force participation rate fell 
one-tenth, and the employment-
to-population ratio was 
unchanged.  You noted that 
the JOLTS
 job openings rate ticked up slightly, but there wa
s also a 
slight decline in quits and hires, and 
at least 
the Board™s labor market condition
s index was 
unchanged.  I noted some reports from business contacts about increases in turnover and the fact, 
as President George mentioned, that people who are 
ﬁtur
ning over
ﬂŠwho are quittingŠ
appear 
to be moving to jobs 
in which
 they™
re receiving wage gains. 
On wages, I think everyone agreed that aggregate measures suggest very little pickup in 
wage growth, although some of you suggested that the reports you™
re recei
ving from your 
       
      
    
                  
        
    
  business contacts are beginning to hint at a broader acceleration in wage gains and labor market 
pressures.
  That said, many of you noted that wage pressures are confined to particular regions 
and sectors
, such as high-
tech 
in Silicon Valley
 and San Francisco.  But, 
as President Williams 
noted, the implications of movements in wages for inflation and 
for 
our criterion of wanting to 
have reasonable confidence that inflation will move back 
are 
debatable, and at least in recent 
years it doesn™t 
look like there
™s that much of a close link between 
nominal wages and inflation. 
With respect to spending, everyone remarked on the unexpected weakness we™
ve seen in 
a broad range of spending and production indicators, including retail sales, housing start
s, orders 
and shipments of capital goods, nonresidential construction, drilling, exports, and industrial 

output.  And, of course, tomorrow morning we receive the first-
quarter GDP preliminary 
estimate.
  The underlying cause of the Q1 slowdown and its implications for future growth is 
obviously very important and unclear at this point.  Many of you mentioned, and cited evidence 

from your business contacts, 
of the importance of bad winter weather and the West Coast port 
dispute.  A number of you mentione
d the fact that we have a pattern here
Šover many yearsŠ
of 
Q1 being unusually weak, suggesting some residual seasonality in the GDP figures.  
Views on 
the size of these transitory effects differ, but if they are substantial
, then the prospects for a quick 
return to moderate growth should be good. 
On the other hand, a number of you mentioned that other explanations for weaker growth 
that may be relevant in the first quarter could have implications 
for the remainder of the year.  In 
particular, the dollar rece
ived a good deal of mention.  It looks like the dollar may be having a 
significant negative effect
 and that many of your business contacts mentioned the negative 
effect 
they™re seeing from the stronger dollar.  In addition, the decline in oil prices does seem to be 

having a significant effect
Šmaybe larger than we anticipated on business investment and 
       
      
                       
                
    drilling activity, and we haven™t yet seenŠ
surprisingly
, perhapsŠmuch evidence of a positive 
effect
 on consumer spending.  The anecdotes that you reported fro
m your business contacts were 
somewhat mixed, but I interpreted those as being reasonably positive in terms of not seeing any 
really significant changes in business prospects. 
On the international side, a number of risks 
were mentioned: 
Greece
; China, 
whose growth looks like it slowed more than expected
; geopolitical risks that bear on oil prices
; and 
a very interesting discussion, I thought, of what™s happening in global financial markets, 
with 

negative rates in Europe and the potential for a 
global reshu
ffling of portfolios that could raise 
volatility or could have very significant effects either on the dollar or interest rates and could be 

triggered by a shift in U.S. monetary policy. 
On the inflation front, incoming data came in pretty much as the 
staff
 had expected.  Core 
inflation was a touch higher than expected.  Oil prices were up somewhat since our last meeting, 

and the broad dollar exchange rate actually fell a little bit during the intermeeting period.  S
ome 
of you noted that these are welcome developments from an inflation perspective, as they indicate 

that the downward impetus 
provided by 
oil and the dollar to 
inflation is ebbing and shouldn™t 
continue. We had a nice discussion of measures of inflation expectations, with survey measures 

generally remaining stable and market-based measures of inflation compensation moving up 

slightly, although 
they are 
still bel
ow where they were last summer. 
President Williams™
s discussion about the relevance of these inflation expectations to inflation forecasts was 

interesting.  They don™t seem to be very good forecasts of inflation, and it is interesting 
that 
we have, 
I thin
k, 
repeatedly noticed that these measures are more heavily influenced by oil prices 
and movements in oil prices than, 
it would seem
, is reasonable. 
             
  
            
                   On the other hand, with respect to inflation and the outlook for inflation, a number of you 
suggested
, I thi
nk, that we could be in for a period in which inflation undershoots our objective 
for many, many years to come
 and, crossing over into the policy domain, suggested quite a bit of 
concern that we may be in for a very long period of an inflation undershoot.  That took us to 
some interesting observations on the question of 
what the equilibrium real rate is
; the possibility 
that it may be persistently depressed or not, as some think
; a debate about what
™s happening with 
the equilibrium real rate
; and the possib
ility 
that 
if the equilibrium real rate really is depressed
, what 
that implies for our monetary policy, and particularly for our inflation target, which is 
something that maybe we want to get back to and consider. 
Okay.  Let me just stop there as 
a summary
 of what I heard.  Are there any comments or 
corrections anyone wants to offer?  [No response] 
Then
 I™d like to offer some comments of my 
own, then we can quit and go to dinner.  I, of course, was also disappointed in incoming data on 

employment, spending, and production.  I recognize this may be just another soft spot, akin to 
what we saw last year and in a number of years past
, and I definitely think we should be careful 
not to overreact to what is a few weeks™ worth of news.  I find it reassuring that indicators of 
consumer confidence remain pretty upbeat, and I really haven™t altered my modal outlook for 

employment and output over the medium term.  I guess if I were updating my SEP forecast now, 

I would mark down projected growth this year, but modestly.  That said, I do find the widespread 

nature of the recent negative surprises disconcerting
, and, at a minimum, I am more worried 
about downside risk and 
am 
more uncertain about the outlook. 
In March my concerns focused on the external sector, and now I see question marks 
pertaining to the underlying strength of domestic aggregate demand as well.  I find it particularly 

disturbing that the slowdown in business investment appears to have become more widespread. 
                  
     
    
                In March the weakness appeared concentrated i
n drilling activity, and I think now we are seeing 
outright declines in real equipment outlays and nondrilling, nonresidential construction as well.  
The Tealbook assumes 
that investment in intangibles is still growing at a solid pace, but we 
actually have no idea what
™s happening there because reliable source data won™t be available for 
some time.  The broad weakness in business fixed investment may be partly explained by the 

slowdown in aggregate sale
s and output via an accelerat
or effect, but conceivably other factors 
that may prove to be more persistent may also be at work, and I worry about that. 
I™
m also concerned that we may not see a pickup in residential investment nearly as large 
as the Tealbook forecast
s this year.  Housing starts and permits have been incredibly weak even 
though mortgage rates are low, employment and income are rising, and demographic trends seem 

to call for a faster pace of building.  
According to staff calculations, 
if housi
ng remains weak 
it could shave 
¼ percentage 
point or so off the Tealbook projection of real GDP in the second half 
of this year and in 2016. 
I worry most about retail sales having been soft for several months now.  Savings rates 
moved up 1 
full percentage 
point since the fourth quarter despite large gains in employment, a 

sharp decline in oil prices, record equity prices, 
a solid increase in house prices, and low 
borrowing costs.  I suppose one could explain this by saying that bad winter weather and other 

transitory factors are at work here
.  I suppose supporting such an explanation is 
the fact that 
we did see strong auto sales in March, and consumer sentiment, even though the C
onference 
Board 
number fell today, is still pretty high.
  And I suppose, for tho
se reasons
, the Tealbook forecast 
seems reasonable to me, but I must say my confidence in the Tealbook forecast that projects that 

PCE growth is going to pick up to 4 percent really, 
to me
, is a leap of faith, and I worry that we 
may not see a pickup that™
s that 
large.
  And as several of you have mentioned, at this point the 
                          
         
             
    
  only real source of strength in the economy is consumer spending.  I
f there are question marks 
associated with
 consumer spending, that puts a lot of question marks on the outlook overal
l. I don™t think the risks from the external sector have diminished.  Maybe they have even 
increased to some degree. 
The s
taff has marked down estimates of export growth in the first 
quarter 
appreciably
.  It may well be that the drag 
generated by
 past dol
lar appreciation and slow 
foreign economic growth could be greater than previously assumed.  I also worry about the 
Greek debt situation
.  If Greece were to put in place controls on capital movements 
or, worse, 
exit the euro, 
I think it
™s hard to know what 
effect
 that would have on the dollar.  I™m not sure 
whether it would cause the dollar to appreciate or depreciate
, and 
I think there are reasonable 
stories either way. 
I certainly am hopeful that information between now and June will help us resolve some 
of these uncertainties. We will see
, certainly
, two more employment reports and a range of 
indicators on spending and production that could tell us whether we™ve been through a soft patch 
or if there
™s a more significant loss in momentum.
  But by June, 
the spending data for the second 
quarter will still be incomplete, and we shouldn™t underestimate the possibility that new data will 
confuse rather than clarify our assessments of the state of the economy. 
As for inflation, I don™t really have anything to add to what
™s been said.  Even though 
core CPI inflation came in a touch higher than expected, overall, the incoming data on wages and 

prices has been roughly in line with expectations.  My own outlook is little changed.  Both core 

and headline PCE 
inflation 
rates 
are running well below 2 percent and are likely to do so for the 
rest of the year, barring some major surprise in oil prices or a fall in the dollar.
  And the April 
Tealbook projects that headline inflation will be under 1 percent this year on a Q4-over-Q4 basis, 
                              and th
at core inflation this year is only going to run at 1¼ 
percent.  Those forecasts seem quite 
reasonable. 
Given this inflation outlook, the likelihood that employment and output will expand at 
only a moderate pace in coming quarters, and uncertainties about the global economy, I 
personally think it™s unlikely that the 
conditions we
™ve set out for a firming of policy will be met 
by June, but I have an open mind.  We™ve agreed to be data dependent, and that assessment could 

certainly change 
as we receive additional data on real activity and inflation in coming weeks. 
So let me stop there
.  We should probably break for dinner.  Tomorrow, 
Thomas will 
give his briefing. We may have to make some changes in the statement when we see what
™s in 
the GDP report, but I think we have enough time tomorrow morning to do that.  We™ll begin 
tomorrow 
at 9:00 a.m. 
[Meeting recessed] 
         
   
                       
            
          
   
    
              
  
   
                                                             
  
 April 29 Session 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  I guess 
we should get started
, and 
I™d like 
to first turn to Bill
 Wascher to give us an update on this morning™s GDP announcements. 
MR. WASCHER.
6  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll be referring to the handout 
titled ﬁMaterial for Gross Domestic Product Update.ﬂ  You 
have a table that 
summarizes some of the key aspects of this morning™s GDP data, and the first thing I 

would say is that it™s nice to be lucky once in a while.  [Laughter] 
As you can see 
from the first line of the table, the BEA™s advance estimate of real GDP 
growth in the 
first quarter was 0.2 percent at an annual rate.  That™s 
one-
tenth of 
1 percentage point 
higher than 
our estimate
 in the Ap
ril Tealbook. 
Among the major spending categories, 
real PCE growth slowed from 4.4 percent 
in the fourth quarter to 1.9 
percent in the first quarter, about as we had expected. 

Business fixed investment, which is labeled here by its official title, 
nonresidential 
private 
fixed 
investment, fell 3.4 percent, and residential investment edged up 
1.3 percent.  Again, both of th
ose were close to our expectations. 
The next three lines show some offsetting misses that turned out not to have much 
effect on the top-line GDP number.  In particular, government spending fell by less 

than we were expecting
, net exports fell by more, and 
there was a greater 
accumulation of inventories than we™d written down.  
In terms of their contributions 

to growth, net exports were estimated to have subtracted 1¼ 
percentage points 
from 
GDP growth in the first quarter, while inventories added 
¾ percentag
e point to 
growth.  I should note that, 
for these two categories in particular
, the BEA does not 
have complete data for the 
first 
quarter
.  In the advance GDP estimate
, inventories 
and net exports are based on two months of data and BEA™s 
assumed values fo
r the 
third monthŠin this case, for 
March. 
Our staff had a chance to look at the monthly assumptions and other details of 
both of these components, and Steve mentioned to me that his colleagues in the 

Division of I
nternational 
Finance 
are inclined to disc
ount some of the negative miss 
in net exports between their forecast and the BEA™s estimate.
  Going the other way, it 
looks as though the BEA wrote down a very high assumption for inventories in 

March, and we might be inclined to discount a little bit of that.  So I don™t know that 

it would have much effect on the top line.  B
ut I 
believe
 our thinking at this point 
would be that net exports aren™t quite as weak as the BEA has estimated, and 
that 
inventories may not be quite as large. 
The bottom of the table shows 
the BEA™s estimate of consumer price inflation. 
Total PCE prices fell 
2 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter, the same as our 
6 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
           
        
     
                
                                                                               
  
 Tealbook estimate, while core PCE prices rose 
nine
-tenths 
of 
1 percent, 
one
-tenth 
more than we were expecting. 
Finally, I
™ll
 just mention that real disposable personal income rose at an annual 
rate of 6.2 percent in the first quarter, while the saving rate came in at 
5.5 percent.  

Both of those figures were also close to our expectations.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Are there questions for Bill?  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. Bill, is the staff embarrassed that you missed this by 50 percent? 
[Laughter]  No, congratulations on this.  This is a good call, and I think it was useful information 
to bring to the Committ
ee.  It™s a tough job, and when you get something right, you should 
definitely take some credit for it. 
MR. WASCHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great.  Then let™s turn to Thomas, who is going to brief us on 
our monetary policy decisions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.7  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™ll be referring to the handout 
labelled ﬁMaterial for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.ﬂ 
At previous meetings and, indeed, yesterday, several of you discussed the 
possibility of market turbulence in the run-up to, or following, the onset of policy 
tightening.  Although the Committee now has communications tools, including the 
SEP, that it did not have at the start of previous tightening cycles, unexpected 

movements in yields and volatility, up or down, may nevertheless occur even if the 

expected policy 
rate 
path does not shift markedly.  The upper-
left panel of your first 
exhibit provides some perspective by showing the staff™s estimate of the 10-
year 
Treasury term premium over the past 25 years.  The vertical bars high
light three 
episodes:  the beginning of the tightening cycles in 1994 and 2004 and the taper 

tantrum in 2013.  Within the shaded 18-month windows around these events, term 

premiums moved substantially.  But they also did so at other timesŠ
and likely in 

res
ponse to factors other than monetary policy. 
The upper-
right panel isolates the episodes associated with the three shaded 
regions and, for reference, the current episode conditional on the staff™s assumption of 

liftoff at the September meeting.  As shown by the red line, in 1994, the term 

premium rose substantially in the months following the onset of tightening.  By 

contrast, in 2004, in blue, it moved up several months before the federal funds rate in 

response to stronger economic data that moved up the expected timing of policy 
7 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
                       
     
  
       
           
   
    
  
             
 tightening.  But the term premium then began to decline and continued to do so over 

the remainder of 2004Š
the well
-known ﬁconundrumﬂ episode.  Finally, in 2013, the 
term premium began to rise around the time of Chairman Bernanke™s JEC testimony 

in late May, apparently reflecting market participants™ reassessment of the outlook for 

asset purchases and possibly policy rates.  As shown in the middle-
left panel, these 
term premium movements may, to some extent, have reflected uncertainty about the 

future course of monetary policy.  The panel shows the width of the 90 percent 

confidence interval for the federal funds rate 12 months ahead, derived from options 

on federal funds futures. The term premiums are highly correlated with this pro
xy for 
policy uncertainty in the 1994 and 2004 episodes, but less so in 2013, presumably 

because uncertainty in that episode was driven less by the path of the federal funds 

rate over the next 12 months than by the course of asset purchases and longer
-term 
rates. 
These experiences suggest that, even in a context in which the FOMC™s policy 
communications tools are more extensive than in the 1994 and 2004 cycles, it may be 

prudent for the Committee to consider its likely response to unexpected changes in 

term
 premiums that might occur around the time when it begins policy firming.  A 
special exhibit in the ﬁMonetary Policy Strategiesﬂ section of the Tealbook, Book B, 

provides some background that might be useful.  As shown by the dotted black line in 

the middle-right panel, the staff projects that the 10-
year term premium will rise at a 
modest pace after the Committee is assumed to start raising the federal funds rate. 

This slow projected rise in the term premium reflects in part the waning effects on 

longer-t
erm yields of the Committee™s asset holdings.  The magenta line presents the 
path for the term premium in a scenario, labeled ﬁTightening Tantrum,ﬂ that is similar 

in magnitude to, albeit less persistent than, the rise in the term premium that began in 
May 2013 (the green line).  As shown in the lower-
left panel, in the ﬁtantrumﬂ case, 
optimal control would call for a more gradual increase in the federal funds rate for 
several quarters, with the federal funds rate running, on average, 35 basis points 

below 
the optimal control path associated with the Tealbook baseline (the black line) 
over the four years following the shock. 
Recent public discourse has largely focused on the specter of another market 
tantrum.  However, a repeat of the 2004 experience, in whi
ch term premiums 
remained surprisingly low for a while, is also a possibility.  For example, such an 

outcome might occur through the effects of the very large asset purchase programs 

that are under way in Europe and Japan.  The yellow line in the middle-
right panel 
shows a scenario for the path of the term premium that is similar to the 2004 

conundrum episode.  In this instance, optimal control would call for a federal funds 

rate path that is 40 basis points higher, on average, over the next four years. 
The 
lower
-right panel highlights a few caveats. The tantrum scenario abstracts 
from the possibility of widespread liquidity or solvency problems, a point worth 

mentioning in light of recent commentary about reduced liquidity in key markets, 

which Simon discussed in his briefing.  More generally, the scenarios do not examine 

the consequences of term premium movements that are associated with other 

disturbances.  If, for example, the term premium fell because of weaker economic 
           
                   
        
       
         
          
    
  
  activity abroad and associated fl
ight-
to-safety flows, the optimal policy response 
could be to keep the federal funds rate lower, not higher, than in the baseline.  Finally, 

the appropriate policy response to either scenario depends importantly on the 

persistence of the deviation of the t
erm premium from its baseline path, which will be 
known only in retrospect.  In response to such scenarios, policymakers may wish to 

emphasize that they will respond to financial conditions that are judged inconsistent 

with the achievement of the FOMC™s objectives. 
Turning to the draft policy alternatives, thanks to the excellent work of Bill 
Wascher and his colleagues, I can discuss the alternatives as distributed yesterday. A 

key issue for your decision today is how to convey the implications of recent and 

incoming economic information for the likely timing of policy normalization.  First, 

as indicated at the top of exhibit 2, assuming that the Committee decides to remove 

time
-based forward guidance from the statement, it will primarily rely on paragraphs 
1 and 2 to speak to its assessment of whether its criteria for liftoff
 have been met or 
when they are likely to be met.  In broad terms, with alternative B, the Committee 

would communicate that the conditions for an increase in the federal funds rate are 

not yet in place, while alternative C would suggest that those conditions will likely be 

in place in the near future.  Alternative A would indicate that the preconditions for 

liftoff are unlikely to be met in the near future. 
The second set of bullets summ
arizes how each of the three alternatives may 
shape expectations for the timing of liftoff.  On the Committee™s criterion that it 

would need to see ﬁfurther improvement in the labor market,ﬂ alternative B states that 

ﬁunderutilization of labor resources wa
s little changedﬂ over the intermeeting period, 
citing the moderation in the pace of job gains and the steady unemployment rate.  

Regarding the second criterion, that the Committee would need to be ﬁreasonably 
confident that inflation will move back to its
 2 percent objective over the medium 
term,ﬂ alternative 
B updates the description of recent data in paragraph 1 and retains, 
in paragraph 2, the expectation that inflation will 
ﬁrise gradually toward 2 percent 
over the medium term.ﬂ  Thus, alternative B does not signal a change in confidence 
about the inflation outlook. 
In addition, the Committee noted in the March minutes that the timing of the first 
increase in the federal funds rate would also depend on the evolution of economic 

conditions and the outloo
k.  In that regard, alternative B provides the judgment that 

the Committee sees the recent weakness in economic activity either 
ﬁin part
ﬂ or ﬁat 
least in partﬂ as transitory and indicates that, despite the first
-quarter slowdown, the 
Committee still expect
s economic growth at a pace that will lead to further 

improvement in labor market conditions.  Under alternative B, the Committee would 

remain fully data dependent and offer no time-based guidance about how soon the 

conditions for liftoff are likely to be 
met. 
By contrast, alternative C would communicate the Committee™s readiness to begin 
policy normalization in the near term.  Paragraph 1 indicates that, despite a steady 

jobless rate, ﬁsome labor market indicators suggest that underutilization of labor 

resources continued to diminish.ﬂ  It expresses a more positive reading of recent news 
               
    
    
    
           
    
    
              
                   
         
on inflation and notes that, although inflation remained below the Committee™s 

objective, ﬁit was no longer declining.ﬂ  In addition, paragraph 
1 of alternative C 

attributes this winter™s economic slowdown largely to transitory factors. Paragraph
 2 suggests not only that the Committee continues to anticipate moderate economic 

growth and further improvement in labor market conditions, but also that it now has 

become more (or perhaps somewhat more) confident that inflation ﬁwill rise 

gradually to 2 percent over the medium term.ﬂ  Having made those assessments of 

recent developments and the outlook, the Committee would adopt new guidance in 

paragraph 3.  Rather than repeating t
he criteria for liftoff adopted in the March 
statement, the Committee would announce that ﬁeconomic conditions mayﬂ or ﬁlikely 

will soon warrant an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate.ﬂ  While 

alternative C reintroduces a time dimension 
to the forward guidance, it also retains 
the more general data
-dependent statement that the timing of the adjustment would 
depend on realized and expected progress toward the Committee™s objectives of 

maximum employment and 2 
percent inflation. 
Finally, with alternative A, the Committee would express heightened concerns 
about the underlying strength of the economic expansion, downside risks to the 

outlook for the labor market, and possible persistence of below-
target inflation. 
In paragraph 1, in 
alternat
ive A, 
as in alternative B, the Committee describes 
underutilization of labor resources as ﬁlittle changed,ﬂ but it stresses that inflation 

ﬁcontinued to run well below the Committee™s longer
-run objective.ﬂ  It does not 

offer any judgment on how much of this winter™s slowdown may have been 

transitory. Additionally
, in 
paragraph 2™s assessment of 
the outlook, 
under 
alternative 
A it would be report
ed that the Committee now sees the risks to economic activity 
and the labor market as ﬁtilted to the downside.ﬂ And the statement would voice 
concern that ﬁinflation could run substantially belowﬂ 2 percent for a protracted 
period, and possibly that ﬁthe pace of improvement in the labor market could remain 

slow.ﬂ 
Given these risks to the outlook, alternative A 
introduces a somewhat more 
stringent precondition for the initiation of policy firming, stating in paragraph 3 that 

the Committee would need to see inflation ﬁclearly moving up towardﬂ the 

Committee™s 2 percent objective rather than being ﬁreasonably confi
dentﬂ that it will 
do so.  In addition, alternative A emphasizes concern about the inflation outlook by 

indicating that ﬁthe Committee is prepared to use all of its tools as necessary to return 

inflation to 2
 percent within one to two years.ﬂ All told, alternative A would 
communicate that liftoff appears unlikely for some time. 
Thank you, Madam Chair.  That concludes my prepared remarks, and I will be 
glad to take any questions. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there questions for Thomas?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHA
RT.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Thomas, I™d like to ask you about your 
thinking as you drafted 
alternative C.  Specifically
, I™m referring to the bracketed choices in 
                  
             
            
             paragraph
s 2 and
 3, and I™m interested in how the staff is thinking about the choice of the 
ﬁhas 
become somewhat more confidentﬂ
 and 
ﬁmay soon warrant an increaseﬂ language
, as opposed to 
the 
ﬁhas become more confidentﬂ 
and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ language. 
These two language options could be seen as a sequence of statements over, say, two 
meetings.  They could convey increasing certainty on the part of the Committee or increasing 

probability of a liftoff decision.  Alternatively, I can imagine choosing between these two 

language options 
at the 
meeting ahead 
of liftoff
, with the choice depending on the probability of 
the 
liftoff decision. 
So I can see a case for both of these interpretations of the alt
-C bracketed 
language as something we might consider in the future, and 
I wonder if the staff had either of 
these ideas in mind or 
if 
it™s just providing an option for this meeting alone. 
MR. LAUBACH. 
We also explored the choice between ﬁmayﬂ and ﬁlikely willﬂ 
in 
previous drafts of a
lternative C and in other materials that
, if I remember correctly
, were sent to 
the Committee ahead of the January meeting.
  In my view, just focusing for now on that, one key 
question is how the Committee wants to strike a balance between, on the one hand, sending some 

advance notice and, on the other hand, emphasizing data dependence.  So I think one key 

question for you at some point will be, how firmly do you want to express that the next meeting 

might be likely for liftoff
, and how do you 
balance that against 
the fact 
that
, of course, over
 any 
intermeeting
 period, yo
u will receive data that may change the 
course of policy?  T
hat™s some 
of 
the thinking that went into the considerations about 
ﬁmay
ﬂ and ﬁ
likely will.
ﬂ As to the ﬁsomewhatﬂ in 
paragraph 2, you
™re right that you can see a pair between
Š ﬁsomewhatﬂ in 
paragraph 2 could perhaps fit better with ﬁmayﬂ in p
aragraph 3 because it still 
emphasizes a little bit more that you™re reserving judgment.  So that™s certainly a possibility. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
          
   
    
     
          
     
      
           
     MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes
Šthank you, Madam C
hair.
  I had a question and a 
comment.  The comment is on page 1 of the handout that you provided, ﬁMarket Expectations 
and Policy Issues.ﬂ  I thought that was a very nice set of experiments, and 
I like the idea of 

having these three possible cases
 and 
lay
ing them out.
  My own thinking is, focus more on the 
tantrum case, but, 
certainly
, it™s useful for us to keep in mind 
the conundrum case as well. 
My comment is about the use of optimal control as a way to evaluate the appropriate 
policy response here.  
Whe
n I think about what was going on in these episodes
, it wa
s really that 
there were uncertainties in markets about what the 
Committee was trying to achieve with policy 
Šand you used 
the same language, I believe
, when I was listening to you. 
But
 optimal con
trol, 
of course, involves the 
assum
ption that 
what we were trying to achieve 
with
 policy 
is all pretty 
much common knowledge. 
For example, 
in the tantrum case, we might want a more aggressive response in order to 
rebuild lost reputation, 
in some sense
, abo
ut what we™re actually trying to achieve. In the 
conundrum case
, the same is true
Šwe might want to be even tighter than what™s built in here, 
because we™re actually trying to convince markets that we are really concerned about inflation 
getting too high.  
But
 in the tantrum case, 
we might 
be even easier than what™s described by 
optimal control, because we have this need to rebuild reputation in 
the eyes of the markets 
about 

the fact that 
we really
 care about getting inflation back up to 2 
percent. 
That™s a comment.  The question I had actually builds, 
I think
, on what Dennis was 
asking about alternative C.  I™ll ask the same question about a
lter
native B.  As you described on 
page 2, which was a great way to summarize 
what™s in the various alternatives, we™re really 

relying on p
aragraphs 1 and 2 to speak to the Committee™s assessment of 
the 
criteria for liftoff.
 I         
  
   
            
       
             
         guess we™re relying on the evolution of the data over time to allow the public to figure out what 
we think 
is relevant. 
Another way to proceed is to actually be more explicit about, 
ﬁOkay, we™ve had some 
incoming dataŠparagraphs 1 and 2.  We just saw GDP now.  H
ow does that affect the li
kelihood 
of liftoff in, say, June?
ﬂ  So we could have provided more explicit guidance about that in the 
statement in 
alternative B.
  And I guess my question is, what were you thinking in not doing 
this? 
MR. LAUBACH. 
I have 
two thoughts, perhaps, on that, and maybe Simon can also 
weigh in on 
at least one of them
.  N
amely
, as Simon showed you yesterday, there was a question 
in the primary 
dealer survey on which factors market participants view as most relevant for the 
achievement of reasonable confidence.
  So there is an indirect route in the sense that what you 
say in the statement will be evaluated even though you may not have a direct statement in there 

about how 
the Committee is no
w more or less confident than before.  Presumably, 
market 
participants will
 look at your characterization of these various factors and draw conclusions from 

that about how your confidence has shifted. 
I™m not quite sure how easy it would be to try 
to come up with a summary statement for 
the degree of confidence because, well, my 
guess is that various participants rank different 
criteria differently, and I think that
™s evident from your comments.  Therefore, I believe 
this is a 
step that™s left to market participants and the public in general to draw conclusions about this. 
MR. POTTER. 
Prior to the GDP release, I think 
the 
dealers put an average 
probability of 
13 percent on liftoff in June.  Let™s assume that™s moved down to 8 
percent 
or something 
right 
now based on the 
GDP release
.  If you felt that that 
8 percent 
was way t
oo low compared 
with 
the likelihood that you might lift off in June, then you might want to try 
to indicate something.  
                                          
    
      Before it was way too high, but it 
seems a little bit 
less likely that you would want to indicate 
something at 8 percent. 
MR. KOCHERLAKO
TA.  That™s helpful.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Are there other comments or questions?  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thomas, I wonder if you could, to help us understand these scenarios, 
refresh the Committee™s memory about the extent to which overnight 
short-
term interest rates 
that we influence directly through the federal funds rate target can affect economic activity in 
the 
FRB
/US model 
independently of the value
s of the 
5-, 7-, and 10-
year interest rates
, which appear 
to figure prominently in th
ese scenario
s. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  Monetary policy transmission 
in the 
FRB/US 
model 
is largely through 
long-
term rates
, so I™m
Šlet me think. 
MR. LACKER.  Entirely? 

MR. LAUBACH
.  Largely
Šwell, to varying degrees.  F
or example, there are some rates 
in there
, like
 the rate on auto loans, that arguably are not quite as long term.  So they are not only 
a 10-year Treasury 
yield
. But it™s true that the funds rate
, in and of itself, doesn™t carry a whole 
lot of weight in monetary policy transmission, but only through its ef
fects on longer
-term yields. 
By implication, 
these shifts in term premiums that we are considering in the scenarios are 

actually quite powerful.  So they do have 
a substantial macroeconomic effect
s. 
MR. LACKER. Well, 
I have two follow-ups.  One is, when I think about this, 
I have 
difficulty reconciling that structure with the impression that a sizable volume of bank lending 

among 
the bankers I talk to seems to be priced off LIBOR and other short
-term interest rates. 
The s
econd thing is, what would this imply for Taylor r
ules? 
Have we been wrong for 
years?  Should we have been including a ter
m premium thing that we accommodate in the Taylor 
           
  
       
   
     
      
  
  
    
  
  
               rules? 
Should we think about policy differently now that we™
ve got this transmission 
mechanism 
whose 
strength varies
 depending on what the term premium does? 
MR. LAUBACH
.  There are two separate aspects to this.  One is, what if monetar
y policy 
transmission also importantly works through term premiums?  That means that term premiums 
systematically vary with the path of short-
term interest rates. 
To some extent, that is actually the 
case in 
the 
FRB
/US model
Šnamely
, that the term premium is an endogenous function of 
expected future output gaps.  So to the extent that choices about the path of the funds rate affect 

the outlook for future output gaps, that has an added effect by moving term premiums 

endogenously 
as well. 
A separate ques
tion is, should a Taylor r
ule also take into account other financial 
conditions more broadly?
 And there, arguably, a Taylor rule that responds only to current 
economic conditions may have a shortcoming because it responds only to current inflation and, 

say, the current output gap, whereas financial conditions that you observe today, like movements 
in the dollar and things like that, clearly affect your outlook in the future.  So that is not an asp
ect 
that is captured by Taylor r
ules that
 just mechanically respond to current conditions.  Of course, 
for example, if you look at optimal control, 
it obviously knows about these things because it™
s run under 
perfect 
foresight.  Therefore, agents anticipate that changes in financial conditions 
today more broadly, including changes in term premiums, will affect the future outlook. 
MR. LACKER. 
Let me follow up further.  When I look at the plot in the upper-
left
-hand 
corner, if I took Taylor rules and incorporate this term premium, d
oesn™t that mean that an 

augmented Taylor r
ule should now predict interest rates 
2 percentage points higher 
for
 1994 than 
would a Taylor r
ule without that augmentation
?                            
         
    
          VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  That™s a
ssuming you have a time-constant equilibrium 
real rate, but the equilibrium real rate could be moving, too. 
MR. LACKER.  Yes, there
™s that.
  There™s the gap.  There™s inflation.  But now we add 
the term premium
, and that™
s poi
nting in the other direction by 2 percentage points. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  If you look just at, say, the lower-frequency movement, it now seems 
as though, 
on a
n almost secular or at least a highly persistent basis, the term premium seems 
about 2 percentage points 
lower than it was back then.
  That is an effect that arguably ought to be 
reflected already in current conditions. 
MR. LACKER.  Current conditions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  If you thought about a sudden drop right nowŠ 

MR. LACKER. 
What about the current Taylor r
ule?
  Shouldn
™t it be in the current 
Taylor r
ule, too
?  We should include 
it. MR. EVANS.  It™s in the current Taylor rule through current conditions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  W
ell, I think the point I
™m trying to make is that this 
is a 
secular 
downshift 
in the term premium from a mean of what looks like around 2 percent in the 1990s to 
about close to 
zero
 now.  But that™
s not a recent development
, that™
s been persistent since
 the 
mid
-2000s.  T
he decline in the term premium
, in and of itself, arguably had, at some point, 
a stimulative effect
.  Assuming that this really occurred in isolation
, as I referred to in my briefing, 
you could seeŠ 
MR. LACKER.  So it
™s affected the current gap and the current inflation rate. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  Exactly. 
MR. LACKER.  But your optimal control says that, even given the current gap and the 
current inflation rate
, there should be some response of the funds rate to the term premium. 
               
  
   
     
                         MR. LAUBACH. Yes
, but those are projected future changes in the term premium, not 
where it is today
.  So my point is, if you had just observed 
in recent history a 
2 percentage point 
decline in the term premium, then if that had happened in isolation, 
that should indeed affect 
your outlook.  Your outlook should be stronger, all else being equalŠagain, wit
h the caveat ﬁall 
else 
being equal.ﬂ  If the 2 percentage point decline occurred in the context of a flight to safety, 

that™s no longer so obvious.  But if that had recently occurred, then, indeed, 
there is a little bit of 

a discrepancy in terms of your standard Taylor rule response only to current conditions.  If these 

current conditions haven™t responded yet to that decline in the term premium, then there is a bit 

of 
a tension since 
you project that 
that decline in the term premium, in itself
, actually is going to 
provide a boost. 
If you think, for example, about the staff projection, 
it is, very importantly, driven by our 
assessment of financial conditions today and over the projection period.  So the Taylor r
ule does 
take account of that over the projection period. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Governor Fischer, do you have a two-hander? 
MR. FISCHER. 
Yes, it™
s a two
-hander.  
What is the correlation between the term 
premium and the difference between the short
-term rate and the long-
term rate?  Is it high? 
MR. 
LAUBACH
.  The correlation between the term premium and the slopeŠ
sadly, I do 
not know this right off the top ofŠ 
MR. 
POTTER
.  It has to be high on a daily basis. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It has to be high. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Yes, i
t would be high. 
MR. POTTER. 
That™s because the short
-term
 rate is not moving that much
, because the 
FOMC
 is not moving 
it, but the 10-year is moving around every day. 
                                      
    
         
         
  
         MR. EVANS.  Yes, arithmetic, I guess. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS. 
My question is related to P
resident Lacker™s topic, but I guess it
™s really more about how we think about movements in the term premium in general.  A
s I understand 
the 
FRB
/US model and 
the way you described it, Thomas, is that these 
movements 
have very powerful effects because they affect all asset prices. 
They 
affect mortgage rates, the 
stock market, and the 
exchange rate. These 
movements are really spilling over throughout 
financial conditions, 
and 
so have a very powerful effect on GDP, employment, and inflation. 
The research on the effects of QE
ŠI™m thinking of the work of 
Vis
sing-Jorgensen 
and 
KrishnamurthyŠa lot of the research has looked at this and 
seems to have called into question 

whether there
™s this full pass
-through of T
reasury term premi
um effects onto private rates, 
such 
as corporate bond rates 
and 
mortgage rates, 
as well as asset prices in general.
  I guess the 
question is, to what extent are you buying into the story that maybe the term premium doesn™t 
affect financial conditions as fully as the FRB
/US model would tell you? 
Or how do we think 
about some of the more recent research in terms of these simulations? 
MR. LAUBACH
.  I think the short answer to that is, what I have here on the handout and 
what is being shown in the 
ﬁMonetary Policy S
trateg
iesﬂ section of Teal
book, Book B, of course, 
buys fully into the FRB
/US view that, to the extent that long rates matter for re
al a
ctivity, 
changes in the term premium are in 
long-
term
 rates.  So no distinction 
is drawn between
 whether 
the movement 
is in the expectations compo
nent or in the 
term
-premium component
. We could certainly 
try 
to look at how the results will change.  Broadly speaking, my 
expectation would be 
that 
the lines 
you see in the lower-
left 
panel 
are based on 100 
percent
Šthat 
                     
     
                 
        is, t
erm premiums are worth 
exactly 
as much as changes in expected future interest rates
.  Then 
you can shave that if you thought that a more reasonable estimate was, say, 50 percent. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you.  The second comment is really to President Lacker.  
This 
is why you have a 
time
-varying 
r*. In my view, this is the argument for thinking about the fact 
that the term premium changes over decades.  Other factors
, such as 
risk premi
ums
, the equity 
premium, 
and the sovereign risk premiumŠlots of things change in the 
economy
, whic
h is 
basically the argument not to have a constant 
r*. Your point is exactly right.  On its own, the term premium going down would argue for a 
higher 
r*. So what™
s really striking is that 
Laubach
-Williams, which just tries to let the data 
decide, has 
r* falling all 
of 
the way to zero, despite the fact that QE and other factors have 
pushed the term premium down.  T
he way I view this is
, there are these factors pushing 
r* up, but the other factors, the headwinds and the other things, are just so much more po
werful that
, on net, they push 
r* down.  Through the lens of 
r*, everything makes sense.  [Laughter]  Thank 
you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Why don™t we begin our round now?  O
ur first speaker is 
President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m looking forward to hearing 
President Williams™
s remarks through the lens of 
r*. [Laughter]  We™
ll see how that goes. 
Madam Chair, I favor alternative A.  My rationale for alternative A is based on the modal 
outlook for prices and employment, the risks to that outlook, and the zero lower bound.  On the 

benchmark outlook in 
the 
Tealbook
, Book
 A, you see 
that inflation does not return to the 
FOMC™s target of 2 percent until 2019, which is four years from now.  We should take steps to 

facilitate a fas
ter return of inflation to target.  These additional steps would also help boost 
           
   
    
                          
  
   
    employment over the medium term.  
Our congressional mandate calls for us to achieve 
maximum employment and stable prices.  If we are able to simultaneously create more jobs an
d impro
ve our performance on the price-stability goal, we should do so. 
That™
s the argument 
just 
based on the modal outlook alone.  It provides a clear 
justification for the policy course described in a
lternative A. 
I think this argument is enhanced 
by consideration of the risks to the outlook.  I agree with the Tealbook, Book AŠthe risks to the 
outlook for prices and employment are to the downside.  The standa
rd risk
-management 
considerations that are often advanced by the Committee suggest that these fut
ure downside risks 
bolster the case for current accommodation. 
When we think about the zero lower bound, as recent Brookings 
conference paper 
by 
President Evans 
and his colleagues 
makes crystal clear, these risk
-management considerations 
are significantly 
enhanced by the presence of the zero lower bound.  The past five years have 
taught us that when we™
re close to the zero lower bound, as we expect to be over the medium 
term, we will not be able to mitigate downside risks as effectively
 as we would like.  A
s President Evans™
s paper points out, this means that we should make policy choices so as to 
strengthen the economy in advance of these shocks hitting.  That, again, argues in favor of the 

kind of stance described in a
lternative 
A. So I see three arguments
 in favor of a
lternative A
Šthe modal outlook, the risks to the 
outlook, and the constraints on policy imposed by the zero lower bound. 
As I
™ve indicated in the past, I believe that it is important for monetary policy decisions 
to take account of the macroe
conomic risks created by potential financial instability.  My own 

reading of the QS report is that the main financial stability risk we face right now is actually 
          
         
      
     
   
                
associated with higher, not lower, interest rates. This will build on some of the work that 
Thomas was showing us earlier this morning. 
In May 2013, we began to tighten policy while we were still apparently several years 
away from achieving our macroeconomic objectives.  Market participants lost confidence in the 

willingness of the FOMC to buffer the economy against adverse shocks, and we saw a rapid 

increase in the term premium. If we raise the target range for the federal 
funds rate when 
headline inflation and core inflation are both running so low, we risk sending the same message 

that we did in 2013, and, accordingly, 
we risk seeing the same rapid run-
up in the term premium. 
Madam Chair, the modal outlook for inflation is too low.  We can best address this 
deficiency and simultaneously create more jobs by making clear, as 
alternative A does, that we 

are willing to use all 
of 
our tools to return inflation to target within one to two years, and that 
such a determined approach
 in 
the pursuit of our mandated objectives is also the best way to 
manage the risks we face, especially
 near the zero lower bound. 
I™d like to conclude by suggesting a topic for a possible research briefing
.  I
t builds on 
President Bullard™s comments yesterday and
, actually
, the conversation we were just having 
among 
President Williams, President Lacker, an
d Thomas.  I think it would be really useful for 
us to understand the work going on in the System on 
r*Šwhat™s determining it and 
what
™s moving it around.  It plays, actually, a pretty critical role, even in the statement itself.  So I 

believe
 exposing the Committee to the research going on in the System on this would be very 

valuable.  
With that, I
™ll conclude.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Today™
s GDP report confirms what we 
alr
eady knewŠ
that GDP growth slowed significantly in the first quarter. It™s too early to 
       
                  
   
  
       
      
     
 determine whether that slowdown will be persistent or whether it will be t
emporary, as last 
year™s first
-quarter slowdown turned out to be.  With no decision on the table, we don™t have to 
make that determination today.  
June™s decision is going to be data dependent, 
and we™ll be receiving important 
information
, including two monthly employment reports, 
to help
 come to a decision about liftoff 
in June.  Thus, I think it™s important not to signal anything today about a June decision.  
I support the spirit of a
lternative B today because
, at this point
, I favor data dependence 
and the meeting-by-meeting nature of the decision of liftoff.  
I believe it is appropriate to 

acknowledge the slowdown in growth and employment in paragraph 2, but then to maintain the 

characterization of the risk
s to the outlook for economic activity and 
the labor market as nearly 
balanced.
  However, in my view, the tone of the first paragraph on inter
meet
ing developments is 
too negative.  I think some of that negativity comes from focusing too much on short-
term 
changes 
in economic indicators instead of providing the Committee™s assessment of changes in 
economic cond
itions that matter for a policy decision. 
I do appreciate some of the changes that 
were made between the first draft of statement language that was circulated and the draft on the 

table today that addressed this issue of tone, but we have to remember that the public doesn™t see 

the evolution of our drafts. 
The 
Tealbook, Book B, 
tells us that the intention of 
alternative B is to avoid any date
-based guidance and ret
ain the option of beginning policy normalization in June if the data and 
outlook justify it.  
My concern is that 
alternative B doesn™t seem to achieve this.  My concern is, 
it™ll be read as our signaling that we™ve taken June off the table when that™s not the case, and it 

would be inconsistent with our data-dependent approach. 
             
  
    
           
                      Since our 
March meet
ing
, market expectations have shifted to a later liftoff and 
a flatter 
policy 
rate 
path.  In normal times, 
such a shift would be reflecting their assessment of the 
incoming data for the economic outlook, and we might want to take some signal from it.  
But 
as we prepare for liftoff, markets are particularly sensitive to our communications.  The shift in the 
expected policy 
rate 
path may not be providing any independent assessment of the economy.  
Instead
, it might be reflecting the market™s view of the Committee™s view. 
As former Chairman Alan Greenspan once said when discussing how difficult policy 
communications are, ﬁPeople hear what they want to hear.ﬂ  In such an environment, 
we must be 

even more careful than usual not to say things that could be misinte
rpreted
, even if they™re 
factually true.
  Of course, anticipating how the market might react to anything 
we do say is a 
difficult task. 
Turning to language specifics, in paragraph 1, I would opt to say ﬁgrowth slowed . . . , in 
part reflecting transitory f
actors,
ﬂ rather than ﬁ
at least in part.
ﬂ  And at this point, I understand 
that the rest of the language is pretty well locked down, but I would like to suggest one change.  

Instead of 
ﬁGrowth in household spending declined,ﬂ 
can we say ﬁH
ousehold spending 
continued to grow
, although at a slower pace
ﬂ? Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  So you said 
that, 
instead of 
ﬁGrowth in household spending 
decline
dﬂŠwhat did you want? Just review what you wanted to say instead. 
MS. MESTER.  Ye
s.  ﬁHousehold spending continued to grow, although at a slower 
pace.
ﬂ CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  
President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I support 
alternative B, including the 
statement and President Mester
™s suggestion concerning ﬁin part.ﬂ 
                 
        
                    
I see t
he decision 
at this meeting on both policy and statement as straightforward.  So I™d 
like to spend a few minutes looking ahead and thinking aloud about statement language 
possibilities in alternative economic scenarios, obviously evidence
d by incoming data, and 

alternative liftoff decision scenarios. 
I expect it will be evident in this round that there is some desire to keep June an active 
option.  In any event, I think having various communication strategies in mind could help the 

Committee achieve as smooth a policy transition as possible and reduce the chances of avoidable 

and unwanted market volatility associated with liftoff.  For my part, I™m not so optimistic that by 

June we will be able to make a clear and plausible case that the economy is on track 
in terms of 
our two decision criteria.  Having repeatedly emphasized the data dependency of our liftoff 

decision, I think it™s important that we not cause impartial observers to scratch their heads about 

the data on which we™re basing a liftoff decision.  I expect 
that the data picture will be 
sufficiently inconclusive by the time of our next meeting to justify waiting a bit longer. 
As my earlier question to Thomas indicated, I™m trying to think through how 
communication might evolve in the coming meetings should we decide not to move in June.  As 

I suggested in framing the question for Thomas, there are a couple of ways the language options 

in this meeting™s 
alternative C might serve as a template. 
The ﬁ
has become 
somewhat more 
confidentﬂ and 
ﬁmay soon war
rant an increaseﬂ language option
, combined with the ﬁhas become 
more confidentﬂ and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ version
, could be viewed as a 
sequence of statements o
ver two meetings in advance of the liftoff decision.  
Alternatively, the 
two v
ersions could be viewed as distinct choices
, with one or the other selected depending on the 
degree of certainty or probability the Committee wishes to convey, presumably in a statement of 

the meeting just ahead of the liftoff meeting. 
         
             
             
          
        Having said all 
of 
that
, my sense of 
opinion in 
the Committee is that there is not a lot of 
appetite for signaling liftoff two meetings in advance, even if couched in very tentative terms.  I 
also doubt there™s much support for a move to language along the lines of a
lternativ
e C unless 
the liftoff decision is highly probable.  So I have difficulty actually envisioning circumstances in 

which we might choose to use the softer ﬁ
has become 
somewhat more confident
ﬂ and 
ﬁmay soon 
warrant an increase
ﬂ version in a
lternative C. 
Where 
this leaves me is the view that the most 
feasible approach to some amount of guidance in advance of a liftoff decision is the ﬁhas become 

more confidentﬂ and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ choice.
  I apologize for walking 
everyone through my tortu
red thought process.  [Laughter] 
It™s certainly possible that we will receive a string of data reports between now and June 
that is strong enough to justify pulling the trigger.  If we were to move in June, 
the advance
-
signal decision will be moot, of cour
se.  In that case
, the question becomes whether the June 
statement ought to address what comes next
Šthat is, provide some more concrete guidance on 
what is the Committee™s expected path of policy over the subsequent meetings. 
As I said at the top of my remarks, 
I just want to air some communications 
considerations.  I think it would be helpful to further discuss the question of whether to provide 

advance guidance and, if so, how to phrase it.  And it™s not too early to start thinking about ways 

to prepare the public for the path of policy 
after 
liftoff. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
alternative
 B.  The data to 
date have 
not 
met the conditions we provided in the Marc
h statement for raising rates.  I am very 
skeptical that these conditions can be met by June.  
With t
wo quarters of weak real GDP growth, 
        
  
             
  
              
  
  
   
  
       
we once again are faced with a forecast of improvement
Šthe data reflect broader
-based 
weakness. 
In addition, interna
tional conditions since the 
March meeting have become more 
worrisome.  The frustration among Greek leaders when talking with European policymakers is 
palpable, while the European policymakers I spoke with seem
ed to have more confidence that 
any problems as
sociated with a Gree
k default could be readily contained. 
I am less confident 
that a smooth resolution will be achieved.  Moreover, I worry that this misplaced confidence 
in the likely 
containment of spillovers arising 
from a possible Greek default may ge
nerate 
conditions that make default even more likely. 
As I discussed yesterday, it is possible our inflation target is too low, given the 
accumulating evidence that we set the target based on research that underestimated both the 

likelihood and severity of being at the zero lower bound.  If we are willing to entertain a higher 

target, then a later liftoff would be further justified.
  In part, this would also indicate a higher 
standard for moving, shifting from reasonable confidence that we are moving toward our 

inflation target to just plain confidence that we are moving toward our inflation target. 
As the 
data to date should not make us even reasonably confident, this distinction will become more 

relevant at future meetings, presumably in the fall. 
In term
s of language, I would take out the ﬁat least,ﬂ and I would keep ﬁin part reflecting 
transitory factors.ﬂ
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
First Vice President Holcomb. 

MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
There
™s no denying that the bulk of data 
on real activity released since our March meeting has disappointed expectations.  However, a 
                              
       
      
    
     review of what has happened and what may be revealed to have happened argues for maintaining 
flexibility with respect to the tim
ing of liftoff. 
Labor market conditions continue to improve, albeit at a slow pace.  We™ve also seen the 
trade
-weighted exchange value of the dollar fall slightly against other major currencies and the 
price of oil move irregularly upward.  So we have some reason to think that the two main forces 

that have driven down headline inflation and which might pose a threat to long-
term inflation 
expectations are abating. 
Measures of core inflation have ticked upward. 
In the University of 
Michigan survey, longer-term inflation expectations edged downward in April™s preliminary 

report but remain within their recent range. 
Between now and the June meeting, the information that we will receive may shed new 
light on jobs, retail sales, consumer sentiment, and the overall health of the manufacturing and 

nonmanufacturing sectors.  We will also have two new reports on trimmed mean PCE inflation 

and household inflation expectations. Several of the current uncertainties hanging over the world 
economy may be at least partia
lly resolved.  It seems to me to be well within the realm of 
possibility that the information we receive between now and June will warrant a policy response. 
I believe it is important, therefore, that a June liftoff remain on the table. 
While
, technically
, there is nothing in the language of a
lternative B that takes June liftoff 
off the table, I do have some concern.  I can readily imagine people in the financial markets and 

business press drawing the conclusion that June action is all but impossible, given the lack of 

foreshadowing in a
lternative B.
  This move in market expectations could prove to be an 
impediment to Committee action.  Therefore, the language in paragraph 3 of a
lternative C with 
the ﬁmay soonﬂ option is attractive, 
as it more clearly indic
ates that June remains a viable option. 
On the other hand, a
lternative B states the Committee™s intention to take timely action once its 
         
            
    
                 
  criteria have been met
.  With the possibility of continued uncertainty on both fronts, 
I support 
alternative B.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, although with a 
language change, which I will get to toward the end of my remarks. 
I first wanted to say that I agree with people that once w
e have removed the forward 
guidance, as we™ve now done, every meeting should be a live meeting in which the possibility of 

a change in the federal funds rate can be on the table.
  Having said that, though, we still have 
different assessments as to how like
ly it is that we think we
™re going to want to raise the federal 
funds rate target range in the next couple of meetings.  I, for one, don™t think it™
s very likely at 
all.  But I do 
believe
 that we should not do anything that formally takes it off the table. 
I wasn™t going to comment on this, but 
President Lockhart
™s 
thoughtful observations did 
provoke me to say a couple of things on how to begin moving forward.  I think I™m coming out 
in a somewhat different place, although only in a tentative way, and would 
like to hear other 
people™s views on this.  I™d be reluctant to put back into paragraph 3 at some point an indication 

that, one or two meetings from now, we are more likely to move.  T
he reason 
is, I think that 
becomes a form of calendar guidance of its o
wn.  J
ust as
, when we put in the quasi-
calendar 
guidance before, saying, ﬁWell, 
this isn™t really calendar
Šit™s all data dependent,ﬂ the markets 
all read it as calendar guidance
, I think the same thing is going to happen now if we put in 

language such as t
hat included in paragraph 3 of a
lternative C. 
My preference would be that we use paragraph 2 as the vehicle for beginning to 
communicate a change in the Committee™s collective view as to where the economy is headed, 

which
, it™s hoped, actually begins to, I would say, 
increase some volatility a little bit as people 
        
           
         
  
      
  
       begin to think 
liftoff
 is more likely but is not a done deal.  T
hat 
way, we don™t have a surprise at 
the meeting in which we eventually lift the target range, but it is not de facto occurring just by 
the inclusion of language in paragraph 3 at a meeting before we™
ve actually decided to lift the 
target range. 
As I said, my current view is that June is very unlikely as an appropriate time to increase 
the target range.  I thought that paragraph 1 as originally circulated a week or two ago actually 

hit about right the factual characterization of the economy.  It™
s fairly
 hard to argue with the 
proposition that the data w
ere 
rather 
disappointing and pretty bad, yet paragraph 1 began with 
something sayin
g that it was 
ﬁin part reflecting transitory factors.ﬂ  M
ost important, 
I think, the 
beginning of paragraph 2 communicates that ﬁAlthough growth in output and employment 

slowed during the first quarter, the Committee continues to expect
–ﬂ In other words, 
the basic 

direction of the 
Committee™s expectations ha
sn™t changed, notwithstanding the disappointing 
developments reported in paragraph 1. 
Notwithstanding the fact that I thought the original paragraph 1 got it about right, I
™m okay with most of the chang
es that have been made since the original language was circulated, 

although I wouldn™t want to see us going too much further to try to look for the cheery in a way 

that would obscure what™
s actually happened.
  The one exception, Madam Chair, is the 
sentence 
on inflation, which is the second-
to-last sentence in paragraph 1.  Back in March, that sentence 
said ﬁInflation has declined further below the Committee™s longer-run objective, largely 

reflecting declines in energy prices.ﬂ So the phrase 
ﬁlargel
y reflecting declines in energy pricesﬂ 
was, in effect, explaining how the decline had gone further below.  It was an explanation of the 

delta. 
                                
       
  
       
 I think the language that was circulated 
originally to the Committee a week or two ago is 
now in a
lternative A
, and the language is as follows: 
ﬁInflation continued to run well below the 
Committee™s longer
-run objective, largely reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and 
decreasing prices of non
-energy imports.ﬂ  There, the way I read it when that language wa
s circulated was that now this 
phrase 
ﬁlargely reflectingﬂ in effect explains the ﬁwellﬂ part
Šwhy 
it is ﬁwellﬂ below.  But as it
™s been modified, the sentence now reads ﬁInflation continued to run 
below the Committee™s longer-run objective, largely reflect
ing earlier declines in energy prices 
and decreasing prices of non-
energy imports.ﬂ 
I don™t think it
™s the case that all of the difference between the Committee™s target and 
where we are right now is explained based on the earlier declines in energy prices 
and decreasing 
prices of non-energy imports.  On the contrary, as many people pointed out yesterday and a little 
bit today already, we haven™t been hitting the inflation target for quite some time now.  And if 

you pull out housing inflationŠ
which
, of cour
se, is largely a function of rents imputed to 
homeownersŠthen you have an awful lot of continuing questions 
about how much inflation 
there is. 
As a factual matter, I think we should modify that sentence to say something like the 
following: 
ﬁInflation cont
inued to run below the Committee™s longer-
run objective, partly 
reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non
-energy importsﬂŠ
or something just making clear that that second phrase does not account for all of the difference 

betw
een the Committee™s target and where we are right now. 
Finally, like those who have gone before me, I would prefer removing ﬁat leastﬂ in the 
first sentence.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 
                   
                             MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Our March statement provided forward 
guidance only as far ahead as this meeting, and it effectively said we were going to go to a 
meeting
-by-
meeting
, data-dependent approach to decisionmaking.  From now on, that™
s the right 
thing to do, and I think 
tha
t™
s imp
ortant.
  This means we will not be in the business of 
telegraphing interest rate moves in the previous meeting™s
 statement.  I support the observations 
President Lockhart made on this.  A
n important corollary 
of that is that we should not be 
encouraging pe
ople to believe we won™t raise rates without having sent a telegraph on the issue 
in the previous meeting™s 
statement. 
Concerning 
alternative 
C as a stalking
-horse for future statements, I don™t feel the need to 
include language like that in paragraphs 2 or 3 
at a meeting prior to liftoff
.  So I agree with 
Governor TarulloŠevery meeting should be live, and we should, to the extent that we have the 

opportunity, condition people to expect that we could move without forewarning, perhaps.  
A critical aspect is today™s characterization of the economy
, especial
ly in the first 
paragraph.  As I said in the earlier round, a substantial amount of data is scheduled to arrive 

between now and our June meeting.  If those reports are reasonably close to what the Tealbook is 

forecasting, they
™re going to show a rebound in consumer spending growth, and they™re going to 

show a firming in the monthly inflation figures. 
In that case, there could well be a strong argument for raising rates in June.  Now, we 
don™t know for sure the data will come in that way, and we don™t know for sure there won™t be 

some looming concerns on the horizon that alter the outlook. We could find we™ve hit a more 

prolonged soft patch.  I
n that case
, we may be inclined to delay raising rates when we get to 
June, and I™m open to that possibility.  But, in view of the information we™
re going to get, I think 
it™s very important not to take June off the table. 
        
  
                 
   
         
          As I said, the critical aspect is how the statement characterizes the data, and that focuses 
attention on the first paragraph.  T
he revisions that were made between 
the 
beginning of last 
week and the end of last week in the first paragraph were good, important, and 
necessary
.  But I 
agree with President Mester that the first paragraph still has somewhat of a ﬁglass half
-empty
ﬂ tone, emphasizing the empty half of the glass I guess you™d say.  I support her suggestion for 
changing the characterization of household spending.  I 
also 
support Governor Tarullo™s change 
of ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpartl
y.ﬂ I think he™
s right on there. 
But I 
believe 
that the inflation sentence in 
alternative 
C is more balanced and fair
, as it acknowledges that inflation is no longer declining.  
It calls that out. 
Central bank communication i
s all about what you choose to call out, and I 
think it would be fair to call out that inflation isn™t declining
.  S
o I™d put that suggestion on the 
table. 
Regarding 
the phrase ﬁat least,ﬂ 
I™ve 
been wrestling with that in my mind.  Certainly, in 
a broad-brush kind of way, you can see how including it might make things a little more dour than 
they ought to be, as President Mester argued.  But, on the other hand, ﬁat least in partﬂ means 
that the amount that™
s attributable to transitory factors is 
ﬁin part
ﬂ or ﬁgreater than in part.ﬂ  F
rom 
that point of view, 
ﬁat least in partﬂ seems to me like a more upbeat assessment than just ﬁin part 

reflecting.ﬂ But I could be persuaded either way on that.  Those are my comments on language, 

Madam Chair.  Thank you very much. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank y
ou.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m going to make three comments here.  
First of all, I support President Kocherlakota™s call for a symposium on 
r*.  We could probably 
benefit from getting a lot of views on the table about th
is important parameter in our models
Š         
  
    
                 
    
        
  
  
   how we
™re thinking about it and how that thinking shapes policy choices.  So that would be an 
excellent thing to do, if we could fit that in at some point. 
That leaves me with two comments.  One is about building credib
ility for data
-dependent 
policy, and the other is about shading policy to prevent asset price bubbles.  On the credibility 
question, as we all discussed yesterday, recent data ha
ve been relatively weak.
  We have been 
trying to build credibility 
regarding 
a data-dependent policy 
being the basis for rate decisions 
as we go forward.  
I guess my assessment so far is that we have indeed built some credibility, even 
considerable credibility, 
regarding 
a data
-dependent policy rate for the period ahead
, despite the 
fact that we haven™t moved the policy rate for six and a half years.  And that™
s an achievement. 
Markets
Šappropriately
, in my viewŠmoved the likely date of liftoff back in response to 
weaker
-than-expected readings on the U.S. economy during the intermeeting period.  That™
s exactly what you™d expect to observe if policy is data dependent.  If we can maintain this type of 

credibility as the 
data wax and wane during 2015, we™
ll be in excellent shape at the time of 
policy liftoff, whenever that should arrive, in the sense that there will be few surprises in the 

markets at that juncture. 
The more we can do to convince people that we™re going to 
react to the data
 and be clear 
about what data we™re going to react to, the better off we™
ll be
.  I™m hopeful that the day of the 
first move will be an anticlimactic event because we have credibility that that
™s what we 
were 
going to do.  T
hen we make the 
move, and it™s pretty smooth.  I think we™
re well on the way to 
that, but we probably have more work to do during the spring. 
Let me turn to the second comment on the shading 
of 
policy.  The staff™s forecast is that 
there will be a smooth glide to the steady state.  This forecast envisions unemployment only a 

few ticks lower at the end of the forecast horizon in 2017 than it is today.  This is not my 
        
                   
          
    
     
    baseline forecast. 
I envision unemployment falling well into the 4 percent range over the 
forecast horizon,
 barring any large negative shock to the U.S. economy.  This is what happened 
in the 1990s and in the 2000s, and I think it™
s a good baseline forecast of what
™s going to happen 
again this time. 
Simultaneously, the labor market conditions index, which takes 
into account all aspects 
of labor market performance, will continue to rise far above its average value
.  So we
™ll be 
talking about, 
in the years ahead
, a very robust labor market performance when compared 
with 
metrics on past labor market performance in 
the U
nited S
tates
.  This is going to constitute a 
boom phase for the U.S. economy, notwithstanding this morning™s GDP report, which I think is 
going to prove to be temporary. 
The boom will be associated with about 3 percent growth, at least for a time, in the U.S. 
economy.  That 3 percent growth, while not stellar, is still about 1 percent higher than the 

potential growth rate for the U.S. economy.  T
his is very similar to the 1990s
, when we had years 
in which 
we were at 4
 percent in an economy that had a 3 
percent potential growth rate. We
™ll be growing at 3 
percent for a time in an economy that has a 2 
percent potential growth rate. 
Inflation will rise
, go through the inflation target, and be higher than 2 percent over parts of the 
forecast horizon. 
Duri
ng this period, interest rates will remain exceptionally low by historical standards. 
We™ve already committed ourselves to that by saying 
that
, even 
when 
we start to normalize, it 
would be very small and very gradual.  You could throw in that my view is t
hat this policy rate, 
as we
™re envisioning it over the next couple of years, 
will be below the likely natural rate of 

interest, the 
r* value.  I
n this sense
, we™re going to provide accommodation as currently 
                         
        
        
      envisioned all 
of 
the way through this boom phase for the U.S. economy.  This is how I™
m thinking about it. 
Now, the boom period, combined with exceptionally low policy rate settings, is a recipe 
for asset price bubbles.  Asset price bubbles have plagued the U.S. economy during the 1990s 
and 2000s and have been a major point of debate at this Committee over the p
ast 20 years. 

These bubbles are not in our models.  They were not in the past 20 years, they™
re not in our 
models today, and we don™t see any component of this in our standard presentations on w
hat we 
should do about monetary policy.  So we do not have a good understanding of where these 

bubbles come from or how to control them when they occur.  Furthermore, bursting asset price 

bubbles can have devastating consequences for the U
nited S
tates
 and the global economy.  It™
s no small matter if this thing gets going and develops. 
The basic strategy, in my view, should be to head off this kind of possibility.  We™ve had 
boom-and-bust cycles during the 1990s and the 2000s.  What you™d like to do this time around is 
not to 
have that boom
-and-bust cycle
.  Then you™ll get a longer expansion, and you
™ll 
get better 
outcomes for everybody. 
It™s true that we have an improved macroprudential stance today, and that 
will help 
mitigate some of the more severe consequences of a bursting bubble.  But untested 
macroprudential tools alone are, in my view, insufficient to rely on, given the exceptionally dire 

consequences of bursting asset bubbles not just for the U.S. economy, but 
also 
for the global 
economy. 
The prudent policy, in my view, is to combine our efforts on macroprudential policy with 
a sensible monetary policy that hedges our bets in the direction of prevention of the kind of asset 

price boom-and-bust cycles 
that we
™ve
 experienced during the 1990s and 2000s.  I think we 
      
   
                    
       
    
     
  
  
      should be shading in the direction of slightly higher interest rates than we would otherwise have, 
on the grounds that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure on this dimension.  We do
n™t 

have very good knowledge of what these bubbles are or how they form, so we should be hedging 

our bets on this.  This is an important reason to get going on a modest normalization program 

when the opportunity ar
riv
es, which I expect it will later this y
ear. 
Let me turn just to alternative
 B for a minute.  I support 
alternative
 B, 
as written, for 
today, without the ﬁat leastﬂ phrase 
in the first paragraph.  T
he ﬁin partﬂ covers the bases there, 
and I don™t think we need to add anything more to that. 
I do 
agree with President Mester™s suggested change. 
The wording ﬁG
rowth in 
household spending declined; household
s™ real incomes rose stronglyﬂ is a little bit jarring, and I 
like President Mester™s suggestion there that would smooth that out a little bit. 
I agree with Governor Tarullo and President Lacker that we should not try to reintroduce 
calendar
-dependent language as liftoff nears.  We™re trying to get away from that, so we should 
not try to do that.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  P
resident Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  President Kocherlakota made a good case for 
alternative 
A, and I™m sympathetic to his view, but I can support a
lternative B.  I continue to 
believe that economic conditions will most likely be consistent 
with an appropriate time for 
liftoff being sometime in 2016.  I currently think, based on data, that it will take until then for me 

to be reasonably confident that we™re on course to achieve our inflation objective within an 

acceptable time 
frame. 
The information we™
ve received since our 
March 
meeting has not changed my opinion on 
this.  Indeed, I™
m a little nervous over the latest data on activity and their implications for further 
                    
                            
             slower reductions 
in resource slack. The recent stabilization of energy p
rices and 
the 
dollar are 
positives.  But, 
as I discussed yesterday, I need to see a good deal more broad
-based, concrete 
evidence before being confident that underlying inflation trends actually are heading up with 
adequate momentum.  But, having said that
, we
™ll see how the data evolve. 
Let me make a couple of comments about other things people have mentioned.  I agree 
completely that we have moved to the point 
at which 
it™s a meeting
-by-meeting decision.  
They
™re all live decisions on the rate increase, 
so data conditionality, by itself, is all we need.  I 
don™t think we need special language, 
either
, to signal our intent. 
I agree completely with Governor Tarullo on the paragraph 1 language on inflation.  I had 
noted that myself.  T
he problem is that the 
previous iteration had talked about the gradientŠ 
inflation declining
Šand now it
™s a level concept
Šﬁcontinued to runﬂŠ
but it leaves the same 
factors in place. 
So if you add, as I think you said, ﬁ
part
ly reflecting earlier declines,
ﬂ that would 
take care of 
that.
  Alternatively, if you leave the language, you could also add ﬁand resource 
slackﬂ as part of the explanation, but the more minimal ﬁpart
lyﬂ would probably be better there. 
I™m indifferent on the language about 
household spending
 growth that Preside
nt Mester 
indicated.  I™
m a little worried that it
™s going to sound like 
the message you communicate 
when 
you go out and say, ﬁI support so-and-so 1,000 percent.ﬂ  When you say, ﬁHousehold spending 

continued to grow,ﬂ the alternative to that is a recession.  If household spending doesn™t grow, 

it™s a recession, so I
™m not quite sureŠbut, 
at any rate, that
™s fine. 
On ﬁ
consumer sentiment remains high
,ﬂ these are factually correct observations, 
but
 I™
m a little worried that it might be risky.  After all, we
™re thinking that the energy price declines are 
transitory.  Gas prices are going to go up, and we know that sentiment goes down when gasoline 

prices go up.  
So we might be providing a different bright line for people looking for a bright 
            
  
    
      
                 
     
  
  
    sign here.  Then, if you see that one go down, 
it might have a little more of an implication than 
we intend
.  B
ut otherwise, I don™t have a problem with that.  I support a
lternative B. 
Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B and the latitude it 
offers the Committee to consider a change in policy at its next meeting. 
In terms of guidance that we can glean from policy rules, the benchmarks in the 
Tealbook, Book B, continue to generally suggest 
that 
the funds rate should be higher than its 
current setting. Granted, the equilibrium real rate, or 
r*, we
™ve been discussing remains 
depressed and raises 
questions as to whether these benchmarks are providing appropriate 

guid
ance today. 
At the same time, common frameworks used to estimate 
r* also provide an estimate of 
potential GDP in which 
declines in 
r* go hand in hand with lower potential.  
For example, the 
current Laubach
-Williams framework indicates that 
the equilibrium real rate is negative, though 
it also implies that output is actually above potential.  So
, while policy should incorporate a 
lower equilibrium real rate into the appropriate setting of the funds rate, it also should not neglect 

the implications for potential GDP and the output gap.  For example, using the lower 
r* measure 
and positive output gap in the Taylor (1999) rule with inertia suggests a higher current funds 

rate.  The Taylor (1993) r
ule indicates a setting above 1 percent, even with the lower equil
ibrium 
real rate.
  I don™t take the positive output gap to completely reflect current conditions by any 
means, since some labor market slack remains.  However, this example illustrates 
that 
taking on 
board a lower equilibrium real rate may also imply a sma
ller output gap. 
      
              
          
              Finally, although this is not a decision for today, I note increasing uncertainty about the 
timing and effects of ceasing reinvestments.  I
™m a bit concerned in looking at the market 
participant surveys and noting that expectations on the 
timing of when reinvestments will be 
ended are quite diffuse. For example, a slight majority of dealers expect 
Treasury reinvestments 
to end in the first quarter of 2016, but then expectations are spread over the next four quarters 
into 2017.  This is somewhat concerning, especially given the risk highlighted in the QS report 

and recent IMF financial stability reports that longer
-term rates could increase sharply 
approaching liftoff.  Or the Committee could be facing another conundrum in which longer-
term 
rates 
remain low.
  I think we should try to manage some of this risk by providing more guidance 
on the timing of reinvestment, perhaps incorporating 
it into the SEP or perhaps just 
distributing it 
on an internal basis for our own use, to think about 
expectations on when we anticipate ceasing 
reinvestments.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Prichard. 
MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I view the evolution of the draft 
alternative 
B to finally contain entirely data-dependent language.  This is a very positive 
development and, 
I believe
, an essential step on the path to policy normalization.  I also interpret 
the language in alternative B as leaving our options open for beginning normalization at any 
future meeting 
as we are
 informed by incoming data. 
My biggest concern with a
lternative B is its overly weak interpretation of the current 
economic environment.  As I mentioned yesterday, expenditure-side data for Q1 over the past 

30 years appears to be suffering from poor and pe
rhaps incorrect seasonal adjustment.  An 
ind
icator that incorporates income
-side data, GDPplus, which was posted to 
the website of 
our Real-T
ime 
Data Research 
Center this morning, indicates that the first quarter may not be nearly 
             
              
     
    
          
   as weak as many of the 
nowcasts
 being reported.  GDPplus grew at 1.65 percent in the first 
quarter after growing 3.3 percent 
on a year
-over-
year 
basis
 in 2014:
Q4. 
Further, 
I suggest that the Committee consider
, now or in the future, 
simplifying its 
assessment of the labor market. 
Many labor market indicators paint a relatively healthy picture 
of the labor market.  F
or that reason
, I would favor deleting the third full sentence in 
paragraph
 1Šagain, either now or in the futureŠand simplifying it.  T
hat sentence begins with 
ﬁA range of labor market indicators–
ﬂ  This sentence is fairly imprecise, and it adds little to the 

meaning that is already embodied in the preceding sentence.  The idea would be to seek every 

opportunity to boil the FOMC statement down to its essence by eliminating sentences that don™t 

add particularly to meaning or understanding. 
I am otherwise supportive of the suggestion to eliminate ﬁat leastﬂ and 
of the other 
suggestions that have been made.
  Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Presid
ent Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B.
  Let me respond to 
some of the language suggestions first.  Like others, I would not include the phrase ﬁat leastﬂ in 

the opening paragraph.  That™s not needed.  It™s even unclear. 
On Governor Tarullo™s suggestion, I think he™s absolutely right.  I would put ﬁpartly 
reflecting earlier declines in energy pricesﬂ in the penultimate sentence in 
paragraph 1. 
That™s 
exactly right.  In the recent data, core is running about 1 per
cent.  O
verall 
inflation
 is running 
at around zero over the past couple of quarters, but 
it was 
obviously negative in 
the first quarter
.  There are a lot of factors going onŠPresident Lacker made this point, too.  T
hat™s just accurate 
and, 
I think
, better.
  Paragraph 2 is really 
the place in which we do the heavy lifting and explain 
how we interpret things. Paragraph 1 is really about the data. 
         
                              
  
    
   
     
   I™ll 
make a comment about data dependence in 
paragraph 1.  T
his is part of life. We™re in 
the data-dependent mode.  Paragraph 1 is going to describe the data.  We had only a month, 
really
, of data here.  This is a very small sample, but these are the data we have, and I think we 
have to just describe them accurately. 
The part of the statement 
in which we try to expl
ain how we interpret 
them 
is 
paragraph 
2. In that respect, 
I thought 
paragraph 2 did a nice job of making the point that, yes, the data 
have been weaker.  Yes, we™ve had th
ese 
factors in terms of inflation
.  But, basically
, our outlook 
hasn™t changed much.  I™m not concerned so much about the weakness or the signaling in 

paragraph 
1 as currently stated
, because I think that™s the way the data have been.  It™s just a 
small sample, and
, of course, we™ll get a lot more data bef
ore our next meeting.  So I™m fine with 
that. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo and others who™ve commented on where the future 
statements should go, obviously President Lockhart started us down that road.  I strongly agree 
with Governor Tarullo and, 
I think
, P
resident Evans 
as well as
 some others that we shouldn™t be 
going back to trying to put some quasi-
date
-based guidance in there.  That whole thing of how 
we have to take a couple 
of 
steps before we act is a kind of straightjacket we don™t want to get 
ourselves in. We™re in a good place now on our statements, and I wouldn™t want to see us move 
back to that. 
Now, my own view in terms of the outlook hasn™t really changed based on the data we™ve 
seen in the 
past month, 
which is similar to what 
others have mentioned.  
First
-quarter 
data seem 
to be distorted by some seasonal factors and other factors.  We™ve been down this road before.  

In terms of the inflation data, I haven™t changed my view there, 
either. I still have 
the 
view that 
inflation 
will come back over the next couple of years to our target. 
                    
                               
  But this is 
all 
forecast
, and we™re now in the data-dependent mode.  When I™m asked 
when I think we™ll be raising rate
s, I say,
 ﬁI might have a view on this, but I don™t know.ﬂ 
I try to avoid tal
king about June, September, December, or whichever year because it really depends 
on how the data 
come in
, how they influence our outlook, and what the right policy is. 
That™s a hard message for us to get across
, because we™ve been focused on June versus 
September versus December or whatever.  So I™ve been thinking a little bit outside the box here 
about how we can, beyond this statement, get to a more data-dependent approach.  
Madam 
Chair, I have a suggestion for you.  I made you a special T-
shirt 
[Laughte
r].  The message reads 
ﬁMonetary P
olicy Is
 Data 
Dependent.ﬂ 
CHAIR YELLEN.  How about one for everybody? 

MR. WILLIAMS.  I have a whole box of them.  You wear this around, and then I think 
that™
ll make the point pretty clear
.  We won™t have to worry so much aboutŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Fantastic. 
Love it. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you. 

MR. 
TARULLO. 
Have the softball team wear th
ose. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Another great idea.  Oh, I have one 
last comment I want to make
Š sorry
.  [Laughter] 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You can™t top that, 
John. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  No, I know.  Actually, 
President Kocherlakota
, I can
Šin this way.  I 
would like to second the comments of 
President Kocherlakota
 and 
President Bullard about 
having more of a discussion 
regarding 
the natural rate of interest, 
with 
r* e
stimates
 obviously 
being at the center of this.  I get a lot of feedback, pro and con, about this, and there is some 
                    
              
      
  
           literature developing on 
this besides just the Laubach
-Williams 
model.  So I really do think that 
having a further discussion about 
that wo
uld be helpful. 
The basic logic of Laubach
-Williams is actually pretty simple.  Over the 
past five years
, output growth 
has been averaging 2.3 percent
ŠI™m picking up on President Kocherlakota™s 
point yesterday about 
how L
aubach
-W
illiams
 works.  The 
trend
 growth in our model is 2.0 
percent
.  I think that™s consistent with most people™s views. So we™re getting growth of 
0.3 percentage point above trend over five years, while the real federal funds rate has been about 
minus 1.7.  The only way you can interp
ret this statistically is 
to think 
that the real rate gap
Š basically
, the 
amount of monetary stimulusŠis very modest over the p
ast five years, and this 
hasn™t changed in our model. 
What 
Laubach
-Williams is telling you is simple.  We™ve had negative real rat
es for five 
straight years.  Output growth has been just a smidgen above potential.  Therefore, 
there™s really 

not much monetary stimulus relative to the neutral rate going on.  This is something we should 
discuss further, but, 
basically
, that™s how the mo
del interprets the data.  If the equilibrium real 
rate really were 
2, growth would have been a lot faster than 2.3.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I had read about the T-
shirt in the 
media, and I™m glad to see the real thing in front of us. 
But the 
more 
serious thing 
is, President Williams summarized a number of people™s 
comments that we want to get away from being date 
dependent.  One challenge 
with regard to 
that is the way the 
Summary of 
Econom
ic 
Projections presents our policy outlooks.  That™s very 
date dependent.  In fact, that™s what I™m often asked about
:  ﬁBoy, it looks as though everyone™s 
saying 2015. What do you think about that?ﬂ  So it™s something to be thought about
.  I
f we™re 
        
         
    
                       really trying to get away from date dependence, I think that says something about how we want 
to be talking about interest rates in the 
Summary of 
Economic P
rojections as well. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  That™s a good suggestion.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FIS
CHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d like to first discuss briefly the inflation 
target issue that arose yesterday
, and then turn to the monetary policy decision and explain why I 
support 
alternative 
B. Yesterday President Rosengren
, supported by President Kocherlakota and one or two 
others, 
suggested raising the target inflation rate, a suggestion that™s also be
en made by 
Olivier 
Blanchard.  I believe 
that 
we should constantly be reexamining all 
of 
our assumptions about 
monetary policy and the behavior of the economy, but that, 
particularly in the case of targets, we 

need to be very careful about our public stance. 
With regard to our public stance, we fixed a target inflation rate in 2011 and announced a 
2 percent target in 2012.  The setting of a 
target inf
lation rate was a major achievement and
, to 
those outside the S
ystem
, a major surprise
.  We need to be very careful indeed about reopening 
that decision and that discussion. 
The argument for raising the target inflation rate is that the higher target would permit 
normal monetary policy to attain a more negative real rate of interest than is now possible.  That 

is true, but there™s not so far been public discussion of the negative aspects of a higher inflation 

target. 
The main cost, I believe, relates to Al
an Greenspan™s definition of the desired inflation 
rate as a rate such that inflation is not taken into account in routine economic decisions.
  In 
particular, at around 4 
percent inflation
, we very likely would see the return of indexation into 

relatively 
short
-term contracts, including labor contracts.  Monetary policy becomes much more 
difficult in heavily indexed economies, in part because the inflation rate typically becomes more 
                  
        
    
  
      
               
  variable the higher the indexation rate and 
because 
the probability that t
he dynamics of inflation 
become unstable increases. 
A second cost relates to the credibility of the inflation target and of the F
OMC
.  It is possible that we should, at some future point, 
raise the inflation target
.  But if we 
go out now and 
start a public discussion about the inflation target, we will undoubtedly be asked why we™re 
raising the target and what the effects of doing so are likely to be.  
There are answers to these 

questions, but the answers may well reduce our credibility precisely at a time when reasonable 

people regard us as the most credible and most professional of the macro policymaking 

institutions in the United States. 
WeŠthat is, the participants in this meeting
Šshould not take that risk.  We should not 
go public with any doubts that we might have about the goals of monetary policy.  At the 

moment
, we™re in the middle of the process of trying to normalize monetary policy.  We should 
always be reconsidering our policy framework, but there are times to go public and times not to 
do so.  That is why our discussions of the target inflation rate should continue within the Federal 
Reserve System and within the Committee, and that is why it is fine that Eric raised the issue in 

yesterday™s go
-round, but we should not go public with that discussion. 
Turning now to the monetary policy decision, yesterday™s discussion, 
in which almost 
every participant said, 
rightly
, that 
the key issue is whether first
-quarter weakness i
s transitory or 
a signal of a longer-term weakening of growth, and this morning™s announcement 
of the first 
estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth make it clear that we should wait before making a decision 
to change the interest rate. I say that while bearing in mind an almost true maxim I once heard:  

ﬁThe situation is never clearer in the future.  It™s just unclear in a different way.
ﬂ  [Laughter] 
         
      
       
       
        
           
    I support 
alternative
 B, in which the first three paragraphs do a good job of showing that 
we are watching the data carefully
, and that the probability of a June liftoff has declined, but that 
June remains on the table. As weak as the incoming data have been and as threatening as 
the 
many black clouds that are out there 
are, it remains important to keep June as a possible liftoff 
date.  How could it be possible?  Well, we™ll receive two more employment reports before the 

June meeting.  If we see very high payroll gains in April and May and if the unemployment rate 

comes down to, say, 5.3 percent while the spending data firm as expected, it would be reasonable 

to argue 
for liftoff. 
Some might suggest that we should wait just a little longer to be sure
, since September 
isn™t really that different from June
, to perfect our communications about liftoff or to reexamine 
the tools we intend to use to raise the interest rate.
  That would mean that even in the face of very 
good data, the June versus September decision would be a close call.  But in making that call, 
we 
need also to take into account the importance of our credibility, which would require us to act 
when the conditions for acting that we have set out are fulfilled. 
Turning to the bigger picture, my views on when to lift off were influenced by the very 
helpful paper that was sent to this Committee in January by 
Oliver d
e Gr
oot, 
Etienne 
Gagnon, and Robert 
Tetlow
, whose results I quoted in the March FOMC meeting.  In that paper, they 
compared the probabilities that policymakers might regret their decisions under early and late 
liftoff scenarios.
  Using random draws from historical shocks, they show that the probability that 
we would fall behind the curve and wish that we had tightened sooner was negligible if we go on 

the early side but 
was close to 
10 percent if we wait a year longer
.  In contrast
, the difference 
between the probabilities that we would need to retrace our steps if we go earlier, 10 
percent, 

rather than later, 
5 percent, w
as not as great. 
        
        
              
           
       
Now, it™s a very good paper, but it™s not obvious where we are today relative to going 
early or
 going late.  Nonetheless, all in all, I found that analysis very useful, and it helped 
persuade me that we should seriously be contemplating lifting off soon.  It further helped 
convince me that ﬁ
early and gradual
ﬂ is a much better approach to raising the 
interest rate than 
ﬁlate and steep.
ﬂ  Of course, in the event, 
we may have to raise the rate faster or slower than we 
anticipate, but, 
at this stage
, we have to work with expectations. 
I™d also like to relate to the argument that we™re only in this relati
vely good position on 
employment and 
this 
potentially good position on inflation because the interest rate is so low, 
and that, therefore, we should not move anytime soon.  It™s undoubtedly true that the U.S. 

economy would not be in this relatively favorable position if the F
OMC
 had not moved rapidly 
after Lehman Brothers to the zero lower bound and then undertaken three rounds of QE 
as well 
as Operation Twist.  I believe history will show that the 
Federal Reserve
Štogether with the 
decision to recapitalize 
the banking system, in which the Treasury and the Congress played 
critical roles
Šsaved the United States from a second Great Depression. But we need to realize 
that, at some point, we have to put the interest rate back into action as a tool of monetary policy.  

In so doing, 
we™ll not only begin to activate a more normal way of undertaking monetary policy, 
but we™ll also be sending an extremely important signal to businesses and households that, 
after 

seven years
, the American economy is ready to exit the Great Recession and begin the return to 

normal. 
When should we do this?  The answer is, we should do it w
hen an interest rate higher 
than we have now is still consistent with 
the closing of the output gap.  I believe that, on the 
inflation rate
, the 
staff 
forecasts we heard yesterday from Bill Wascher are far less pessimistic 
than what I™ve heard around this table this morning.  I
t™s true we™ve got negative inflation in the 
          
           
  
    
                         
  
   first quarter, but it™s very important to note that forecasts of core PCE inflation 
are somewhere 
well above 1 
percent, and that when you take the special factors into account, it™s expected to 
rise not to 0.7 percent, but to 1.7 percent, which is very close to target. 
We should also note that even the 
r* in the Tealbook, Book B, is about 110 basis points 
above our current real federal funds rate, suggesting that a sooner liftoff would not be 
incompatible with further progress toward our goals if the situation improves.  Or, to put the 

criterion in the words of 
alternative 
B, we should move when the Committee ﬁ
has seen further 
improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 

2 percent objective over the medium term
.ﬂ  And I expect that will happen reasonably soon.  
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B.  On the 
statement
, I support taking out ﬁat leastﬂ and changing ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpartly.ﬂ 
More broadly, paragraph 1 initially struck me, and continues 
to strike me
, as fairly 
downbeat.  But what saves it for me is this comment about how household real income is rising 

strongly, which I think really sets out our narrative for just how much we™re counting on 

consumer spending and is a pretty strong statement in a context of weak spending.  
So, overall, 
it achieves a level of balance, and I™m fine with it with those changes. 
In terms of forward guidance, I™ll just add that I 
believe 
it™s a very bad idea to surprise 
the market with l
iftoff.  I would avoid calendar-based guidance.  I would let the data speak.  I 

would let the statement
, the minutes, 
and the speeches speak. 
I do think the market will get it. 
It™s very unlikely that the people in this room would be approaching a decision to lift off the 

interes
t rate
, with all 
of 
the attention we™re getting, and that this would be a surprise to the 
        
         
     
   
                    
  
   
          
   market.  T
hat™s incredibly unlikely. 
In fact, my guess 
is, as we approach that, it™s not going to be 
a surprise to the market, 
in light of 
all of 
the transparency and all of the attention being paid. 
More broadly, I think that policy is right where it™s supposed to beŠlooking at incoming 
data to see whether the liftoff narrative still holds together, that narrative being reasonable 
growth that is strong enough to support further improvement in the labor market at a meaningful 

pace and inflation moving up to 2 
percent in the medium term. 
The sense I had at the beginning of the year was that the labor market would continue to 
heal fairly quickly in a context of moderate growth, and I thin
k there™s a better
-than-
even chance 
that something like that narrative will reemerge as we leave the first quarter behind, just 
as it did 

in 2014.  
So, as I said yesterday, I feel good about where the current Tealbook forecast is, and 
I consider that to be still on the same path we were on
Ša little bit slower, but a reasonable path. 
I do have to admit I have a concern now, though, that the speed limit on U.S. growth may 
now be closer to 2 percent than 3 percent, because of the drag gen
erated by
 the behavior of net 
exports, and that improvement in the labor market will also slow down as a result.  TimeŠand 

dataŠ
will tell
.  Monetary policy can respond and really has already done so through 

expectations.  It may 
limit further tightening bu
t doesn™t feel 
as though 
it can reverse 
the 
tightening 
in financial conditions that we have already experienced. 
In the case of returning closer to the old path that had strong job growth, we™re close to 
the natural rate.  Monetary policy works with long lags.  Zero isn™t the right number.  This 

remains for me a very satisfying approach if we do get back to that path, and, 
again, that™s my 

modal case. 
The lower path is just much tougher. We™re still close to the natural rate. We™re still 
eliminating slack
, but at a much slower pace, and I think 
that, 
more important, 
the economy is 
       
                      
              more vulnerable to an unwanted tightening 
in financial conditions and probably in a nonlinear 
way. 
I would still want to lift off, just a little bit later
.  But I would point 
out that the 
communication challenges and the risks are much less attractive. 
I™d be very happy to see data come in that would justify liftoff in June or at any meeting 
subsequent to that
.  But, 
having resisted predictions so far for the most part, I™ll co
ntinue to do so 
today.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  I support a
lternative B.  It seems appropriate for the 
statement to recognize that incoming data ha
ve shown softness across a range of 
spending 
categories
, in industrial production as well as in labor market conditions. 
Although there is reason to believe that some of the weakness reflects transitory factors 
or statistical noise, my best guess is that some of it also reflects a more persi
stent slowing in 
economic momentum.  In particular, the negative effects of dollar appreciation and weakness in 
activity abroad on net exports and business investment, as well as the negative effects of earlier 
oil price declines on drilling and mining, appear to be greater than expected, and the boost to 

consumption has not materialized. 
This softness of recent data
, along with the advance estimate of GDP, 
leads me to favor 
removing the bracketed ﬁat leastﬂ language from the first sentence. 
I also support Governor 
Tarullo™s modification to the sentence on inflation.  T
hat is simply a more accurate statement. 
By the same token, reflecting our uncertainty about the persistence of these effects, it is 
appropriate to include mention of some continuing positive economic signals, such as the 

relatively high level of consumer sentiment.  For that reason, I support the additional words in 
        
  
           
            
        
       paragraph 2, which stress that, 
despite the weaker data, the Committee continues to expect the 
economy to expand at a moderate p
ace. 
For those who worry 
that p
aragraph 1 is too downbeat, I would note this is significantly 
counterbalanced by the fact that a
lternative B makes few changes to 
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the 
March statement, including importantly reiterating that the risks to
 the outlook and the labor 
market are nearly balanced rather than emphasizing downside risks in light of recent data. 
In my view, the incoming data, on balance, do not suggest we™re appreciably closer to our 
two conditions for liftoff.  The incoming data on the labor market do not provide evidence of 

further improvement.  If anything, the softer tone of the aggregate spending data raises the 

possibility that labor market improvement may stall this year.
  My reading of the data on 
unemployment, labor force p
articipation
, and the number of employees working part time for 
economic reasons is that slack remains.
  Nonetheless, we™ll have two additional labor market 
rea
ding
s to help with our assessment before the June FOMC deliberations. 
Meanwhile
, the modest improvement we™ve seen in putting a floor under inflation falls 
short of our standard of reasonable confidence.  We™ve seen some encouraging movement in 

core CPI, although core PCE remains persistently soft relative to our 2 
percent target. 
The recent 
firming
 of oil prices and the recent 
plateauing 
in dollar appreciation raise the possibility that we 
might be seeing an inflection point
, but further appreciation seems likely
, accelerating wage 
growth has 
yet to materialize, and market
-based measures of 
inflation expectations remain soft, 
although they™ve shown some improvement as the price of oil has firmed. 
It™s possible that the data we 
will 
receive 
in the coming months 
will reveal the weakness 
in the data to have been a temporary aberration, and that momentum in underlying activity is 

undiminished.  It could also be that incoming data and economic developments abroad will show 
                  
     
                  
       
 foreign activity to be on more stable footing than now appears to be the case.  
If so and if price 
inflation 
and 
measures of in
flation expectation
s show further signs of firming, then liftoff could 
be appropriate.  On balance, my assessment is that
, although June should remain on the table, the 
probability of liftoff has shifted from June to later in the year.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLE
N.  Thank you.  
Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.
  I support a
lternative B.  Given the 
slowdown in growth, the weaker payroll trend, and a host of other weak economic data, I think 

it™s unlikely, speaking for myself, that I™m going to see su
fficient news in the next seven weeks 

that™
ll cause me to want to lift off at the June FOMC meeting.
  That said, I wouldn™t rule it out 
completely
, because, as 
Governor 
Fischer makes clear, it™s possible that we could see two strong 
employment reports and a big upturn in economic activity.  So we could get there.  I just don™t 

think that™s very likely at this point. 
I hope the economy is going to cooperate and is going to make a September liftoff 
feasible, but I 
don™t even 
really have that much confidence about that, 
either. 
The Tealbook 
forecast is actually interesting now in the sense of how flat the unemployment rate trajectory is. 

So modest shortfalls in growth could actually cause the unemployment rate trajectory to be 

completely flat or even tick up.  In that case, we might not find ourselves yet 
able to pass the 
ﬁfurther improvement in the labor market
ﬂ test. 
I think that 
ﬁfurther improvement in the labor marketﬂ and ﬁreasonably confident [about] 
inflation
ﬂ are really good tests, and I feel very comf
ortable using those 
when 
speaking about my 
own views in terms of the tim
ing 
of liftoff
.  We should talk about that in speeches and make 
those our criteria, and that will help the market participants think along with us. 
       
                                
   
     
             
In terms of language, I™m with every
one else. I would delete ﬁat least.ﬂ  I™m not that 
confident that it™s all due to transitory factors
, so 
I think ﬁat leastﬂ goes a little too far. 
With respect to President Mester™s suggestion to change the sentence about consumption, 
I believe 
the meanin
g is the same. 
MS. MESTER.  The meaning is the same. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Given 
that 
the meaning is the same, I guess I prefer to go 
with the more parsimonious number of wordsŠ
a more direct approach.  So I think 
I prefer what 
we have. 
MS. MESTER.  I 
think second derivatives are harder to understand. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo™s ﬁpartlyﬂ versus ﬁlargely,ﬂ 
I think you really could go either way.  You think about the gap between our target of 2 
percent 

for inflation and where we 
are. 
My judgment would be 
that
 about two-thirds of that gap is due to 
lower energy prices and the stronger dollar, so about one-third is due to other things.  You could 
call that ﬁlargelyﬂ if you wanted to
, or you could call that ﬁpartly.ﬂ 
It™s really wh
at the 
Committee wants to communicate in terms of how concerned they are about inflation being low 
that should drive whether you want to be ﬁ
largely
ﬂ or ﬁ
partly.
ﬂ  I would slightly favor ﬁ
partly
ﬂ because I™m not as concerned about inflation today as I was six weeks ago, but I™m happy to 

accept the judgment of the Committee. 
With respect to the statement, I™m really glad that we™
re now in a data-dependent place, 
and I don™t feel bad about that in the slightest.  The market should be able to think along with us 

as they see the data
, as long as they can interpret them through the prism of labor market 

improvement and 
whether we are
 becoming reasonably confident about the inflation outlook 

over the medium term.  
If the market starts to diverge from what our expe
ctations are, there 
are 
                    
     
                        
       
 plenty of forums in which to remind people of what the data mean to us in terms of those two 
criteria.  I think we can easily pull the market back. 
Lastly, Chair 
Yellen 
opened the meeting by recognizing Chris Cummings
, so I want to 
close my remarks similarly.  I want to acknowledge Chris™
s service to the New York Fed
, the 
Federal Reserve System
, and this Committee.  On several occasions during the crisis
, Chris was 
forced to sit in this chair and provide the New York Fed™s views on monetary policy, and she did 

that very ably.  We hope that will never have to happen again. 
In terms of Chris™
s contributions to the 
System, they™re very large.  She™s been a great 
colleague to me and to many others throughout the Federal Reserve System.  I™ve heard many 

people comment to me over the past few days and weeks about how much they™re going to miss 

her and how important she™s been in contributing to the Federal Reserve System writ 
large, as 
opposed to just the New York Fed.  She embodies, in my mind, the modern central banker 
in that 
she has a 
very deep and broad portfolio, ranging from 
serving as p
roduct d
irector for the 
Wholesale Product Office to chairing the Financial Stability Board™s Cross
-Border Crisis 
Management Group.  That™s a pretty wide span of responsibilities. 
I want to thank her personally for her wise counsel and support during my tenure.  And, 
of course, I wish you the best in all 
of your future endeavors.  [Applause] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thanks, everybody.  
First of all, 
let me acknowledge 
that I 
heard the support for 
a Committee discussion about 
r* and the factors influencing it, and I also 
think that™s a good idea
.  W
e™ll work with Thomas and others to see if we can put that together.  
It™s a great idea. 
I heard
, in gene
ral
, broad-based support for 
alternative 
B for today, and we have a few 
language issues to review.
  First, starting at the top of 
paragraph 1, we have the bracketed ﬁat 
         
       
               
   
               least,ﬂ and I actually heard a large number of people who suggested we not include the bracketed 
ﬁat least.ﬂ
  Let me give anybody who wants it in there an opportunity to say 
so.  President 
Lacker
, I heard you support putting it in there, but are there others?  [No response] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Then I will
Š MR. LACKER.  I c
ould support deleting 
it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great. 
So we will remove the bracketed ﬁat least.ﬂ
  The next 
change suggested was President Mester™s recommend
ed change in the language about household 
spending.  Just to remind you, she suggested changing the words ﬁGrowth in household spending 

decline
dﬂ to ﬁ
Household spending continued to grow
, although at a s
lower pace.ﬂ 
I heard a little 
bit of support, not a great deal, and a couple of people 
were opposed.  Let me just ask
ŠI think I 
heard two supporters in addition to 
President Mester.  Is there widespread support for that 

change?  If so, please indicate if you support that change. 
MR. FISCHER.  I do. 
PARTICIPANT.  I support the change. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I see 
three
 people who are supportive.  And how many are 
opposed?
  [Show of hands]  Okay.  I™m going toŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Chair™s prerogative. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Chair™s prerogative
.  I think leaving it as is
, rather than going with the 
suggestion, is, frankly, my own preference. 
Finally
, we have Governor Tarullo™s 
suggested change
.  That would be in the ﬁinflationﬂ 
sentence, the next
-to-last sentence in 
paragraph 1, and the suggestion is to change ﬁlargely 
reflectingﬂ to ﬁpartly reflecting.ﬂ 
I did hear quite a bit of support for that.  Personally
, I™m also 
               
  
   
      
                
   open to making that change, but let me see what people think who didn™t weigh in on that.  H
ow 
many people wouldŠ
President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  C
ould I ask a clarifying question? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sur
e. 
MR. EVANS. 
Vice Chair
man
 Dudley, you mentioned two-
thirds o
fŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  That would be my characterization. 

MR. EVANS. Was that 
of 
headline inflation or 
core? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Headline 
is zero
.  Core is running about 1.3-ish on a 
year
-over
-year basis
. MR. EVANS.  So you™re saying two-thirds of the low headline inflation. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Yes, exactly. 

MR. EVANS.  Ye
s.  That™s fair. I agree. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It refers to inflation.  It doesn™t refer to core inflation. I 
think you can argue it either way, frankly. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Inflation is running about ¼ 
percent.
  Core is running about 1.4 or 
something like that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.  So about two
-thirds of the gap is in these transitory 
factors
, and about one
-third is
Š MR. EVANS.  When I s
ay inflation
, I™m thinking underlying inflationŠ
something closer 
to coreŠso that™s why I 
believe 
ﬁpartlyﬂ is important
.  But you™re right.  If this was nailed down 
and 
it said headline inflation
, that would be okay.  At any rate, I support Governor Tarullo™s 
recommenda
tion. 
             
          
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
            CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. 
Let me see support for Governor Tarullo™s suggestion.  [Show 
of hands] 
I see broad
-based support.  Is there anyone who feels strongly opposed?  Okay.  So let 
us also make that change. We will change the word ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpart
ly.ﬂ
  And those are all 
of 
the suggestions that we need to review, s
o I think we™re ready, Matt
. MR. LU
ECKE.  The vote will be on a
lternative B 
as depicted 
on pages 7 and 8 of 
Thomas™
s handout, with the changes of taking out the words ﬁat leastﬂ in the fir
st sentence and 
replac
ing ﬁlargelyﬂ 
with 
ﬁpartlyﬂ in the penultimate sentence in 
paragraph 1
.  It will also cover 
the directive on page 12 of Thomas™s handout. 
Cha
ir Yellen 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
Governor Brainard 
Yes 
President Evans 
Yes 
Governor Fischer 
Yes 
President Lacker 
Yes 
President Lockhart 
Yes 
Governor Powell 
Yes 
Governor Tarullo 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You should have your gavel.  [Laughter] 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
Okay.  
We need 
to confirm the date of the next meeting, which is 
Tuesday and Wednesday, June 16 and 17.  Thanks, everybody, for your participation.  The 

meeting is adjourned. 
END OF MEETING 
      
                                                                
    
 ________________ Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
April 28
Œ29, 2015 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 28, 2015, at 

1:00 p.m. 
and continued on Wednesda
y, April 29, 2015, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the 
following: 
Janet L. Yellen, Chair 

William 
C. 
Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Lael Brainard 

Charles L. Evans 

Stanley Fischer 

Jeffrey M. Lacker 

Dennis P. Lockhart 

Jerome H. Powell 

Danie
l K. Tarullo 
John C. Williams 
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, and Eric 
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Helen E. Holcomb and Blake Prichard, First Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Dallas and Philadelphia, respectively 

Thomas Laubach, Secretary and Economist 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 

David 
W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle 
A. Smith, 
Assistant Secretary 
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Eric M. Engen, Michael P. Leahy, and William 
Wascher, Associate Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account 

Robert deV. Frierson,
1 Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market Committee and t
he Board of Governors. 
                             
                           
  
       
         
   
 ________________ Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of 

Governors 
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Governors 
James A. Clouse and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 
William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, 
Board of Governors 
Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider, and Stacey Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board, 
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Michael T. Kiley, Senior Adviser, 
Division of Research and Statistics, and Senior 
Associate Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 

Governors 
Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Joshua Gallin, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci,
2 Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 
of Governors; Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, 

Board of Governors 
Jane E. Ihrig
1 and David López
-Salido, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Edward Nelson, Assistant Director, Division
 of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Eric 
C. Engstrom, Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Penelope A. Beattie,
1 Assistant to the Secretary, Of
fice of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
2 Attended the portion of the meeting following the joint session of the Federal Open Market Committee 
and the Board of Governors. 
                                    Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Katie Ross,
1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
Jonathan E. Goldberg, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

James M. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

James J. McAndrews, Executive Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 
Troy Davig, Michael Dotsey, Evan F. Koenig, and Spencer Krane, Senior 
Vice 
Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Todd E. Clark, Sylvain Leduc, Giovanni Olivei, Douglas Tillett, and David C. Wheelock, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, San Francisco, Boston, Chicago, 

and St. Louis, respectively 
Kei
-Mu Yi, 
Special Policy Advisor to the President, Federal 
Reserve Ba
nk of 
Minneapolis 

Matthew D. Raskin, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Jame
s M. Egelhof,
1 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 
                   
             
  
      Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
April 28
Œ29, 2015 April 28 Session 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Good afternoon, everyone.  I™d like to welcome back First Vice 
President
s Holcomb and Prichard, who will again be representing Dallas and Philadelphia, 
respectively. 
On a sad note, my understanding is that this is the last FOMC meeting for New York 
First Vice President Chris Cumming.  Chris has attended 92 FOMC meetings, 70 of which she 
attended as an alternate voter
.  And, as all of you know, Chris has been involved in a wide array 
of 
System work over many years in all facets of what we do and has been a very wonderful 

colleague.  Chris, I really thank you for your service and want you to know that you will be very 

much missed.
  [Applause] 
Next, I™m pleased to let you know that Brian Madigan has agreed to return to the Board™s 
Division of Monetary Affairs as 
deputy d
irector
, reporting to Thomas, effective June 1.  I think 
all of
 you know that Brian served as d
irector 
of the 
division 
and as FOMC 
secretary
 from 2007 
to 2010.  
Since he retired from the Board, Brian has been a visiting professor in the Department 

of Economics at Georgetown 
University
. Now, as I think many of you know
, in recent years
, the job of 
director 
of 
the Division of 
Monetary Affairs has become increasingly burdensome.  It has entailed serving as the 

Committee™s chief monetary policy advisor, as s
ecretary of the FOMC, and as leader of a large 
organization with c
ritical responsibilities.
  As part of a strategy to create a more sustainable 
situation, Brian will have oversight responsibility for the FOMC Secretariat and will play a key 

role in the production of the minutes and transcripts of FOMC meetings.  Obviously, 
these are 
things he has done superbly well in the past and for which he is eminently well qualified. 
                           
                               
                                                           
  Accordingly, I intend to propose that Brian be appointed by the FOMC as its s
ecretary
.  Unless there are objections, I will 
ask the 
FOMC 
Secretariat to send out a request 
in early June 
for notation 
votes to select Brian 
as our 
secretary
.  Under this 
arrangement, Thomas will 
continue 
to serve as 
the 
Committee™s primary advisor on monetary policy and will also be able 
to 
dedicate more of his 
energy to ensuring that 
the Division of 
Monetary Affairs fulfills its critical 
role 
in supporting our monetary policy and other responsibilities. 
Okay.  Now, 
the first two items 
on our agenda 
today will be 
considered in a joint meeting 
of the FOMC and the Board of Governors, and, accordingly, I need a motion to close the Board 
meeting. 
MR. FISCHER.  So moved. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  O
ur first item is financial 
developments and open market operations, and let me call on Simon to delive
r the 
Desk report. 
MR. POTTER.
1  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Lorie and I will split the briefing into 
three parts. 
First, I will review financial market developments. Next, Lorie will 
review Desk operations.
 Finally, I will discuss staff work on enhancing 
the 
calculation methodology for the federal funds effective rate. 
Over the intermeeting period, domestic financial conditions eased following 
more
-accommodative-
than
-expected U.S. monetary policy communications and 
weaker
-than-
expected
 economic data, including the March employment report.  
On net, nominal Treasury rates declined by as many as 25 basis points, the S&P 500 
index gained 2 percent, and the DXY dollar index decreased nearly 3 percent. 
A substantial portion of these changes came around 
the time o
f the March FOMC 
events, which were characterized as 
being 
more
 accommodative than expected 
despite the removal of ﬁpatientﬂ language from the statement. 
Investors pointed, in 
particular, to the large downward shift in the target 
federal funds 
rate projections 
in 
the SEP 
and, to a lesser extent, the downward revisions to Committee participants
™ projections of inflation, GDP growth, and the longer-run unemployment rate.  
The 

left column of your top-
left panel shows 
that nominal and real interest 
rates declined 
in the one-hour window around the statement and SEP releases
, while measures of 
inflation compensation rose, equity prices increased, and the dollar weakened. 
As shown in the right column of the table, the absolute magnitudes of these moves 
were 
1 The materials used by Mr. Potter and Ms. Logan are appended to this tran
script (appendix 1). 
             
            
    
         
           
     
         
     very large relative to changes in one-hour windows around FOMC statement releases 

over the past decade. 
One hypothesis for seeing moves of this magnitude could be decreased market 
liquidity. Indeed
, late in the trading session outside the window use
d to measure 
these FOMC announcement effects, there was a very large move in the euro
dollar 
currency pair.  The move pushed the intraday trading range for the currency pair to 

over 4 percent, a 5 standard deviation move over the period since 2004, as shown in 

the top-right panel.  The size of the move is comparable to the 6 standard deviation 

range in the 10
-year Treasury yield on October 15, both of which took place amid 

very high volumes.  
The March FOMC events shifted out expectations for the timing of 
liftoff 
according to the Desk surveys, as shown in the middle-left panel.  
The ﬁflashﬂ survey, 

taken 
three 
business days after the March FOMC meeting
, suggests that most of the 
shift occurred in response to the meeting and the large price moves in the hou
r 
following the March FOMC 
statement release
, therefore likely reflect
ing shifting 
policy expectations as opposed to outsized liquidity 
effects
.  Since the flash survey, 

soft domestic economic data and speeches from Federal Reserve officials appear to 

have further solidified this shift in policy expectations. 
The April surveys also showed a notably slower expected pace of policy 
normalization after liftoff. 
The middle
-right panel shows that the probability 
distribution for the pace of tightening in the fir
st year after liftoff, assuming no return 
to the zero bound, shifted toward a slower pace over the period, the first notable shift 

in these views since 
the question was originally asked last September.  
A similar shift 
occurred in the distribution of the expected pace of tightening in the second year after 

liftoff. 
In considering when the Federal Reserve will begin to normalize monetary policy, 
market participants are particularly focused on the outlook for inflation and the 

Committee™s reasonable confidenc
e that inflation will move back to its 2 percent 

objective.  
We asked survey respondents to score the importance of various factors 
they believe the Committee will use in assessing whether reasonable confidence in 

the inflation outlook has been achieved.  As shown in the bottom-left panel, 

respondents assigned the most importance to a further improvement in the labor 

market and the absence of weakening in realized core inflation.  
Over the intermeeting period, market-
based measures of inflation compensation 
increased alongside higher energy prices and a weaker U.S. dollar, as shown in the 

bottom-right panel.  Forward measures of inflation compensation increased at both 

shorter-
and longer
-dated horizons but remain below levels at the end of 2013.  
The 
increa
ses over the period were attributed to the March FOMC communications, 
somewhat higher-
than
-expected 
realized inflation, the increase in oil prices, and 
positioning dynamics in the TIPS market.  Longer-
term inflation expectations from 
Desk surveys were little changed over the period.  Meanwhile, front-month Brent 

crude increased nearly 22 percent but remains more than 40 percent lower since the 
      
   
               
          
            
       
   
                        
  end of 2013.  
As I noted, the DXY dollar index declin
ed nearly 3 percent over the 
intermeeting 
period but is over 20 percent higher since the end of 2013. 
Despite the depreciation over the period, market participants expect the exchange 
value of the U.S. dollar to continue its broad appreciation amid ongoing monetary 

policy divergence across major economies.
 Desk dealer survey respondents reported 
that dollar appreciation seen since last summer has prompted them to revise lower 

their forecasts for 2015 growth and inflation, with the median markdowns to 2015 

GDP growth and core PCE inflation of roughly 40 basis points and 20 basis points, 

respectively. 
A key factor contributing to broad dollar strength has been widening global 
interest rate differentials, especially between the 
United States
 and the 
euro area. 
These interest rate differentials became more pronounced as 
euro-
area sovereign rates 
have traded increasingly negative and yield curves have flattened substantially. 
The 
top-left panel of your next exhibit shows the extent of 
negative rate trading
 by country and maturity. 
 Red indicates that 100 percent of the bonds in that category 
trade at a negative yield, while green indicates that none trade negative. 
Despite the continued decline in 
euro
-area rates and the increasing universe of 
securities trading at negative yields, there have been few market
-functioning issues, 
and the ECB has stated that it has had little trouble achieving its purchase targets thus 

far.
 Even so, it is possible that market functioning strains will emerge over time, and 
to help address such strains, the ECB unveiled details of an augmented 
securities
-lending program aimed at supporting bond and repo market liquidity. 
The declines in 
euro-area rates, coupled with the very large currency depreciation 
and increase in equities, have s
ubstantially eased European financial conditions since 

President Draghi™s remarks at 
the 
Jackson Hole symposium last August.  
It is interesting to compare the asset price reaction 
with
 recent LSAP programs.  Using the 
price changes from when asset purchase
 expectations began to form until three 

months after the purchase programs were announced, the 
ECB™s PSPP and B
OJ™s 
QQE, shown in the left and middle columns of the top-
right panel, 
respectively, 
contributed to significant currency depreciation and meaningful equity price 

increases. The ECB™s program resulted in large declines in German nominal forward 

rates, but 
it has not been accompanied by an increase in longer
-dated 
forward 
inflation measures
.  In comparison, Japanese policies supported a large rise in 
forward inflation compensation and a pronounced increase in equities, perhaps 

stemming from the focus on reaching the new higher inflation target.  By contrast, 

U.S. asset price reaction
s to 
LSAP3 
were
 more limited, as the right column showsŠ 
though it did have a large effect in the mortgage markets, which is not included in the 

panel. 
One potential flashpoint for 
financial markets is the highly fluid situation in 
Greece. While Greek asset prices
 have responded sharply to recent developments, the 

broader market reaction to perceived downside risks in Greece has been relatively 

muted and perhaps a bit complacent.  
Market participants attribute the lack of 
          
  
                  
               
    
     
                
       
  
             spillovers to institutional improvements in 
the euro area, reduced 
private
-sector 
exposure to Greece, and the effects of ECB asset purchases. 
Reflecting the mounting 
liquidity pressure from deposit flight and bank funding strains, Greek banks have also 

increased their borrowing via the emergency liquidity assistance program to 

•76 billion in April from •69 billion in March.  
As would be expected, Greece™s 

Target2 liability, which represents balances owed to others in the E
urosystem
, rose in 
March, shown in the middle-
left panel. This level is near Greece™s prior peak Target2 
liability in June 2012.  It is uncertain how long the Greek government will be able to 

meet its debt obligations. 
Some market participants still expect an agreement 
between Greece and its creditors to be reached but only after
 a high-
stakes game of 
brinkmanship.  
Steve will further discuss Greece in his briefing. 
Shifting to emerging markets, there has been a very sharp increase in Chinese 
equities over recent months, shown in the middle-
right panel. Over the intermeeting 
period, mainland Chinese and Hong Kong equities rose by 23 
percent 
and 16 percent, 
respectively, and, 
over the past year
, the Shanghai Composite has more than doubled.  
Mainland equity outperformance 
came despite a worsening domestic economic 
outlook and proba
bly involved some speculative dynamics, though it was supported 
by expected and actual monetary policy easing.  
During the intermeeting period
, the 
People™s Bank of China 
cut their reserve requirement ratio 
by a larger
-than
-expected 
100 basis points; most contacts expect additional cuts to reserve requirements or 

decreases in lending and deposit rates in the near 
term. 
Equity prices in other emerging markets also increased
, and, as shown in the 
bottom-
left panel, broader EM asset prices rose, partially retr
acing prior period 
declines.
 The moves were supported by the accommodative March FOMC 
communication as well as a moderate abatement of risks in a number of countries, 
including Brazil and Russia.  
This partial retracement of emerging market asset prices 
came despite continued markdowns of expected growth in several countries.  
These 

markdowns and recent U.S. dollar strength have contributed to a broader trend of 

emerging market currency depreciation since the May 2013 JEC testimony or 
so-called 
taper tantr
um. 
Some market participants are concerned that taper tantrum
Œlike volatility in 
emerging markets could materialize as the Federal Reserve approaches normalization. 

Recall that implied volatility in emerging market currencies rose sharply with U.S. 

interest rate implied volatility in spring 2013, shown in the bottom-
right panel, and 
has recently moved back to similar levels.  Decelerating emerging market growth and 

rising corporate leverage, as well as volatility in commodity prices may make 

emerging markets vulnerable as normalization nears. However, these risks are 

somewhat offset by lower emerging market asset valuations and reportedly more 

cautious positioning fro
m emerging market investors, as discussed in the special QS 
memo. 
Volatility in emerging markets is only one part of broader financial market 
volatility that some worry could ensue from expected Federal Reserve normalization.  

Indeed, a senior IMF official 
recently warned of a ﬁsuper taper tantrum,ﬂ 
in which 
              
     
                                        
     negative term premiums 
would be rapidly decompress
ed as domestic policy rates are 
increased; Thomas will comment more on this risk in his briefing.
 Given the 
punctuated bouts of recent realized volatility in the very deep and liquid markets I 

discussed earlier, financial market volatility during normalization could be even more 

challenging for relatively illiquid markets. 
I will now take questions before turning to 
Lorie. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  No questions? 
Lorie. 
MS. LOGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll start 
with
 exhibit 3 and provide an 
update on MBS reinvestments, discuss testing of normalization tools, and conclude 

with the staff recommendation to extend the existing central bank liquidity and swap 

arra
ngements. 
The Desk™s MBS reinvestment operations continue to go smoothly, 
and MBS 
market liquidity remains stable.  
The continued trend 
toward higher prepayment 
speeds in March was largely an ongoing result of the low mortgage rates witnessed 

earlier in th
e year and has pushed the current monthly reinvestment amount up to 
approximately $40 billion, as shown in the top-left panel of your third exhibit.  

Despite the increased size of reinvestments, we do not anticipate having any issues 

with the execution of MBS operations, but we have increased the frequency of our 

operations to accommodate their larger size. 
Testing of the Federal Reserve™s overnight and term RRP operations continued 
over the intermeeting period.  Patterns of total RRP demand remained broadly 

consistent with recent experience, as shown in the top
-right panel.  
The additional 
25 counterparties that began participating in operations on March 16 have only 

modestly 
affected
 overall RRP usage. 
For broader perspective on the Federal Reserve™s 
involvement in reverse repo 
activity, this panel also includes reverse repos conducted with foreign official 

institutions, known as the ﬁforeign RP pool,ﬂ shown in gray.  The size of the foreign 

RP pool is notably above its pre-
crisis levels, largely a ref
lection of central banks™ 
desire to hold greater dollar liquidity buffers, while at the same time they are 

tightening their counterparty 
risk
-management
 frameworks.  Increases in the foreign 
RP pool this period, and since the beginning of the year, have been primarily driven 

by a single customer who has sought to increase the liquidity profile of its FX 

reserves 
due to precautionary 
financial
-stability motivations, in part by raising its 
cash balance 
held 
at the Federal Reserve. 
The Desk conducted two term operations over March quarter-end, the first a 
$75 billion, 14
-day operation and the second a $125 billion, 7-day operation, 

summarized in your middle-left panel.  This $200 billion offering in term RRPs 

reduced the Federal Reserve™s overall RRP offered am
ount spanning quarter-
end to 
$500 billion, down from the $600 billion offered at year-end.  However, the reduction 

did not appear to have an adverse 
effect
 on markets or meaningfully change 
participation, likely because the amount offered was perceived to still provide ample 
           
      
   
    
                     
   
           
         headroom above expected demand.  The 14-day operation was modestly 

oversubscribed, with $81 billion in propositions and a stop-
out
 rate of 9 basis points, 
a slightly higher rate than was expected.  
The 7
-day operation conducted on March 30 
was undersubscribed
, with $101 billion in propositions submitted and a stop-
out rate 
at the max offering rate of 10 basis points, similar to the rates on the undersubscribed 

operations held closer to year
-end.  Substitution between overnight and term R
RPs 
and the breakdown of counterparty demand at the March term operations were 

broadly similar to behavior observed in December. 
As shown in your middle-right panel, the Desk™s RRP operations continued to 
provide a soft floor under short-
term interest rate
s, even around quarter-end.  
The 
federal funds effective rate averaged 12 basis points over the period and printed at 

6 basis points on quarter-end.  While rates and volumes in unsecured 
markets
 over 

quarter-end were broadly in line with expectations, temporary funding pressures in 

secured markets
 were much larger than expected, with the overnight GCF repo index 

for Treasury collateral, shown in the dark blue line, printing at 45 basis points. 
Further, the dispersion in repo rates increased notably.  For ex
ample, the spread 
between rates on overnight Treasury GCF repo and 
triparty 
repo widened 
considerably on quarter-end.  This spread, shown in your bottom-
left panel, reached 
30 basis points on quarter-end.  
While all the factors that drove the larger
-than
-expected widening between repo rates are not fully understood, institutions with 

stable access to triparty repo funding appeared to demand increased compensation to 

intermediate between triparty cash lenders, like money funds, and GCF borrowers, 

such as sma
ller or less creditworthy dealers. 
It should also be noted that the spread between GCF and triparty repo rates has 
been gradually widening over the past several months even outside quarter-end.  
This 
trend is likely partially driven by financial institutions modifying behavior in 
response to regulatory changes and associated higher costs to intermediate between 

triparty and GCF repo markets. 
Looking forward, pursuant to the resolution adopted at the March FOMC 
meeting, the staff proposes conductin
g term RRP tests over June quarter
-end. 
For the June quarter-end, we suggest a slightly different approach to 
the 
public 
communication about the term RRPs than was used in December and March.  As 

outlined in your bottom-right panel, the Desk proposes to re
lease a statement shortly 
after the April FOMC meeting minutes on May 20 that would note the tentative 

intention to offer at least $200 billion of term RRPs in addition to capacity 
of 
overnight 
RRPs for the June quarter-end.  Based on our experience with t
he March 
term operations, we believe that $200 billion in term RRP capacity over June quarter-

end, in combination with at least $300 billion capacity in overnight 
RRP, should 
provide sufficient headroom on total RRP availability, assuming no change in the 

target range.  Further, we would propose noting in the statement that the Desk would 

release the remaining details on Monday, June 22
Šthat is, after the June FOMC 
meeting. 
        
   
     
  
                   
   
  
       
       
     
       
            
        We would thus come back to the Committee with a recommendation of the exact 
size and
 maximum offering rate for each operation at or shortly after the June 
meeting.  This communication approach could be replicated in future quarter-ends 

and should provide the market 
with 
confidence in available supply around quarter-
ends, but, 
importantly
, retain some flexibility to adjust the specific parameters of the 
operations should the Committee decide to lift 
off. 
In order to maintain operational readiness with the TDF
Šboth within the Federal 
Reserve and 
among banksŠthe staff is developing plans to resume a routine, every-
other-month testing schedule that would be similar to that employed prior to the 

series of special larger test operations conducted over the 
past year. Offering rates, 
counterparty limits
, and other terms of these operations would b
e set so that the scale 
of such testing operations would be modest.  The tentative plan is to announce and 

resume the routine periodic testing beginning next month. 
Additionally, the work on implementing changes to the methodology for 
calculating interest 
payments is proceeding according to schedule.  Comments on the 
Federal Register 
notice 
are due by the middle of May.  
If there are no major issues 
raised by those comments, the staff should be in a position to implement the new 

methodology before the June 
FOMC meeting as planned. 
Your fourth exhibit begins with the focus of some market participants over the 
intermeeting period on the discussion of normalization tools 
that appeared 
in the 
March FOMC minutes.
 Contacts specifically highlighted the discussion concerning 
temporarily elevated capacity for the ON RRP facility. 
In the Desk™s April surveys, 
respondents were asked to provide their expectations for both the level of the daily 

aggregate cap and level of ON RRP demand around the time of liftoff. 
As sho
wn in the top-left panel of your final exhibit, 10 respondents expected there 
to be no cap on the ON RRP facility immediately following liftoff.  Among those 

respondents expecting a cap at liftoff, the median expectation was a cap of 

$500 billion, and all anticipated that ON RRP demand would be at or below the cap.  

Across all respondents, regardless of whether they expected a cap, the median 

expected level of ON RRP demand immediately after liftoff was $300 billion, 

unchanged from the March survey. 
However
, many respondents did update their expectations for ON RRP demand 
from the previous surveyŠ
both immediately after liftoff and 
one- and 
three
-years 
ahead.  Expectations shifted in both directions, with a number of participants moving 

their expectations by several hundred billion dollars, perhaps pointing to significant 

uncertainly about the likely level of 
take
-up. 
Respondents were also asked about 
their 
expectation
s for the variation in ON 
RRP demand over various time horizons.  They expected the variability of the ON 

RRP demand around the time of liftoff to be more elevated than recent experience, 

largely due to uncertainties over the mix of overnight and term RRPs 
as well as how 
      
    
   
    
    
    
                       
              
          
      
   
    regulatory reforms might 
affect money markets when rates rise from the zero lower 
bound. In terms of the expected levels of money market rates at liftoff, the median 
estimate across respondents for the level of the federal funds effective rate was 

35 basis pointsŠ
very close to the center of the expected target range. 
The April 
surveys also asked respondents for the probability 
they attach to the level of the 
effective rate averaging within certain ranges during the month following liftoff.  
As 
shown in the top-right panel, respondents assigned very high probabilities to the 

effective rate 
being within the target range and only a negligible probability to the 

effective 
rate 
being outside the range. 
Finally, as discussed in the memo sent to the
 Committee on April 15, we would 
like to ask the Committee to vote on the authorization to renew for another year the 

standing liquidity swap arrangements with foreign central banks and NAFA swap 

arrangements. 
While the liquidity arrangements were authori
zed for an indefinite 
period in October 2013, the FOMC has the ability to unilaterally terminate its 

participation with 
six months™ notice. 
This is similar to the NAFA swap 
arrangements with Mexico and Canada, which are renewable annually on or before 

Dec
ember 15 of each year and require 
six 
months™ notice to terminate. 
The use of liquidity swap lines recently has been sparse, as shown in the middle-
left panel, with demand limited to regularly scheduled 
seven
-day dollar auctions held 
by the 
Bank of Japan
 over year
-end and March quarter-end.  
While this is consistent 
with relatively calm conditions in 
dollar funding markets
, we believe the swap lines 
are an important liquidity backstop, helping to maintain stability and confidence in 

global funding markets.  Additionally, liquidity swap and NAFA swap arrangements 

are tangible and constructive signals of cooperation among central banks, and their 
attendant costs are minimal.
 Liquidity swap arrangements also support the approach 
that the Federal Reserve along 
with other major central banks have endorsed that 
there are ﬁno technical obstaclesﬂ to central banks™ capabilities to provide liquidity 
quickly to a systemically important financial market utility. 
Therefore, the staff 
recommends that the Committee vote to renew the liquidity swap lines and NAFA 

arrangements. 
I will now turn back to Simon to discuss the calculation methodology for the 
effective funds rate. 
MR. POTTER.  Thanks, Lorie.  As detailed in a memo circulated in advance of 
the meeting, the staff has assessed that there might be some merit in changing the 

calculation methodology underlying the federal funds effective rate concurrent with 

the change in data source to the 
FR 2420.  We are interested in the Committee™s 
initial feedback on this 
assessment. 
As you a
re aware, the federal funds effective rate is currently calculated as a 
volume-weighted mean.  That is, each observed transaction rate is weighted by the 

share of total volume transacted at this rate
, and the effective rate is the sum of these 
                         
    
             
                      
 weighted rates.
 The distribution of volume by rates for a particular day from the 
FR 2420 data is shown in the middle-
right panel. 
The 
staff
™s 
assessment is that it may be more appropriate to calculate the effective 
rate as the median (
that is
, the 50
th percentile) of the distribution rather than its mean. 
As shown in the bottom-left panel, the volume-
weighted median generates a statistic 
that is the same as
, or very close to, 
the mean at most times
 except for 
the crisis 
period.  However, on tho
se occasions 
when
 the mean and median do differ 
significantly, the 
staff
™s 
preliminary analysis shows that the median is typically a 
better measure of broad money market conditions across a wide range of situations.  

Moreover, the median is much more robus
t to invalid data.
 In general, for an invalid 
transaction to 
affect
 the median, it must have a large volume attached to it, while the 
mean can be moved by an invalid transaction that has a more typical volume and rate.  

The s
taff believes this characteris
tic of the median would enhance both the integrity 
of the effective federal funds rate as a reference rate as well its credibility as a 

monetary policy instrument. 
 We look forward to your views on this subject, and, 
based on your feedback, the 
staff may p
resent a plan to move forward at the June 
meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  T
hat concludes our remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Are there questions or comments
, particularly in 
response to Simon™s request for comments on the federal funds rate?  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I found 
that 
the staff memo and also the 
memo to Reserve Bank r
esearch 
directors
 made a pretty good case, 
to my min
d, for using the 
volume-weighted median.  I
t™s a better measure of financial conditions for all the reasons that 
you went through, Simon.  
In addition, it™s more difficult to manipulate. 
What 
I mean 
is, in 
theory, 
any trade moves a mean, whereas to move the median
, it either needs to be 
fu
rther 
away 
or bigger.  Anyway, I think it is a good case, and I guess I have two questions 
relating to 
when 
we do ﬁ
socialize
ﬂ this to the public, 
which we may not have the answers 
to today.  One is, 
will a 
median versus a mean have a differential effect on existing contracts
, of which there are many 
trillions?
  Two is, I™d be interested to hear how market participants react to this mean
Œmedian 
thing. 
I think that the potential cost that™s laid out in 
the memo is that of successfully 
communicating 
it to the public.  I don™t really see that as an insurmountable concern.  I mean, 
                       
       
   
  
    
    
                 
  
      very few people even know what the 
effective 
federal funds rate is in the first place, and the kind 
of people who know that ar
e probably able to tell the difference between a 
volume-weighted 
mean and a median if they want to and need to.  I don™t see that as a big thing, but I would 
certainly be sensitive to the views of market participants on that. 
MR. POTTER. 
In terms of the c
ontracts that are written on the 
effective 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate, if we were to pursue this, there would be a long lead time 
during which 
the market 

participants would know that the change is coming.  We would have to weigh the effect that that 

would have, an
d it would have some effect because the median is not always equal to the mean, 

but many of these contracts average over a long period of time.  
So occasions on particular days 
when 
we do see differences 
are
 probably not going to have a large 
effect
 on tho
se contracts. 
What they will be perhaps more interested in is the level of rates that you™ll be setting in 
the future.  If you think about a contract in 2016, that™s going to be very heavily influenced by 

where they think you™ll be setting the target rate. 
The
 kinds of issues to do with the gap between 
the mean and the median are very second-order, compared 
with
 that.  They also have to think of 
things 
like
, ﬁWhere would the 
effective 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate
 be trading in the range?,ﬂ and so on.  
I don™t believe this change is anything 
of 
first
-order importance for 
a contract, and it™s pretty 
typical for the uncertainty that market participants face overall in terms of trading in the fed
eral 
funds market
, which 
we know some large participants have 
left
 and s
ome other participants 
could leave in the future, 
affecting where the federal
 funds 
rate 
trades 
in the range. 
On the market participants™ knowledge of this, I agree that many people probably don™t 
know that much about the detailed calculation of 
the effective 
federal funds rate.  Those who do 
would find it pretty understandable, I believe, that we switch from a volume-weighted mean to a 

volume-weighted median, partly because one of the things that we do know is 
that 
the mean is 
       
                                    
        quite heavily influ
enced by a small transaction at a rate 
that 
is far away from where most of the 
volume is. 
MR. POWELL.  That™s helpful. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I
n the 
LIBOR 
case, the issue about really 
small changes in LIBOR from what was perceived to be a correct LIBOR pricing was considered 

a big issue. 
Here you™ve got a picture of 
a 20 or 40 basis point difference.  I
t gives me a little bit 
of pause that the people 
who
 are contracting on this might be upset by this change. 
MR. POTTER. 
In the crisis period, particularly as the balance sheet got larger, we didn™t 
have that much control over the fed
eral
 funds 
rate
, and that was an event that really was 
exogenous to the calculation method.  Whichever calculation method we would have used, there 

would have been more variance at that time.  If
, arbitrarily
, the Federal Reserve
 had turned up on 
one day and sa
id, ﬁWe are going to change that calculation method,ﬂ without any kind 
of 
forewarning, that would make payments flow differentially to what people expected.  The plan 

here is
, if there is support f
or moving forward 
with
 this, 
it will be clearly communicated well in 
advance, and it will be the type of consideration that all market participants should have to take 

into account when pricing contracts. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments?  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL. 
Well,
 I have a question now.  This 
refers 
to the expectations about the 
size of the 
ON RRP facility 
post-
liftoff. 
This is anecdotal, but it sounds like there™s a systematic 
difference between 
buy-side 
participants
, who tend to be predicting a larger facility, and primary 
                      
        
      
    
     
   dealers
, who are predicting something more in line with what the Committee has been thinking 
of saying.  
Is that accurate? 
MS. LOGAN. We do see some distinction between the two.  The median for the dealers 
is 
$190 billion at liftoff for demand.  For the buy side, 
it is 
$350 billion.  T
here is some variation, 
but there is variation within the dealer estimates as well.
  But I think you are correct that the buy 
side is skewed a bit higher. 
MR. POTTER. 
There is variation within the same 
firm
. MR. POWELL.  Are we incl
ined to attribute more or less weight to the buy side? 
MS. LOGAN.  I don™t think there™s anything in the commentary that would suggest the 
buy side has some better analytics of understanding that from what we™re reading in the 

commentary.  As Simon said, even within firms, we™re hearing the numbers to be quite different.  

In the survey, we did find that some firms had produced written reports that had different 

expectations than 
those 
who
 filled out the survey, 
so I don™t think there™s any additional 
knowledge or analytics that the buy side is drawing upon. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions or comments?  [No response]  Okay.  Then let™s turn 
to swap arrangements.  We have a proposal to renew both the NAFA swap arrangement with 

Canada and Mexico and a proposal to renew the liquidity swap arrangements.  L
et me first ask 
whether there are any questions or comments on these proposals.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d like to respectfully dissent again 
on the 
foreign swap arrangements.  
The 
Richmond 
Reserve Bank has dissented on these swap lines 
going back 20 years on the grounds that they facilitate inappropriate actions by 
the Fed
eral 
Reserve
.  One is sterilized foreign exchange operations, which are inappropriate for reasons I 
       
   
                
                     
   
    
                                                              spoke about in January.  The other is channeling intergovernmental assistance to our 
NAFA 
partners, among others, who may be well deserving of such assistance, but that constitutes fiscal 
policy that™s best left to fiscal authorities
, in our view.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments or questions?  [No response]  Okay.  Hearing 
none, seeing none, we need two separate votes
.  I™d like to first ask
Šand this is an FOMC 
voteŠon the renewal of the NAFA swap arrangements with Canada and Mexico.  All in favor? 

[Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed? 
MR. LACKER.  Opposed. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker is opposed. 
Okay.  I think that passes, and, second, 
I™d like to ask for a vote on the liquidity swap arrangements.  All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes] 

Any opposed? 
MR. LACKER.  Opposed. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Okay.  We need one more vote to ratify 
domestic open 
market operations
. Is there a motion? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Any opposed?
  [No response] 
Okay. 
We will consider those 
approved 
as well
.  Next, I think we™re going to move to our second topic, which is normalization 
procedures, and I™m going to call on Ellen Meade to provide 
a briefing. 
MS. MEADE.
2  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  I will be referring to the handout 
labeled ﬁMaterials for Briefing on Governance Issues Associated with Liftoff.ﬂ  
When you commence the normalization process, the Committee will set the 
stance of policy by announcing the new target range for the federal funds rate.  In 
addition, as you™ve discussed previously, the Committee and Board will set the 

administered rates
Šthe IOER rate will be set to the top of the new target range and 
the ON RRP rate will be set to the bottom of the new target range.  The Federal 

Reserve will also announce the details associated with the capacity of the ON RRP 
2 The 
materials 
used by 
Ms. Meade 
are 
appended 
to this 
transcript 
(appendix 2). 
            
                                      
    
          facility and the discount rate, which will be set at a spread above the top of the federal 

funds rate target range. 
Earlier this month, you received a memo outlining possible arrangements fo
r enhanced reporting of market developments and the governance of decisions on 

operational adjustments to the administered rates around the time of liftoff.  In the 

early days after the liftoff announcement, it may be somewhat difficult to get a clear 

pict
ure of how normalization is proceeding because it may take several days for some 
participants in money markets to adapt to the new market environment.  For example, 

money market participants may need to revise investment guidelines, counterparty 

limits, or other restrictions on their allocation of 
funds 
so that they are able to engage 
in the arbitrage opportun
ities available after liftoff. 
Even if the federal funds rate initially lies below the Committee™s new target 
range, you may judge that the prudent course is to monitor developments while giving 

money markets some time to adjust.  During these early days, you may find it useful 

to 
prearrange
 briefings during which the staff could provide updates on market 
developments and assess the effectiveness of pol
icy implementation, and you could 
ask questions.  For example, you could schedule daily briefings for perhaps the first 

two weeks following the liftoff announcement; such briefings could be held via audio 

or videoconference.  These briefings would not be F
OMC meetings
, so no transcripts 
or minutes would be prepared.  Should you wish to express your views about market 

developments or discuss whether to adjust the target range or the administered rates, 

the briefings could be readily converted into joint meetings of the Committee and 

Board.  If the liftoff process does not proceed as planned and the funds rate is 

persistently outside its new target range, then you would presumably wish to discuss 

the timing and course of possible policy actions, and the scheduled briefings would be 

replaced by joint videoconference meetings. 
As discussed in the memo we sent you, the FOMC and Board may also 
wish
 to 
establish decisionmaking procedures that would govern small operational adjustments 

to the administered rates after the first tw
o weeks or so following the liftoff 
announcement.  Adjustments to these administered rates could be helpful if the 

effective federal funds rate were persistently outside its new target range. The memo 

did not discuss the advantages or disadvantages associ
ated with adjusting the IOER 
and ON RRP rates, either separately or together, relative to the new target range for 

the federal funds rate.  The memo focused on the governance of any such 

adjustments, and we provided two approaches for you to consider. 
Under the first approach, each adjustment would be approved by a vote of the 
Committee or Board.  The Chair could convene a joint FOMC and Board meeting via 

videoconference at which you could discuss potential changes to the administered 

rates; all policymaker
s would be involved in the discussion of changes to the IOER 

and ON RRP rates.  Following that discussion, the FOMC would vote on any change 

to the ON RRP rate, while the Board would approve any change to the IOER rate.  A 

variation on this approach would involve policymakers using SDS to submit 

comments on proposed adjustments to one or both of the administered rates, with 
       
           
      
  
        
   
                      
   
    
          
           
 approvals for changes to the ON RRP rate and/or IOER rate recorded via notation 

votes by the FOMC and Board, respectively.  While this would be operationally less 

burdensome than holding a meeting, and would not require the preparation of 

transcripts and minutes, it would not allow for an interactive discussion and, as a 

result, might be most appropriate for relatively straightforward adj
ustments that the 
Committee had previously discussed. 
Under the second approach, you would delegate to the Chair authority to adjust 
the ON RRP and IOER rates, subject to limitations established by the FOMC and 

Board.  If the first couple of weeks of the normalization process had proceeded 

smoothly and you felt comfortable with the delegation approach, one of the staff 

briefings could be converted to a meeting at which you would formally take the 

decision to delegate authority.  You might prefer this approach to ensure that the 

Federal Reserve is able to respond quickly should market conditions warrant.  This 

delegation would allow the Chair to make small adjustments to the administered rates 

if deemed necessary to keep the federal funds rate trading in its 
new target range.  As 

an example, the memo suggested that the Chair could be authorized to make 

adjustments of perhaps 5 or 10 basis points in the administered rates and 
also 

indicated that policymakers could determine in advance whether they preferred to 

address such a situation by adjusting the IOER rate, the ON RRP rate, or both rates in 

parallel in order to maintain a constant spread between them. There may be some 

communications advantages associated with the delegation scenario in that it would 

clearly separate your decisions on the stance of policy
Šthe target range for the 
federal funds rate established by the FOMC
Šfrom small technical adjustments to the 
administered rates necessary to achieve that policy stance. 
The final page of your handout lists the questions that were distributed with the 
memo for today™s go-round on governance issues.  Another memo that was 

distributed at the same time concerned the setting of the primary credit rate.  The 

lending rate for primary credit was originally set in 20
03 at 100 basis points above the 
Committee™s target for the federal funds rate.  The spread was reduced twice during 

the financial crisis, and has stood 50 basis points above the top of the federal funds 

rate target range since February 2010.  The memo discussed two options for the 

setting of the 
primary credit rate spread:  maintaining that spread at 50 basis points 
above the top of the Committee™s new funds rate target range at the time of liftoff and 

for some period thereafter, or raising the spread to 1
00 basis points at the time of 
liftoff.  During the go-round, you may also wish to share any views you might have 

on that issue.  Thank you; this concludes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Before we turn to questions for Ellen and our go-round, I 
would like to just make a few remarks of my own.  
At the outset, I want to emphasize that 
although our policy tools, by law, have different governance structures, the overall conduct of 

monetary policy is obviously the purview of the FOMC.  The gov
ernance issues before us this 
                           
                   
       morning really don™t concern the determination of our intended stance of monetary policy.  
Rather, this discussion pertains to the narrow issue of how to make tactical adjustments to our 

policy tools to deliver the intended st
ance of policy. 
We have spent a great deal of time and effort in devising our framework for 
normalization, and I am highly confident that it will work. But it is clear that when the time 

comes to raise the federal funds rate, we will face unprecedented un
certainties, and we need to 
stand ready to make adjustments, if needed.  It is important that we agree on an approach for 

managing both the initial phase of liftoff and the process for subsequent adjustments that may 

conceivably be needed once that initial 
phase is complete. 
The staff memo proposed that, 
for the first two weeks or so after liftoff
, we set aside time 
on our calendars to receive frequent market updates and, if necessary, hold meetings to make 

adjustments to our tools through the Committee and Board votes.  During this time, the FOMC 

may need to reconsider the setting of our tools, including the administered rates, parameters of 
the overnight RRP facility, and the use of term tools.  I just want to make clear that
, in my own 
view, decisions during this initial period should not be delegated to me. 
The FOMC and Board should vote on adjustments that are deemed necessary after 
debating the relevant policy considerations and alternative approaches.  For example, if the funds 

rate is trading soft relative to the target range, the Committee should decide whether to raise both 

rates, keeping 
the 
IOER

 RRP 
spread
 constant, or to instead adjust only one of the rates.  
These decisions are not entirely tactical or routine.  My expectation, however, is tha
t after some 
initial period, which the memo is guessing might be two weeks, we will have a reasonably good 

sense 
regarding
 how our approach is working, and only minor adjustments, if any, might be 
subsequently needed to keep the federal funds rate in the t
arget range. 
              
   
         
  
    
         
   
Assuming that our approach works roughly as expected, such intensive monitoring on the 
part of the Committee shouldn™t be necessary beyond this initial phase.  We ought to be able to 
settle into an arrangement in which
, at most
, modest adjustm
ent to our tools, especially to the 
administered rates, will be called for to keep the federal funds rate in the target range.
  I hope 
that such adjustments, if they prove necessary at all, can be made in a simple and efficient 

manner.  From a practical pe
rspective, I tend to favor an approach in which authority is delegated 

to me as 
Chair to make modest adjustments, perhaps up to 5 or 10 basis points, to the IOER and 

overnight RRP rates to help maintain the federal funds rate 
in the Committee™s target range. 
These adjustments would be in accordance with a strategy pertaining, for example, to the spread 

that had been decided by the Committee.  In such circumstances, I would, of course, keep the 

Committee fully apprised of ongoing developments.  If any problems in implementing policy 

emerge
d, clearly we would need to convene a meeting. 
I would expect the Committee to decide on any such delegation only at a time when we 
feel we have a good sense for how our approach is working and n
ot at the time of liftoff. Of 

course, if many of you are not comfortable with such an arrangement, we will have to, as Ellen 

indicated, work out a method for holding Committee and Board votes, likely by notation voting, 

and possibly on short notice, to ma
ke these potential modest adjustments once the first couple of 
weeks after liftoff have passed.
  Regardless of the approach we agree on, it 
will be important that 
it serve
s to reinforce rather than undermine market confidence and our normalization approach.  
Let me stop there.  I very much look forward to hearing your views.  W
e have now scheduled a 
full go-round, soŠ
Vice Chairman
 Dudley. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
So I am going to make a forecast that we are all going to 
agree that
, at least for the first few 
weeks
, we are going to want to have some sort of 
a discussion 
            
        
             
  
        
       if the funds rate is trading outside the target range.
  If we are going to do that, I have a couple of 
questions of the staff.  
At w
hat time of day would it be most appropriate to have those meetings? 
How would it work in terms of having the meeting, making the decision, notifying the marketsŠ 

what would the timeline look like as you are carrying that forward?  Because the memo didn™t 

really get into the mechanics of how you would actually implem
ent this.  I was just curious if 
there is any thought given to that at this point. 
MS. MEADE.  I think that we were trying to be optimistic when writing the memo
.  So we were thinking about the first couple of weeks or so as being briefings and not being about 

decisionmaking. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let™s say they were 
about decisionmaking.  When will 
you know enough in the day to have a meeting, to have decided?  When would you have to 

announce it to the market? 
MR. POTTER. We are still looking at when some of the volume is transacted and also 
scheduling, because not everyone is in the same time zone.  I think 
we believe that 
later in the 
afternoon 
will work
.  And that will give us enough time to then announce to the market that 
evening what the changes would be. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay. 

MR. POTTER.  The other choice is to announce very early in the morning. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I guess I would say that
, if we agree on this, we should 
nail that down pretty soon, because, in principle, this could happen as early as June, and it would 

be helpful if people actually had the time blocked out on their calendar.  I think we need to figure 

out the time slot. 
MR. POTTER.  We are working on it. 
                             
       
               
    
  
      CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions before we begin the round?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Just to clarify your proposed approach, 
any adjustment in the first two weeks of the overnight reverse repo rate would be an FOMC 

meeting. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  I know the memo used two weeks.  I am thinking there is an 
initial period. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Until things settle down, basically. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. When we are figuring things out, and if we have to make 
adjustments, we need to meet, we need to discuss it, and during that phase, until 
we decide 
further things are
Šlet me just call them ﬁroutineﬂ
Šthere would be FOMC votes.  We would 
probably be having videoconference briefings that would be converted to meetings, and both 

groups would be voting. O
nly after whatever that initial period is 
when
 things have settled down 
would we agree 
that 
now we have fallen into a rhythm, and any adjustments, if they are needed 
at all
ŠI mean, I think 
in 
the most likely case, we are not going to need any further 
adjustmentsŠbut if we do, those things 
will be 
routine, and then we are talking about delegating. 
Let™s see.  First, President Lacker, then President Rosengren. 
MR. LACKER. 
In this initial period, would you envision all meetings, or a mix of 
briefings and meetings? 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
My understanding is 
the idea 
is that 
we are going to preschedule 
these times. 
When we start the video meeting, we will have some sense of whether things are 
going smoothly, and we really don™t have decisions to make, in which case the staff could be 

relieved of the burden of doing transcripts and so forth.  I would call that a briefing.  
But clearly, 
if things are not going very smoothly and we need to deliberate, we would convene that as a 
         
           
      
  
                  meeting 
right from the outset
.  And, I suppose, even in the middle, if something bega
n as a 
briefing, and we decided in the middle of that briefing, ﬁLook, we need to discuss something.ﬂ 
Is that fair 
to say? 
MS. MEADE.  Yes. 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
We could then say, ﬁLook, let™s convert this now to a joint Board and 
FOMC meeting.ﬂ 
MR. LACKER. 
Okay.  I ask because it has been a while since this group gathered in a 
briefing format.  I think we did it back during the crisis.  There are some rules about not saying 

something that matters, or has substance, orŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN. Well, we can™t deliberat
e. 
MR. LACKER.  That™s not quiteŠ 

CHAIR YELLEN. We can™t deliberate. 

MS. MEADE.  It is really a distinction, I believe, between asking questions and 
discussing among yourselves. 
MR. LACKER. 
If we have something to say
, like ﬁI think this means we should do 
X,ﬂ then we have to convert it to a meeting to say that? 
MR. 
POTTER
.  Well, you could pose it as a question. 
MR. ROSENGREN
.  Like in 
Jeopardy!
  You have to ask a question.  [Laughter] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I see Scott 
Alvarez is 
fretting
 back there. 
MR. 
ALVAR
EZ.  A briefing is an interaction with the staff, and you can ask questions, 
and it is for the purpose of disseminating information.  If the Committee wanted to have a 

discussion in which they are deliberating about a decision, that would be a meeting itse
lf. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 
      
          
          
                MR. ALVAREZ
.  We could set it up so that it could start as a briefing and be converted 
into a meeting, if that seemed to be the direction the Committee wanted to go in.  We can, 
as the 
Chair says
ŠI think the thought process is 
that 
we will have a pretty good idea before we set it up 
whether there is going to be a discussion, and we will just start from scratch as a meeting if that
™s the case. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Just a 
follow-
up to 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley™s question.  For how 
many of the short-term credit markets is it important to know about the closing in Europe?  A
s we think about the timing of the meetings, are there a bunch of short-
term instruments 
that
 would 
make it 
relevant to 
act
 in the morning, 
because of when Europe closes? 
MS. LOGAN. 
For the repo markets, most of that is going to be U.S. activity, and that is 
going to be early in the morning.  For unsecured fed
eral
 funds and E
urodollars
, there is going to 
be some very active trading in the ea
rly morning hours from Europe.  We saw this during the 
crisis when there was a lot of volume done early, and then there is some late-
day volume as well 
in the 
United States
.  It is going to be a mix.  We are going to do more analysis on the full pattern 
of volume data in the unsecured markets before we recommend a time of 3:30 or 4:00 or 4:30 in 

the late afternoon.  But you can think of the unsecured markets as having two trading periods, 

and the repo as being mostly very early in the morning. 
MR. ROSENGREN
.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  I was looking for a clarification.  In the context, the memo offers that 
both the 
IOER or ON RRP 
rates might be subject to these technical adjustments if we delegate 
them.  When I go back and look 
at the normalization principles, as they are described, they talk 
        
     
                 
              
          about IOER as being the primary mechanism by which we will move the funds rate into the 
target range. 
Let™s say we delegate on a technical adjustment basis 
the 
ON RRP rate
.  That 
seems to 
take care of itself.  But by delegating some adjustment to 
the 
IOER 
rate
, does that 
signal a change in policy stance in any way?  Or will it be understood that you are trying to move 

the spread in lockstep? 
MR. POTTER.  I have gotten this question quite a few times in public.  I use an idea that 
Jamie came up with, which is 
that 
everything we are doing in terms of the mechanics of lifting 

rates comes from interest on excess reserves.  We are trying to keep the overnight RRP as small 

as possible, and that me
ans it is just trying to get better trading in the arbitrage relationship 
in 
which 
you are getting interest on excess reserves. 
I view it as the primary way we are lifting 
rates.  But it is not really a measure of the stance of policy.  The stance of policy is the federal 

funds target range. 
MS. GEORGE.  Okay.  In the context of these basis points we have talked about, it 
would be understood these are technical moves, and thatŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN.  The Committee has set the target range and decided to make small 
adjustments to keep the funds rate there. 
MS. GEORGE.  All right.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Yes.  This is just a logistical question, Madam Chair.  Do I understand 
correctly that what you anticipate doing is, if we agree with the concept of having these 

prearranged 
briefings, that all of our calendars will need to be kept open for two weeks following 
each of the next I-don™t-know-how-
many FOMC meetings? 
       
     
         
                    
 MS. MEADE.  I think we were thinking initially about the liftoff 
meeting.  Oh, well, yes, 
of course. 
MR. TARULLO.  Unless you know something I don™t know.  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You™d have to prepare for the earliest meeting you might 
liftoff for, right? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I suppose
ŠI mean, people will have some conflicts,
 right? 
MR. TARULLO.  They have major ones. 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
We can™t for the next whatever meetings
ŠI mean, we can try to 
block out 
those times.  But
 some people will have trips presumably that they can™tŠI suppose if 
somebody can™t participateŠ 
MR. TARULL
O.  There are already a number of international meetings that several of us 
on the Board, 
I think
, are going to haveŠand 
Vice Chairman Dudley will have conflicts with as 
well. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s my point.  I™d prefer to get this nailed down 
sooner rather than later, so we can block out the time as efficiently as possible.  That would be 

my preference. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Maybe we can call in
ŠI mean, we normally have videoconferences, 
but conceivably we can 
call. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In the old days, 
we had telephone calls, right? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. 
Maybe we could have some telephone calls that people could 
take fromŠ 
MR. POTTER.  As long as they were secure.  That would be the 
issue. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Well, we need to work this out for sure.  Governor Brainard. 
             
               
             
      
  
  MS. BRAINARD. 
This is just 
from a communications point of view.  Would we 
communicate at the outset that the FOMC is going into the mode of daily briefings with the 
possibility that they could take intermeeting action?  Or would we simpl
y be silent on that until 
such time as we found it necessary to take an action? 
MS. MEADE.  The minutes of this discussion will reflect that you have discussed some 
of these issues. 
MR. POTTER.  I take your question as, 
ﬁLet™s be very careful,
ﬂ and I agree
 we should be 
very, very careful.  Maybe we want to think hard about how this is described, because we don™t 

want everyone thinking every day the FOMC is meeting at 4:00 p.m., and we are waiting for this 

thing to come over the wires 
about what the rates ar
e going to be the next day.  That is probably 
notŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  This is contingen
cy planning. 
MR. POTTER.  Yes.  This is a contingency plan. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
This is contingency planning for something that doesn™t 
work as well as we think i
t is going to work.  I think we want to present it in that manner. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. 
My question 
is in terms of contingenciesŠdo you anticipate that we could 
do this by notation vote?  Possibly, 
if there was a conflict
 and you 
were
 traveling, you missed the 
videoconference and 
maybe a staff member was sitting in
Šthey could give you a quick 
executive summary and then the notation vote could be done by a BlackBerry anywhere, right? 
MR. POTTER. 
Again, we would have to look at the timing exactly and tell you what that 
window is, because the meeting could go quite long.  Then we would still have to put out the 

announcement or switch to 7:00 a.m. in the morning or something. 
         
             
      
  
  
                  
     
  MR. EVANS. 
You anticipate making an adjustment in the middle of the dayŠI mean, 
for the market. 
MR. POTTER.  No, no.  After the meeting, it is probably pretty good practice to 
announce the decision.  I would feel more comfortable announcing quite soon after the 
conclusion of the meeting, rather than waiting, 
but
Š MR. EVANS.  That does put a premium on the turnaround. 

MR. POTTER. 
Šyou could have some time gap there and 
instead 
do it earl
y in the 
morning.  To 
Governor Brainard™s question, there 
are 
a lot of complications
Šif this is the way 
you want to goŠ
that w
e would need to describe to you, so you understood exactly which way 
you wanted to go. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Presumably, Simon, you would want to announce this 
the day before, because the money market trading starts very early they need to have this 

information, so they can digest it. 
MR. POTTER.  We are actively checking so you have the full information to 
make 
that 
choice. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let™s begin the go-
round.  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the first question, m
y answer 
is ﬁY
es.ﬂ It™s as simple as that. 
On the second question, regarding approaches, I actually think you laid 
out 
the approach we should take really well in your comments just a moment ago.  W
e hope we 
won™t need to do any of this, but having a 
serious meeting 
to 
discuss what is causing the 
funds 
rate to 
trad
e outside 
the target range, understanding what the effects of moving the two different 
administered rates would be, and having 
FOMC
/Board of Governors 
decisions seems like the 
right 
approach.  But once things haveŠ
I think ﬁsettled downﬂ is the phrase 
you usedŠ
I think it 
                
          
                  
      
       would be completely appropriate to delegate to you any further tweaks, plus or minus 10 basis 
points, say, to the two administered rates.  I fully support the approach that you laid out today.  
I do view this as representing prudent contingency planning more than something that I would 

expect to happen.  I am still pretty confident that we won™t have problems keeping the fed
eral 

funds rate within the range, but I think it is goo
d planning. 
I do think that one of the issues that came up 
in the questions 
asked 
in the 
past minute or 
two is really important, and that is about the communication
s in connection with 
this.  
One of the 
Committee™s long
-standing principles is that, to th
e extent possible, policy decisions regarding 
monetary policy really should be separated from technical issues associated with the 

implementation of policy.  
I™m thinking back to the good old days when the Desk had wide 
latitude to adjust the amount of 
reserves in the 
System
 in order to achieve the 
target fed
eral
 funds 
rate.  I think it would be very useful, if we canŠand this is going to be 
the 
challengeŠ
frame 
the 
communications regarding 
these adjustments t
o the administered rates so 
that 
we indicate t
hat 
these are just mostly technical decisions reflecting, of course, the decisions of the FOMC and the 

Board of Governors on the policy decisions, but really communicated as technical means to 

achieve the policy goals that we have agreed on.  
We really wan
t to avoid this perception that 
moving around these administered rates reflects some kind of shift in the stance of policy or 

creating some noise 
in connection with
 that.  I think we are doing prudent planning.  It is April 

now.  Thinking through these iss
ues now 
makes a lot of sense. 
Again, I support the approach 
that you laid out.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am in favor of delegating to the C
hair 
certain tactical decisions that en
sure that we attain the policy goals voted on by the FOMC.  This 
             
        
  
      
   
   
  
        
          is consistent with the FOMC setting strategy 
but delegating tactical implementation of monetary 
policy.  However, determining the scope and timing of that delegation should wait until we have 
a better understanding of how the constellation of short-
term interest rates will respond to our 
setting of IOER and overnight RRP 
rates 
at, and immediately following, liftoff.  I am still 
somewhat uncertain about how successfully we will be able to targe
t the federal funds rate and 
other short-
term rates at liftoff.  As a result, I could imagine a wide variety of adjustments that 
may be necessary following liftoff. 
While the federal funds rate and other short-term rates may be comfortably bounded by 
the IOER and overnight RRP 
rates
, I can easily imagine situations 
in which 
that is not the case. I 
can also imagine circumstances in which some market rates do not adjust as expected to changes 

in our policy rates. In addition, it is difficult to predict how variable policy or market rates will 

be at liftoff. 
My preferred approach, 
in light of
 my concerns, would be to have frequent briefings, 
initially following liftoff, 
along 
with the flexibility to turn those 
into 
joint FOMC
Board 
meetings, if necessary.  Once the relationship of the funds rate and other market rates to our 

tools, as well as the variability of those rates, 
is better understood, we could agree on the 
appropriate delegation of tactical decisions to the 
Chair.  
Predetermining 
our arrangements for 
delegation at this time serves little purpose
, if they are quite likely to change after liftoff. I 
recommend being humble about how much we know now about liftoff and plan appropriately to 

have significant consultation and adjustments as we develop a more practical understanding of 

the challenges of lifting interest rates from the zero lower bound. 
Similarly, it is probably premature to determine the normal relationship we expect for the 
primary credit rate.  The current spread of 50 b
asis points above the IOER rate seems an 
           
   
                  
             
  
    
    
     
appropriate spread at liftoff. We can decide to alter the spread once it is clear where the federal 

funds rate and other short-
term rates are likely to trade relative to our policy tools. 
In summary, I suggest a highly flexible policy that is highly consultative.  Once 
relationships are better understood after liftoff, we can discuss delegation of tactical decisions for 

achieving our goals.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank 
you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable with a governance 
approach that involves prescheduled staff briefings for a period 
of time after liftoff and then
, after the initial period when things appear to have settled down, delegating authority to the C
hair 
to ma
ke small technical adjustments to the ON RRP and IOER rates between FOMC meetings. 
These technical adjustments would be for the purpose of keeping the funds rate from moving 

persistently outside the FOMC™s target range.  If the Committee agrees on the del
egation 
governance structure, then this delegation of authority should be communicated at the time of 
liftoff. 
It is important that the Committee be aware of the developments in financial markets and 
the effectiveness of policy implementation after the li
ftoff announcement, and the briefings 
would be very useful in that regard.  Whether two weeks is the appropriate time for the initial 

period isn™t clear to me at this point.  If we opt to prearrange daily briefings for two weeks, we 

might also prearrange a weekly briefing for the remainder of the intermeeting period.  Of course, 

the briefings could be converted to meetings, if necessary. 
I do believe it is important that we demonstrate after liftoff that we have the tools to bring 
the fed
eral 
funds rate int
o our target range.  That may necessitate making modest changes in the 
ON RRP rate or IOER rate in a nimble way.  Delegating the decisions for these technical 

changes to the 
Chair seems appropriate. I believe we should treat the IOER rate and the ON 
      
        
   
    
   
     
         
   
   
                  
RRP r
ate symmetrically with respect to delegation.  That is, if we delegate to the 
Chair, we 
should delegate the authority to make technical changes in both rates. 
Changes that are strategic policy decisions should remain under the purview of the full 
Committee
.  These would include decisions to deploy the auxiliary policy tools, like term 
deposits and term RRPs, as well as making larger changes in the IOER and RRP rates and, of 
course, changes in the federal
 funds rate target.  
Particularly if liftoff doesn™t g
o as planned and 
the funds rate is trading persistently outside its target range, the full Committee needs to be 

responsible for making those hard choices and helping to communicate them to the public.  The 

Chair shouldn™t have to go it alone. 
The Committe
e hasn™t had a full discussion of what constitutes successful liftoff.  This 
will help inform whether a technical adjustment is needed.  Let me offer 
the view 
that liftoff will 
be successful if the federal 
funds rate is within the target range
 on most, but not necessarily all, 
days.  In my view, successful liftoff does not require that the funds rate be at the midpoint of the 
range.  
We plan to operate with a target range of 25 basis points because we don™t expect to have 
precise control over the funds rate.  Under those conditions, I don™t think we should require the 

funds rate to be close to the midpoint of the range. 
Communication of any technical adjustments is an issue.  We have indicated to the public 
that at liftoff we will continue to target a range 
for the funds rate that is 25 basis points wide and 
set the IOER and ON RRP rates at the upper and lower bounds of the funds rate target range, 

respectively. 
If we find that adjustments are necessary to keep the funds rate in the target range, 
we must 
depart from these plans in one way or another.  Presumably, this can better be handled 
if, at the time of liftoff
, we acknowledge to the public that technical adjustments to the two rates 
might be necessary and that
, as we proceed with liftoff and normaliz
ation
, the Board of 
             
       
    
                
     
 Governors and FOMC have delegated authority to the Chair to make those adjustments, and 
also 
that any technical adjustments would not constitute a change in policy.  Thank you, Madam 

Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE
 CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable 
prescheduling the staff briefings during the first few weeks following liftoff.  They can be 

canceled if they are not needed
Šall is working smoothly, for example, and the federal funds rate 
is tr
ading within 
its
 target rangeŠor they could be converted to 
joint 
FOMC
Board 
meetings 
if 
adjustments to the overnight RRP and IOER rates are needed to keep the federal funds rate in its 

target range.  Obviously, we have to retain some flexibility about how 
long this period lasts
, depending on what our experience is. 
Turning to the governance approach beyond this initial period, I very much favor 
distinguishing between changes that are tactical, such as small shifts in the overnight RRP rate 
and the IOER rat
e to achieve the federal funds rate target selected by the Committee 
and changes 
in policy, which 
are 
shifts in the target federal funds rate
Šthis 
goes to President George™s 
question. 
I think there is a long history that tactical changes needed to implement the monetary 
policy stance that has been selected by the Committee can and should be delegated either to the 
Chair or to the Desk.  If you consider how policy was implemented prior to the crisis, the Desk, 

in close consultation with Board staff, decided 
how much 
in reserves to add or drain each day in 
order to keep the federal funds rate close to its target.  For many years, presumably as a 

governance measure, there was also one FOMC member on the call
, essentially to keep an eye 
on the proceedings. 
             
               
  
        
         
          
     The d
ecision on the amount of intervention and the means of intervention was left during 
normal times to the staff, the New York Desk, and the Division of 
Monetary Affairs at the 
Board.  In unusual circumstancesŠfor example, August 2007Š
the staff consulted clos
ely with 
the Chair in making those reserve adjustment decisions.  The issue in my mind is whether 

changes in the overnight RRP and the IOER rates that are small and designed to keep the federal 

funds rate in its target range meet this tactical criteria, an
d I think they do. 
The changes contemplated would be to implement the monetary policy stance that had 
already been mandated by the Committee.  
So t
his argues for delegation.  One could even argue 
for delegation to the Desk and the Division of Monetary Affairs staff, but I don™t see any reason 

to go this far.  I would favor delegating it to the C
hair to make clear that it is receiving the 
attention it deserves by senior policymakers.
  Also, delegation to the Chair might be more 
appropriate in this particular 
case
, because such 
decisions are about the level of interest rates 
offered 
on our facilities rather than
 as in the past, on the amount of reserves we might add or 
drain. 
To implement this after the initial period, I would give the C
hair the discretion to 
move 
the overnight RRP rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points, so a range of 20 basis points, 

and the IOER rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points 
as needed to keep the funds rate 
within its target range.  The adjustments could either be in tandem to maintain a constant spread, 

or the spread could be widened or narrowed subject to those criteria. 
In contrast to the delegation of modest IOER and overnight RRP rate changes to the 
Chair, I think any other changesŠ
such as implementing 
the time depo
sit facilit
y and things like 
that or changing the size of the cap on 
the overnight RRP facility
Šshould be left to the full 
Committee. With respect to the overnight RRP 
cap, this is pretty consequential because it will 
                 
      
     
                 
         
affect
 the composition of money market flows, and also it is unlikely that changes in the 
overnight RRP cap are going to be needed on a day-by-
day basis. 
So having the Committee 
make
 these changes is not going to be particularly arduous
; they
 will probably be made on a 
much more irregular ba
sis, if at all.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Yes, I™m comfortable scheduling a bunch of 
briefings that can be converted at short notice to meetings.  I think that adjustment of the IOER 

or the overnight RRP rates 
in the first few weeks following liftoff should clearly require an 
FOMC meeting. 
I would point out that it took us almost a year to figure out how we wanted to set the 
IOER and the overnight RRP rates relative to the funds rate.  Committee members brought 

different considerations to the tradeoffs involved, and the initial settings involve a co
mpromise 
among different views about those tradeoffs.  New information about performance of thos
e settings after liftoff is likely to inform Committee members™ views about those tradeoffs and 

likely require recalibration of that compromise. 
For me
, it™s hard to imagine a routine adjustment. 
The analogy has been drawn to the 
Desk™s draining and adding reserves through open market operations
. I™d point out that it has 
taken decades for those to become as routine as they 
did.  A
nd at times 
when 
the FOMC has 
changed its operational regime, those things have been tricky at first, 
and the Committee has 

likely
, in many of those instances, been very involved.  I™m thinking about the early 1980s and 
times in the 
1970s, 
when
 the instructions to the D
esk were very different.  
It™s going to take a 
while for changes to the IOER or overnight RRP rates to be seen as routine or technical rather 

than something 
like: 
ﬁAll right, we™ve set up a new regime, w
e™re trying to calibrate the settings 
          
       
  
     
  
                        
   of these things,
ﬂ and
 the Committee needs to be involved.  W
hat I™d advocate is that we 
plan to 
make all the decisions at meetings until the first meeting at which a decision 
that is made 
appears
, in hindsight, 
to have been 
clearly 
routine; from then on we 
can delegate th
e routine of 
changing 
it. I don™t think routine changes are likely
, to my mind.  If you think about it, what™s at stake 
here is the spread
: the 
arbitra
ge margin between the funds market and 
the 
IOER 
rate
.  It seems 
like 20 basis points, 15 basis points, somewhere in there.  That doesn™t seem like something 
that™s likely to fluctuate the way the need for adding or draining reserves fluctuated on a daily 

basis.
  If it fluctuates, that™s big news if it goes to 30 or 40 basis points.  I™d be kind of surprised 
about that, and I think we™d want to get to the bottom of it.  I don™t think we have an 

understanding of those markets in which it looks like, 
yes
, they should routinely fluctuate by 10 
or 20 basis points.  I™d urge us just to plan on making these decisions at meetings.  I™m happy to 

delegate if it comes to pass that these turn out to be routine decisions that the Committee feels 
like 
delegating.  Let™s go and make one of those decisions at a time like that and then delegate 
thereafter. 
I also wanted to talk about the discount rate spread.  The discount rate spread is 50 basis 
points, and it™s irrelevant to monetary policy right now in the sense that it doesn™t limit spikes in 
the federal funds rate when reserve supply is unexpectedly shortened.  It™s not going to be 

relevant to monetary policy implementation in that sense until
Š2020, I think
, is the latest staff 
projection.  I
ts relevance now is basically for small banks that come 
up short on reserves due to 
poor planning or some unforeseeable contingency t
hat they could claim is outside their control 
but probably isn™t.  Now, large banks have 
a ton 
of reserves 
that i
nsulate them against shocks, 
and they don™t come to the window.  Right now, in our current situation of 
large reserve 
             
             
      
     
         
  
     balances, this is basical
ly about giving the incentive to small banks to manage their accounts 
sensibly. 
I think our old normal spread of 100 basis points would provide a more appropriate 
incentive, given the amounts of money involved if you actually do the overnight calculation.  
I think we should move back to 100 when we lift off.  I would favor that.  It was there.  We set 

that in 2002. We did some analysis.  There was some thought given to the tradeoff involved.  I 

think it makes sense. 
It would also signal normalization in a 
way that would be useful.   
When you talk about discount window borrowing, the word ﬁstigmaﬂ inevitably comes 
up, and the idea is advanced that, well, keeping 
the primary credit rate 
low helps reduce stigma.  
That is certainly true in the only model we have of stigma and discount window lending, but the 

survey research we™ve done as part of the a group looking at discount window issuesŠthey did 

some survey work on stigma, and what they found is that it is not a relevant consideration for 

small banks. Small banks don™t feel stigmatized. Maybe they feel stigmatized already, but they 
don™t feel as if stigma inhibits their borrowing from the window.  It™s just a big bank or 
a too-
big-
to-fail 
bank 
kind of issue, and large banks don™t borrow now.  In the 
last 
crisis
, we lowered 
the primary credit rate
 when it looked as if there was a rationale for big banks borrowing at the 
window.  It turned out they were getting all of the money they needed from 
Federal Home Loan 
Banks anyway, s
o it didn™t seem to be particularly relevant to large banks either. I don™t think 
stigma is a reason to keep the discount rate spread at 50 basis point rather than 100.  That™s the 

import of that.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank
 you.  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My reaction to the questions posed is that 
they™re really matters of pragmatism.  I agree that planning for daily briefings with the option of 
                  
          
            
         
  
         
   invoking an FOMC meeting is sensible and 
worka
ble.  I™m certainly fine with that. 
I™m a
lso 
comfortable with the approach that you laid out
, with
 the Committee and Board making the 
decisions 
the first two weeks
, and then after that
, the delegation of small adjustments. 
So I™m comfortable in both 
cases
.  There are some details yet to be worked out, and under certain 
scenarios
, we may have time to work them out.  We could hear a second version of this possibly 
down the road. 
I haven™t given a lot of thought to the discount rate question, but I™m gla
d that President 
Lacker raised it and talked about it a little bit. 
With regard to
 trying to figure out what that 
spread should be, I want to throw out one thought, 
and that is a recollection that during the crisis, 

the Federal Home Loan Banks became a so
rt of surrogate discount window.  And the 
relationship of our setting of the rates to their operations and their settings may be relevant for us 

to consider. Those are my thoughts.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
First Vice President P
richard
. MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m entirely comfortable with the 
approach described by 
the
 staff and yourself to be used for informing the FOMC on the 
effectiveness of policy implementation during the initial period after liftoff.  
I™m al
so entirely 
comfortable with the approach 
described as that
 to be used for delegating authority to the C
hair 
on tactical matters once we have declared victory on a successful liftoff. 
As it concerns the spread between 
the 
IOER 
rate 
and the discount rate, I think it™s 
actually probably best to 
quiesce 
and minimize the variability at
, and immediately after
, liftoff. 
My preference would be to stay with the 50 basis point spread until we have some separation of 

these events.
  I think the number of moving parts 
at the 
time of liftoff could work against us, 
            
   
      
           
          
       
        especially as we try to understand all of the different things that could be happening, and one 
more change, I think, that isn™t 
necessary might best be saved for later. 
I will add to the earlier discussion on 
the median and midpointŠ
a behavioral issue that I 
would just like 
the staff to consider to the extent that we talk about changing the definition of the 
fed
eral
 funds rate.  I don™t know what the behavioral reaction to that would be
.  It seems like 
when we 
whisper
, people think we shout.  I just don™t know whether people would make more of 
that than is needed, again, at the time of liftoff.  I understand we™re not contemplating the 

definitional change then, but even announcing the plan of a change could have a behavioral 

effect.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  F
irst
, with respect to the meetings and 
briefings, I guess I™m having trouble seeing what the utility of daily briefings for a couple of 

weeks would be in the circumstance 
that 
we think is likely to obtain, which is that 
there™s a 
reasonably successful liftoff. 
It seems to me more likely that 
we would want a briefing or a 
meeting on the Friday following liftoff.  T
hereafter
, I™m just not sure how much there will be to 
say unless things are going wrong, in which case, as everybody says, we™re going to actually 

need meetings and not just briefings.  
But I just note that in passing.  I know this Committee can 

fill up virtually any
 meeting that is set with questions and conversation, but I™m just not sure how 
much there will be to say other than getting emails from Simon and Lorie telling us what has 

happened on day three. 
With respect to governance, like everybody, I think, who™s spoken on this point, I favor 
giving discretion to the Chair, but actually I think I would go further than the staff though.  

Indeed, I™m going to disagree with the Chair in the interest of giving her more discretion than she 
         
   
     
                     
      
     
          
  asked for.  I guess I don™t quite understand why we wouldn™t give her discretion for this kind of 
modest change in the IOER 
rate 
or the 
ON RRP 
rate
 or both, even in the immediate post-
liftoff 
period.  It is new, but we have spent most of the p
ast year talking about how important it is to 
have a smooth and credible liftoff.  And, notwithstanding my substantial uneasiness with the 

potential medium-
term effects of a large ON
 RRP facility, I™ve joined the consensus that our 
dominant goal should be that smooth and credible liftoff, and presumably that smoothness and 

credibility are going to be most importa
nt in the immediate post
-liftoff period, which is to say the 
first couple of days.  I
t seems to me that if we regard the adjustments as 
fine
-tuning 
in pursuit of 
a particular federal funds target rate range, it would be useful to give her the discretion in that 

first couple of days to make such adjustments in an effort to get, as Loretta says, to at least the 

bottom of that range. 
If there™s a major pro
blem with liftoff, we™re going to need another full FOMC meeting.  
But suppose, for example, there™s a little bit of softness in the floor on the first day or two after 
the announced liftoff, and that softness might be firmed by a modest adjustment in the 
IOER 
rate. 
A quick action of that sort might actually buttress the credibility of our tools and intentions 
right from the outset and thereby make the whole process smoother.  
I don™t think
, in any case, 
it represents a policy change, 
because we can talk a
bout it beforehand.  Now, it™s possible that 
markets might read such a quick adjustment as indicating that we lack confidence in the efficacy 
of the decision we had just made a day or two before.  But that™s a judgment that the Chair could 

make in consultation with those best able to discern what market sentiment and intentions may 

be. 
Just by indicating that nimbleness is a 
desideratum
, I think I™ve already explained 
why an 
FOMC decisionmaking process 
won™t 
do the trick.  I just think the logic of what we™re talking 
            
    
    
                 
           
              
     
     about here argues for giving the C
hair this kind of very limited discretion to adjust those two 
rates that we™ve been talking about and 
we will set at the time of liftoff in the period 
in which 
they might be most efficacious in changing or shaping perceptions of how this whole process is 
going to go. 
As to communication, it does seem to me proper to indicate in advance that small, 
operational adjustments might be made in the IOER and ON 
RRP rates between meetings. 
Characterizing those as op
erational adjustments beforehand and contemplating them
, I think
, helps reinforce the sense 
that 
these are technical changes rather than policy changes. 
The 
suggestion that any actual changes be noted by the D
esk, as opposed to 
the Chair or 
the 
Committee 
as a whole, also seems to me a good idea since it would reinforce the fact that these 
rates are more or less operational changes rather than policy changes. 
On the primary credit rate spread, I thought 
President Lacker
™s comments were very 
interesting.  No
twithstanding the fact that they are interesting and we should think about them, 
particularly this difference between 
small
 and large bank stigma when we do discuss this, I 
personally would prefer to wait until the staff thinking about stigma effects and perhaps other 
elements of the discount window are done and maybe a more fulsome memo 
has been 
produced 
and circulated so 
that 
we can have a discussion of that.  It seems to me we™ve got plenty on our 

plate right now, and we might usefully put that conversation off just a bit. 
I want to end by saying I hadn™t thought about it this way, but I fully endorse what 
Loretta said about the criteria for success in how we regard the meeting of the target range post
-liftoff, and I think if we all subscribe to that, it 
would be useful for us, through appropriate 

mechanisms
, to get that expectation out as well so that we™re being evaluated by commentators 
and markets in a manner consistent with what our actual intentions and aims are.
  Like 
President 
      
                    
       
  
      
          
       
    Mester
, again, this is another reason why I think 
these little adjustments even right after liftoff 
are fine for the 
Chair to make
.  And, 
like 
President Mester
, I think using any of the other tools is 
something that should involve the entire Committee.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Did I see a two
-hander?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Like Governor Tarullo, I came to the 
meeting prepared to support delegation in the first two weeks.  I interpreted your earlier 
suggestion as, 
one, respect for governance in a critical period and, 
two
, maybe a desire to have 
more of a group decision than an individual decision.  Could you maybe speak more for another 

moment or two on what your thinking is regarding that? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I feel 
that 
in the days after liftoff, if things are not going exactly as 
we intend, and the funds rate is drifting outside the range, I do really think it™s appropriate for the 

entire Committee to meet, discuss what is happening, try to get 
to the bottom of what the 
problem is, and decide on what the approach is. 
Now, we 
could make the decision 
that
 this is no big deal, the funds rate 
is just fluctuating 
around relative to the target range 
by 
more than we had anticipated and this is the ﬁnew normal.ﬂ 
If we 
want
ed 
to address it 
not by moving the band or changing the spread, but by moving one or 
more rates around to deal with this when we see persistent movements outside the range, and 

early on the Committee says, ﬁLet™s just do this. It™s not that big 
of 
a deal
.  That™s the way to 
address this
ﬂŠand at that point you regard those adjustments as essentially routine, and 
it™s early
, and then you want to delegate it along the lines of what Governor Tarullo said, 
I am 
perfectly comfortable with that, and
, of course, 
that makes life easier.  But I think the Committee 
needs to feel comfortable that we have established procedures that have been determined by the 

Committee that we think are workable and appropriate. First Vice President Holcomb. 
             
        
       
                
MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the staff briefings issue, I say by all 
means they should be useful and perhaps important.  If it should turn out that between the 
regularly scheduled FOMC meetings the funds rate begins to trade frequently below the 

overnight reverse repo r
ate for a reasonably sized ON RRP facility, I support the 
Chair having 
limited discretionary authority to restore 
funds rate control by raising both the IOER and the ON 
RRP rates while maintaining the spread between the two rates.  I agree with Governor Ta
rullo 
that this could be within the first days as well. 
That these rate changes are not to be subject to a 
vote would signal that they are technical adjustments designed simply to implement previously-

agreed
-upon policy.  The main focus would stay on the 
target band for the federal funds rate set 
by the FOMC. 
The simplicity of a system in which the IOER and the ON RRP rates are set equal to the 
top and bottom of the target funds rate band, respectively, is appealing and easily communicated.  

Deviations from that simple system should be temporary with 
reserve
-draining tools
, like term 
deposits and term RRPs, being brought to bear 
whe
n systematically greater interest rate control 
is required. 
I understand that we are entering uncharted territory and may need to act nimbly.  
Therefore, a good solution is for the FOMC and the Board to give the C
hair discretionary 
authority to adjust the IOER
ŒON RRP band relative to the funds rate target range between 
meetings while maintaining the width of the band at 25 basis points.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The staff has laid out a perfectly reasonable 
plan for prescheduled briefings during 
the first two weeks after liftoff.  I expect the process will 

go smoothly and these will end up like routine morning calls.  
If problems arise, I am 
                             
      
          
   
              comfortable with turning the briefings into formal teleconference meetings to handle any policy 
decisions we may have to make. 
After the initial burn
-in period
Šperhaps two weeksŠI also favor the Board and the 
Committee delegating a
uthority to the 
Chair to adjust the IOER and ON RRP rates by up to 5 to 
10 basis points, if necessary, to keep the funds rate within the target range.  I am comfortable 

delegating this authority as early as you™d like.  Even at the outset would be all righ
t with me. 
Basically, these are efficient ways to tweak the dials as necessary, and I see a communications 
advantage to this approach, 
as it reduces the odds of small technical adjustments to 
the 
IOER or 
the ON RRP 
rates being misread as changes in the st
ance of policy.  I completely trust that if any 
major issues arise
, the Chair will not hesitate to bring us in on the decisionmaking process. 
I did have a question.  I can™t remember if this was in the documents or other people have 
mentioned this, but at the time of the first liftoff, would we be comfortable preannouncing that 

we have no intention of adjusting the stance of monetary policy before the next policy meeting 
so that any intermeeting adjustments would be seen as nimble adjustments, just technica
lly to get 
the funds rate in the range? I mean, I can™t imagine that we would really think that we are going 
to have to have a policy tightening in between the first and the second meeting.  But it would be 

unusual, I understand that. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Certainly
, we should make clear that we have an intended target 
range that reflects policy and stand prepared to make adjustments in the administered rates
, and 

that we 
may need to do that. 
MR. EVANS. 
You can say that in your press conference rather than 
it finding its way 
into the statement. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
           
   
              
    
                   
     
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m not entirely comfortable 
with the 
pre
-commitment
 approach that President Evans outlined.  As the Vice Ch
air
man
 talked 
about in some of the remarks he made 
publicly in the intermeeting period, we don™t know 
exactly what is going to happen to financial market conditions necessarily at the time of liftoff.  

If we saw a 
very abrupt tightening in broader financial market conditions, there might be a 
reason for the Committee to think about retracing the steps they have taken, even 
within
 the 
intermeeting period.
  I thought it was an interesting idea, but I, myself, wouldn™t be comfortable 
with that.
  Thanks. 
CHAIR 
YELLEN.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would be happy to set my calendar for 
prescheduled staff briefings during the first two weeks to offer some insight, and I would be 

equally happy to remove them [laughter] 
if the staff judg
es that everything is going smoothly and 
there is nothing to report.  I am also comfortable delegating to the Chair a degree of authority to 
make technical adjustments, and I think we will know whether those are technical or more 
substantive as we go along
. On the issue of the 
discount rate spread, my comments here really are along the lines of 
President Lacker™s
ŠI think this issue doesn™t have much effect right now on overall financial 

market conditions.  But we did make changes to the discount rate during 
the crisis to narrow the 
spread and then widened it to its current 50 basis points.  
Smaller banks do regularly use this 

facility, and Boards of D
irectors 
of the 
Federal 
Reserve 
Banks 
are required to make 
recommendations about the rate. 
It seems worthwhi
le to me to clarify how this rate is going to 
work as we contemplate normalization so that we minimize confusion and perhaps even mixed 

signals at the time of liftoff. 
Thank you. 
              
           
       
       
    
       CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank 
you, Madam Chair.  I appreciate the thoughtful 
analysis and the memos that discuss the intermeeting governance of the IOER 
rate
, ON RRP 
rate, and other policy tools during the early weeks of liftoff.  I thought that the approach 

described of scheduling dai
ly staff 
briefings during those first few weeks is prudent and should 
meet our needs initially, given that we could convert them to official meetings as needed. 
One thing I would note is that it might not always be clear what it would mean to ﬁ
settle 
down,ﬂ so if liftoff takes place, say, in mid-
June or mid
-September, things might settle down 
after the passage of 
quarter-end and then you might have this issue of whether that is really 
settling down from the point of view of being able to deal with quarter-e
nd.
  You might want to 
have staff briefings, again, scheduled for the end of the following quarter, which I guess, 
if we 

raised in September, would be at the end of December.  
I think just the passage of time is not 

necessarily going to tell you 
that this 
is going to be working and working fine.  I think that is 
something to keep in mind as we go forward. 
The staff memo noted that there are quorum rules for the Committee.  Those might be 
useful in the context of these staff briefings.  Not everyone needs to be here for every meeting, 

and the Committee still can operate. 
That might come up in this situation.  I didn™t say this at the 
very beginning, but I should say that I am very confident that this is all about contingency 

planning.  
I am confident the too
ls are going to work.  I think these 
meetings 
are going to 
become
 boring very quickly.  It is going to be like the call.  Not to say that™s boring, butŠ 
[laughter]Š
I misspoke.  But it will become routine
, at least
.  T
hat™s our base
line 
scenario, but I 
do think it™s useful to engage in this contingency planning. 
      
                 
   
      
            
              
   
  I think I am going to be in the minority on my next point, which is, can we trans
ition 
to a 
situation 
in which 
we simply delegate so
-called technical decisions to the 
Chair? 
Here I am not 
supportive of that delegation, and my answer there is shaped by three considerations. First, when 
my staff and I thought about the context in which increases in the ON RRP rate would be 

considered, we weren™t sure that those situations would be that technical 
per se 
or tactical.  It 
seemed like those would be situations 
in which the effective fed
eral
 funds rate would be below 
the bottom of the target range, and that seemed likely to occur in conjunction with the cap on the 

ON RRP volume being binding.  Then there would be some interaction, 
at least
, in your 
discussion about raising the ON RRP rate, and also discussion about raising the cap.  Now, the 

cap is a big deal.  We have talked about that at length.  The Committee certainly has strong 

views about that.  I
t just 
immediately seemed to bring substantive issues into play. 
The second con
sideration is that, a
s I listen to people talk about analogies with the past, if 
we were talking about delegating to the staff, I would almost be more comfortable 
with that 
than 
delegating to the C
hair.  
[Laughter] 
I say that because 
I think 
if 
it is routine enough to be 
delegated to staff, we can delegate it to the staff.  This is clearly not routine enough to delegate to 

the 
staff.
  This is about the Committee deciding tha
t a decision
, which is not sufficiently routine 
to delegate to the staff
, is being delegated to the Chair instead.  T
hat is not something I feel as 
comfortable with. 
Third, basically, there is an issue here of precedent.  This is not about this C
hair.  I f
eel 
perfectly comfortable with you, Madam Chair, and your 
discretion in this matter.  But future 
Committees may not have that level of comfort with future 
Chair
s in related situations.
  Getting 
together for meetings is hard and challenging.  It is always easy to delegate, and I think we want 
             
    
    
                      to fight that tendency, especially in view of how easy modern technology makes it to pull 
together a quorum of the Committee for substantive discussion and deliberations. 
For these reasons, Madam Chair, I recommend that 
the Committee not delegate authority 
for intermeeting adjustments to the 
Chair.  Again, this is all about contingency planning, but I 
think the Committee could make contingency plans to vote, as needed, between scheduled 

meetings, be it by telephone, vide
oconference, telepresence, secure lines
Šall of the other 
suggestions that are out there. 
A quick comment on the primary credit spread.  I thought the idea of doing more research 
and work on this was a very interesting one.  At liftoff, especially if we are going to be doing 

liftoff in the near term, 
the JuneŒ
September 
time frame
, I would favor keeping the 50 basis point 
primary credit spread at that time, then continuing 
to do work on the issue before we decide.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President 
Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I just want to mention 
that 
there has been some loose talk about 
comparing the timing of th
ese briefings
 to the morning call, and I am not in favor of tying them 

to the morning call.  Let me be clear on that. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Notice 
when I was faced with that
, I devised a way to end the 
requirement thatŠ 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I call that leadership by
Š CHAIR YELLEN. 
Thank you.  [Laughter] 
MR. EVANS.  So it can be done?  That™s what you™re saying? 

CHAIR YELLEN.  It can be done.  It only took 50 years, butŠ 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It can be done. 
       
    
                
          
  
  
        CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Generally speaking, I™m comfortable with 
the 
prescheduled
 staff meetings.  Based on the discussion here, I™m wondering whether we need 
one every day.  Maybe twice a week
ŠI™m picking up on some of the comments of Governor 
Tarullo.  I™m not sure how much information you™re going to get from Tuesday to Wednesday.  

You could probably review this a couple of times a week. 
Also, picking up a little bit on themes 
Vice Chairman 
Dudley was talking about, could 
you do this with a subcommittee of the FOMC? Do you really have to have the entire 

Committee reviewing what is s
upposed to be a technical issue?  You could bring the whole 
Committee in
, if necessary, but if everything™s going okay, 
it seems that it
 could be done by 
subcommittee.  That™s something to think about. 
On the governance approach, the 
first part 
was
, should 
we have a vote of the FOMC to 
adjust ranges
? I view this as pretty cumbersome for something that™s supposed to be a technical 
issue.  It sounds nontechnical
. It makes it sound like it™s a policy change regardless of what we 
say, and so I see that
 as a difficult way to go. 
Now, for the C
hair™s authority o
f 5 
or 10 basis points, first of all, I think that moving 
these ranges should be subject to a high bar.  That™s one of my main comments.  
You 
really don™t 
want to do this unless you really have to 
because of
 the communications issues that we™re going 
to encounter.  The payoff to doing this is ultimately pretty low.  
For instance
, maybe the 
fed
eral 
funds 
rate is trading a few basis points below the range
, and now you make this move.  Now the 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate 
moves into the bottom part of the range.  So you™ve 
gained a few basis points, 
but at the expense of markets asking, ﬁWhat are you guys doing?  Are you changing policy?ﬂ 
      
             
  
    
         
     
      
  
   
   
                
 Another question I have that has not come up yet is the authority to go 5 to 10 
basis 
points over what time horizon.  Would you be able to go 5 basis points and then the next week 
another 5 
basis points
, and the next week another 5 basis points? 
I don™t think that™s the intent, 
but that™s something you™ve got to think about here.  And if you went the full 10 basis points and 

it didn™t work
, then I guess the whole Committee would have to come in at that point. 
I see a core problem here
, which we™ve talked about before in our discussions.  The 
Committee insists o
n saying that the f
ederal funds rate is the policy rate, but relatively few trades 
are occurring at that particular rate. 
According to the Committee, 
the IOER rate 
is not the policy 
rate, but, on the other hand
, that is the rate that affects the largest banks in the country
, and it 
affects their funding costs.  And, in other contexts, we have said IOER is our workhorse rate. 
And then you™ve got overnight RRP, which we™re also saying is not a policy rate, but 
which 
is for a market that 
has many traders and 
that 
is potentially 
large at the time of liftoff.  So 
we might say that the 
policy rate is the federal funds rate, but what does 
that 
mean to markets? 
It™s really the markets that are saying what the policy rate is, and if they think moving these other 

rates is more importa
nt than where the fed
eral 
fund
s rate is trading, then we
™ve changed 
policy in 
a macroeconomic sense. 
So, I think this is a conflict, but that is part of the situation we™re in
, given the way we™ve 
decided to do this.  I think it does have potential to sound like a policy move to people inside 

financial markets even though we™re saying, well, the federal funds rate range has not changed 

and so we haven™t done anything different.  The bottom line is 
that I am worried about 
communications issues. Because of t
hat, I don™t think you want to do this unless it™s absolutely 
necessary.  You know, overall I would say 5 to 10 basis points 
per inter
meeting period is okay 
             
             
                           
  
 with me.
  I would agree with President Rosengren that 
it might be premature to decide on this 
today.  You could make the delegation decision later around the time of liftoff, 
if necessary. 
Let me finish with one story that 
old-
timers
 here around the Fed
eral Reserve 
will 
remember from the early 1990s.  I am going to mention ﬁHe-Who-Must-Not-Be-N
amed
,ﬂ who 
is 
former Chairman Alan Greenspan.  At the time, 
it was considered that the 
Chair
man
 had 25 basis 
points on the federal funds rate target and that the 
Chair
man
 could make that adjustment during 
an inter
meeting period without consulting the Committee.  And the Chair
man 
at that time made a 
bunch of those moves and then came into the meeting and said, ﬁNow that I™ve made the move, 
now we don™t have to move at the meeting.ﬂ  This was extremely hot and divisive on the 

Committee in the early 1990s.  We don™t want to get into any kind of situation like that, and I 

know that™s not your intention, but it is a bit of a slippery slope:  What™s going to be delegated? 

Who™s agreed to it?  How much have you agreed to?  Under what circumstances? 
It is a very 
tricky issue
, and it has been a situation in the past on this Committee that has been problematic 
from a collegiality perspective. 
I know we™re not really thinking about anything like that, but I think 
it is a bit of a 
slippery slope.  You™ve got this issu
e about what rates really matter versus what rates 
we are 
calling the policy rate, and you™ve got this precedent in the past 
whe
n it didn™t go so well.
  Thank 
you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 
MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Cha
ir.  I™m comfortable with the governance 
approach in the first two weeks of scheduling daily staff briefings, but I assume that we™ll 

quickly work out whether we need them every day and we can probably unschedule a few of 

them within a day or two.  S
o I th
ink there™s some flexibility the
re.                 
          
           
    
   
  With regard to the governance approach for technical adjustments in the IOER or ON 
RRP rate
s, I don™t know about previous Chair
men
.  I™ve only had one Chair in my life on the 
Board, and my experience with th
at Chair is t
hat if there is going to be any question about a need 
for discussion, she will call for it.  I haven™t detected her trying to get around the FOMC or the 
Board, and I think we can rely on that.  So I™d be perfectly willing to give the C
hair 
an 
adjustment up to 10 basis points.  I agree that 
we need to specify that 
the discretion would be 
granted 
between meetings. 
I™m not sure about the wisdom of constraining the gap between the 
ON RRP and IOER 
rates to 25 basis points. We may find reasons 
why
 we need to move one without moving the 
other, and my general approach is, don™t constrain yourself if there™s no need to constrain 

yourself, because the law of unintended consequences is very powerful. 
On the primary credit rate, I agree with those who think we should t
ry to minimize the 
number of adjustments we make at the time of liftoff, and that this issue is sufficiently important 
for banks to which we give a lot more 
attention than their size would imply.  I™m not sure why 
we would want to start by raising the cost of borrowing by 50 basis points for the smaller banks 
who do borrow at that rate, and we™d need to look at what would happen when we raise the rate.  

And so, for both reasons, 
I favor examining that after liftoff. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  T
hank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m very well aligned with the 
Chair™s 
original comments and additional comments and response to Governor Tarullo™s and 
President 
Lockhart™s points, and with many others around the table as 
well. 
As for the briefings, I think it is fine to schedule them, and if we have them I™ll attend 
them, but I think the only case in which we would actually want to have them is if things are 
         
    
      
              
                 
    
    really not going well.  A
nd I don™t expect that that is likely at
 all in a world in which 
we have 
taken the cap off the overnight RRP or, for that matter, put a very high cap on. 
As far as delegation is concerned, if 
the test is adjustments that are 
routine or 
technical 
in nature
, I completely trust the 
Chair™s instincts on that. I will say that 
if what we™re dealing with 
is a very difficult and failed liftoff situation, I don™t think
, in real time
, that™s going to feel either 
routine or technical.  I think it™s going to feel like something that all of us ought to be involved in 
and accountable for.  I also would not constrain ourselves by holding this space between the 

IOER and 
the 
ON RRP rates
 at 25 basis points.  It might make sense to do something different, 
again, in real time. 
So, for all of that
, I think it™s essentially impossible to anticipate all of these 
things, and I would just say 
that 
I will do what is reasonable at the time. 
In terms of the primary credit facility, it is 
an interesting subject on which 
we can have a 
lot of debate.  I would
n™t touch it until well after liftoff. 
In my view, it™s just not a complication 
that we
, in my view
, need to be taking on right now.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 

MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
the proposal. I think it™s very 
important for us as Committee members to take responsibility for actively being engaged in 

assessing the effectiveness of monetary control and the relative roles of the IOER and the ON 

RRP rates 
in maintaining the federal 
funds rate in the target range for some initial period.  The 
length of that period, I think, should be determined by events.  My guess is 
that 
if the decision to 
lift off is made coincident with a meeting with 
a press conference, as seems very likely, I wo
uld 
expect that period of active involvement to span that quarter-end, but beyond that, 
I think it 
would be unwise to be too prescriptive at this point. 
         
   
  
             
                 
  
    
   
  
  
       
                                                         
  
 When market functioning has settled down, it will be appropriate to delegate to the C
hair 
the authority 
to make the necessary changes to the levels of the IOER and the ON 
RRP 
rates
, or possibly to the spread between them, 
in order to maintain effective monetary control.  I think the 
Committee can make that decision once it judges that the frequent briefings
 and meetings no 

long serve 
the
ir purpose, along with the parameters of the delegation.  
It™s very important that we 
carefully manage communications 
regarding the heightened vigilance and possible activity of the 

Committee and the Board during those initial weeks so that 
our 
communications bolster 
confidence in the normalization process and contribute to smooth market functioning. 
With regard to the appropriate level of the primary credit spread, I would be open to a 
recommendation from the 
staff as to retu
rning it to 
pre-
crisis levels
.  But like many others around 
the table, I would want to put some distance between the timing of liftoff and the 
timing of 
possibly changing that spread so as not to further complicate our 
already challenging 
communications around the time of liftoff.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
I think this has been a very useful discussion.  Let me 
say the Board meeting is now adjourned.  We™re ready to go on to item 3, and I suggest 
we have 
the economic briefings and then 
we™ll 
take a coffee break before going into our round.  L
et me 
turn things over to Bill Wascher
. MR. WASCHER.
3  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll be referring to the top exhibit 
on your pile, which is labeled ﬁMaterial for the U.S. Outlook.ﬂ  The data on spending, 
production, and hiring that we received since the March Tealbook were all weaker 

than we expected.  On the spending side, the February PCE data and March retail 

sales report led us to make a sizable reduction in our estimate of first
-quarter real 
PCE growth.  This downward revision to consumer spending accounts for much of 

the downward revision to first-quarter real GDP growth shown in panel 1 of your 

forecast summary exhibit.  In addition, a number of other categories of spendingŠ 

particularly business investment and residential construction
Šhave also surprised us 
to the downside in recent months, as have the incoming data on factory output.  I 

would note that after the April Tealbook was closed, 
we received the advance report 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
         
        
     
     
   
              
   
  
                
          on capital goods orders and shipments for March, which was also weak but broadly in 

line with our expectations. 
One of the crucial questions that we faced
Šand that you face as well
Šwas how 
to interpret this batch of disappointing news, and wheth
er, in particular, it is best seen 

as just another 
hicc
up in a recovery that fundamentally remains on track toward 
achievement of your policy objectives, or the leading edge of a more serious 

slackening in the pace of recovery.  For the most part, we have 
leaned toward the 
former interpretation.  Accordingly, our projection calls for near-
term real GDP 
growth to return to a pace that is not too different from our March forecast.  In 

particular, although it is difficult to quantify their influence precisely, 
we believe that 
several transitory special factors
Šincluding unusually severe winter weather and 

production disruptions related to labor disputes at West Coast portsŠ
were a small 

drag on first-quarter real activity.  In addition, we think that measured fi
rst
-quarter 
GDP growth will be held down a bit by seasonal adjustment issues that affected 

estimates of state and local construction spending and by a distortion in the BEA™s 

translation of retail sales to PCE associated with the steep decline in gasoline prices 

and the increased share of gasoline sales at large retail establishments such as Wal
-Mart.  We do not judge any of these factors to be exerting a large influence on their 

own, but as a group, our 
back
-of-the-envelope calculations 
put the effect at a
bout ¾ percentage point. 
That said, we have not completely discounted the weaker-
than
-expected incoming 
data.  Specifically, we trimmed our estimate of consumption growth in the second 

quarter a bit as a result of the weaker
-than-
expected March retail sale
s report, and we 
made a noticeable downward revision to our projection 
of 
near
-term residential 
construction activity in response to the lack of a significant pickup in starts and 
permits in March.  We also lowered our forecast for nonresidential structures 
spending, as the latest data on drilling activity suggest that the recent drop in oil 

prices is having a larger effect on drilling and mining investment than we had 

previously anticipated.  Because we believe that the fundamentals underpinning 

household spending remain solid, we continue to expect that real GDP will rise at a 

pace that exceeds our estimate of potential output growth over the remainder of the 

year.  Even so, the 
level 
of real output at the end of this year is almost ½ 
percent 
lower than in our March forecast. 
As a way of providing another perspective on the near-term outlook, panel 2 
presents the results from the Board staff™s dynamic factor model.  This model uses the 

information from a large number of activity and price indi
cators to generate forecasts 

of near-term real GDP growth, and it was among the specifications we showed you in 

the April Tealbook box on nowcasting models.  As you can see, using the data that 

we had available when the April Tealbook was closed, the model 
also predicts a very 
low GDP growth figure for the first quarter followed by a modest pickup in the 

current quarter.  Of course, the model does not know about any of the special factors 

that we think will unwind and provide an additional boost to growth this quarter.  And 

I would note that the range of predictions for first-quarter growth coming from the 
                  
      
              
              
           
         various nowcasting efforts across the System is quite wide, underscoring the 

uncertainty surrounding the interpretation of the pace of activity last quart
er. 
To wrap up the discussion of the near-term spending data, I would remind you 
that we will receive the BEA™s advance estimate of first
-quarter real GDP tomorrow 
morning.  Given how low our current point estimate isŠ
and in light of the relatively 

large degree of uncertainty that surrounds these estimates
, even on the eve of a 

release
Šit would not be especially surprising from a statistical point of view if we 

were to see either a small decline tomorrow or a noticeably stronger increase than we 

have pencil
ed in.  And, of course, the BEA™s initial estimate is itself subject to 
substantial revision over time. 
Moving to the middle panels, the labor market has continued to improve, but here, 
too, the data point to somewhat less momentum than we had anticipated in our 

previous forecast.  In the establishment survey, March total nonfarm payroll 

employment growth was considerably weaker than the very strong pace that we had 

expected
.  I
ncorporating revisions to previous months, the average monthly change in 
payroll employment over the first quarter now stands at about 200,000, which is 

70,000 less than we had written down in the March Tealbook.  The news from the 

household survey also came in a little weaker than we had anticipated:  The 

unemployment rate held steady at 5.5 
percent in March
Šwe had expected it to tick 
down one-
tenth
Šwhile the participation rate, which we had expected to hold steady, 
edged lower. 
To summarize the information from the various pieces of labor market data that 
we have received, panel 3 shows our labor market conditions index, or LMCI.  As 

you can see from the inset box, the LMCI was basically flat last month
.  For the first 
quarter as a wholeŠthe rightmost 
bar in the main chart
Šthe index did increase, but 
at a slower pace than what we have seen in recent quarters.  Just as we did with the 

spending data, we took a modest signal from the incoming labor market news and 

reduced our projected pace of monthly payroll job growth by about 40,000 over the 

current quarter.  We also nudged up our forecast for the unemployment rate in 

coming months. 
Over the remainder of the medium term, our projection 
of 
real GDP growth is 
little revised 
from
 March.  The main conditioning factors that we built into the 
baseline forecast this round
Šparticularly
, the low
er projected path for the exchange 
value of the dollarŠare, on net, expected to be slightly more supportive of real 

activity.  By the end of the medium term, the effects of these changes offset roughly 

half of the downward revisions we put through to the near term, leaving the level of 

real GDP just a little lower relative to our March projection. 
Although it had only a small effect on our projection regarding 
real activity, I 
would point out that we now assume that the federal funds rate will lift off from 
its effective lower bound in September, one quarter later than in our previous forecast.  

Our revised liftoff assumption is broadly consistent with both the ﬁflashﬂ primary 

dealer survey that was taken after the March FOMC meeting and the latest dealer 
        
   
    
  
     
                     
                                      
                                                           
 survey, and 
it is more consistent with the timing suggested by financial markets. In 
addition, as best we can tell, a September liftoff date does not appear to be sharply at 

odds with FOMC participants™ March SEP submissions, in which the median 

participant 
pointed to the third quarter as the most likely quarter for liftoff.  After 
liftoff
Šand consistent with our usual practiceŠthe projected path for the funds rate 
is set by mechanically applying an inertial version of the Taylor (1999) 
policy rule. 
Panel
 4 gives our projected path for the unemployment rate.  With the level of real 
GDP at the end of the medium term only a little lower relative to March
Šand with no 
change to our supply-side assumptions this roundŠthe unemployment rate is 

expected to be 5.1
 percent at the end of 2017.  T
his is 
one-
tenth 
higher than its level 
in the March Tealbook and one-
tenth 
below our estimate of its natural rate.  The slow 
pace of decline in the unemployment rate reflects both the modest pace of GDP 

growth projected over the medium term and our assumption that the strengthening 

labor market will draw more individuals back into the labor force. 
Panels
 5 and 6 summarize the inflation outlook.  The incoming data on price 
inflation have been a touch above our expectations and supp
ort our projection that 
both total and core inflation will step up in the second quarter.  Further out, the 

inflation projection is little revised
.  A
s in previous Tealbooks, we expect 
that 
inflation 
will 
gradually move higher as resource slack diminishes, 
energy prices rise, 
and prices for imported goods turn up again. 
Finally, I wanted to call 
your attention to a change we 
made this round to how we 
characterize forecast uncertainty 
in the Tealbook.
 Specifically, we have revamped 
the methodology that we use to compute confidence intervals 
based on our historical 
projection errors and have also reworked our presentation of these intervals to include 

a comparison with the historical 
range of key forecast variables.  The new intervals 
are typically a little w
ider than the ones we reported previously, and they tend to 
show 
more asymmetry, which is most notice
able in the prediction 
interval 
surrounding the unemployment forecast.  When we 
miss big on unemployment, it 
tends to be because unemployment turns out to have been much higher 
than expected, 
not much lower.  Additional details 
on this new 
methodology were presented in a box 
and associated technical 
appendix in 
the Risks and Uncertainty section of the 
Tealbook and in Jeremy Nalewaik™s pre
-FOMC briefing.  The
se new intervals 
complement our other methodology of using stochastic simulations from the FRB/US 

model to produce confidence intervals around our projection, and we intend to show 

both sets of 
uncertainty measures in future Tealbooks.  I would note 
that 
the 
confidence 
bands shown in my exhibit today continue 
to use the FRB/US 
measures, 
but our intention is 
to eventually extend the new 
methodology to compute confidence 
intervals 
around our quarterly forecasts as well.  Steve will continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.
4  Thank you, Bill.  The harsh weather we endured last winter left 
many potholes in U.S. roads and, as Bill 
Wascher has described, helped create one 
large pothole in U.S. GDP growth.  Interestingly, as shown in panel 1 
of my 
4 The materials used by Mr. Kamin are appended to this transcript (append
ix 4). 
                
    
        
         
          
  
    
                      
    presentation on the international outlook, a pothole also appears in the path of foreign 

growth in the first quarter.  Incoming data have been surprisingly weak in countries as 

diverse as Canada, which shared our harsh winter
; China, which was 
actually 
warmer 
than usual
; and Malaysia, which arguably has no winter at all.  As shown in panel 2, 
the downturn was also evident in global trade, suggesting some underlying malaise 

that was sweeping the globe. 
As indicated by the yellow bars in panels 1 and 2, we faced a very similar p
icture 
exactly a year ago, with U.S. growth, foreign growth, and global trade all turning 

down in the first quarter of 2014.  Accordingly, I went back and looked at my 

remarks for the April 2014 FOMC meeting for lessons that we might apply here.  

First, I 
found that I used the same tired pothole metaphor a year ago.  [Laughter] 
Second, at that time, I also predicted that foreign economic activity would clamber 

out of its pothole and resume moving along the path to recovery, just as Bill 
Wascher 
did for the United States.  Unusually enough, we both turned out to be right, and we 

are making the same call today. 
Certainly, the fundamentals favor a return to solid growth abroad:  Monetary 
policy is generally very accommodative, oil prices remain low, and most c
urrencies 
have weakened considerably against the dollar since last summer.  Moreover, many 

of the factors that pushed down global growth in the first quarter appear to be 

transitory.  Canada™s economy is estimated to have flatlined on account of unusually 

harsh winter weather and a step
-down in oil investment, but with oil prices bottoming 
out, growth should bounce back in the coming quarters.  Mexican output is estimated 

to have decelerated sharply in the first quarter along with U.S. manufacturing, and we 

anticipate that the projected rebound in U.S. activity will boost growth in Mexico as 

well. 
China also accounts for some of the pothole in foreign growth, but its situation is 
more complicated.  As shown in panel 3, GDP growth fell from 7 percent in the 

fourth quarter to only 5.3 percent in the first, well below expectations, as exports and 

industrial production dropped sharply.  It is difficult to parse out how much of the 

first
-quarter shortfall reflects reduced external demand, how much reflects the 
ongoing correction in the property sector, and how much reflects longer-
term 
developments such as the rebalancing of the economy and decline in potential output 

growth.  In any event, the authorities had been easing monetary policy even before 

the weak GDP 
reading
, and they
 have now stepped up this stimulus, including 
reducing the required reserve ratio 100 basis points.  In our projection, the 

combination of heightened policy stimulus and rising external demand pushes growth 

back up to over 7 percent later th
is year before it edges down thereafter. Like the 

booming Chinese stock market, however, this forecast is somewhat speculative, and 

we have revised down our projection a bit in response to the recent weakness. 
Ironically, nearly the only bright spot in the global economy has been the euro 
area, 
for which strengthening industrial production, retail sales, and PMIs point to a 
rise in first
-quarter GDP growth to 1¾ percent (panel 4).  Notably, financial 

conditions are becoming more of a positive for the econo
my, in part reflecting the 
                        
                          
  
  
     
                     ECB™s asset purchase program.  Bank lending standards are loosening, credit to 

nonfinancial corporations is finally picking up 
a bit
, interest rates are extremely low, 
and the real trade
-weighted euro is at its weakest level sinc
e 2001.  Accordingly, we 
see euro
-area growth firming to 2¼ percent in the next few years, provided that 
spillovers from Greece™s crisis remain contained, as we assume in our baseline. 
That, however, is a big ﬁ
if.
ﬂ  The Greek government is struggling in it
s efforts to 
negotiate additional financial assistance from European authorities and the IMF, even 

as it is running arrears to suppliers and raiding the accounts of local governments in 

order to stay afloat.  More than •10 billion in payments on its medium- and long-
term 
debt are coming due in the next four months.  Although the Greeks have reshuffled 

their negotiating team in an apparent effort to ease tensions with their creditors and 

strike a deal, there is still a good chance that the government could miss one or more 

of these payments.  Such an event could trigger a run on Greek banks, and unless the 

ECB stepped up its liquidity support by a substantial margin, the government would 

have to declare a bank holiday and impose capital controls, with a much-heightened 

chance of Greece eventually exiting the euro area altogether. Had such developments 

occurred at the height of the euro crisis in 2012, spillovers to the rest of the euro area 

would have been very destructive.  However, as Simon noted, the regio
n™s financial, 

institutional, and policy framework has strengthened in recent years.  Accordingly, 

we are building into our euro-
area forecast only a small drag 
due to 
spillovers from 
Greece™s intensifying crisis.  Nevertheless, we recognize that, as descr
ibed in the 
Tealbook, far more dire scenarios are possible, not just for the euro area but for the 

global economy more generally. 
While the pace of economic activity abroad remains quite unsettled, two key 
external drivers of U.S. economic prospects have been a bit more quiescent of late. 
First, oil markets have not yielded any big surprises.  To be sure, spot prices, shown 
in panel 5, are up more than $8 per barrel since the time of the March Tealbook, as 

falling rig counts and other signs of declining in
vestment have led markets to expect 
lower U.S. oil production.  However, prices for futures contracts further out on the 

curve are up by less, so that our projected path for Brent prices has been raised just a 

bit and remains well below 
levels prevailing l
ast summer. 
Second, for the first time since last July, the dollar has come down over the 
intermeeting period, as shown in panel 6.  This depreciation likely reflected weak 

data and the fall in expected policy rates here in the United States.  However, I would 

like to remind you that, starting with the March Tealbook, we decided to deviate from 

our standard random-
walk
-oriented model and project
ed a further rise in the dollar
.  That also must have contributed to the dollar™s subsequent decline.  [Laughter] 
In the 
event, from its lower starting point, we assume the broad real dollar will still move up 

some 2
¼ percent between now and the end of the year as the U.S. economy bounces 
back and markets refocus on the policy divergen
ces among major central banks. 
Your next exhibit puts movements in the dollar and their implications for 
economic growth into broader perspective.  As shown by the black solid line in 

panel 1, even at its projected peak early next year, the broad real dollar would be well 
                           
     
                                                                                                
 below its previous two peaks.  The black solid line in panel 2 shows the contribution 

of net exports to real U.S. 
GDP growth
.  We project it at negative ¾ percentage point 
this year and next.  This is the largest drag on growth since the early 2000s, and it 

almost entirely reflects the appreciation of the dollar.  It may seem strange that the 

dollar should depress the net export contribution to such an extent when it remains so 

far below its previous peaks.  However, what matters for the contribution of net 

exports to GDP
 growth is not the level of the dollar but how much it moves, and the 
dollar has appreciated sharply since last summer.  Additionally, the share of trade in 

the U.S. economy has grown over time, amplifying the effects of dollar movements 

on net exports and growth. 
Were the dollar to rise further than we are currently projecting, it would exert 
even stronger effects on the economy.  Returning to panel 1, the dashed line shows 

the 10 percent rise in the dollar described in the ﬁStronger D
ollar
ﬂ scenario in the 
Tealbook.  As shown below, the contribution of net exports to GDP would fall to its 

lowest level since the early 1980s.  Additionally, as indicated in panel 3, core 

inflation would fall below 1 percent on a four-quarter basis before rebounding.  Josh 

wil
l now continue our presentation. 
MR. GALLIN.
5  Thank you.  My material 
is titled ﬁFinancial Stability 
Developments.ﬂ 
My remarks draw on the recent QS financial stability report.  In sum, valuation 
pressures in asset markets have increased since the January assessment and remain 

notable.  In addition, vulnerabilities related to maturity and liquidity transformation 

remain moderate, but leverage in both the financial and the nonfinancial sectors, 

overall, remains relatively low.  Taken together, we think that 
conditions in the 
financial sector are moder
ately prone to amplify shocks. 
I begin with valuations in fixed-income markets.  The yield on the 10-
year 
Treasury noteŠ
the blue line 
in the upper-
left panel
Šand 
term premium measures
Š the red and black lines
Šhav
e remained quite low since the January 
financial 
stability 
briefing.  The possibility that term premiums will move up sharply remains a focus of 

staff analysis
.  I will return to this issue
 near the end of the briefing. 
In corporate bond markets, yield spr
eads to comparable Treasury securities have 
moved down a bit in recent months.  As shown by the red line in the panel to the 

right, the far
-term forward spread for high-yield corporate bondsŠone measure of 
risk premiumsŠ
remains near the middle of its histo
rical range, which suggests that 
valuations are reasonableŠ
relative, that is, to seemingly richly valued Treasury 

securities.  In addition, as shown by the light blue bars in the middle-left panel, 

issuance of high
-yield bonds, a nonprice measure of hot ma
rkets and thus valuation 
pressures, remained robust through the first quarter of the year.  Somewhat in 

contrast, issuance of leveraged loans
Šthe dark blue portion of the barsŠ
has 
declined
, on net, in recent quarters.  Although supervisory analysis of completed 
5 The materials used by Mr. Gallin are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
              
    
       
               
          
      
   
      
   
 deals suggests a modest improvement in underwriting quality, fairly lax nonprice 

terms were reportedly still prevalent in recent deals. 
Moving to the stock market, the expected real return on 
corporate equities
Šthe 
black line in the middle-right panelŠ
has fallen significantly since the 
previous 
stability briefing, as stock prices have advanced and expectations of corporate 

earnings have been revised down
.  The low expected return suggests that valuations 
are quite high.  The equity risk premium, which is the difference between the 

expected return on stocks and the expected real yield on the 10
-year Treasury note, 
shown in teal, has also moved down sharply, though it remains closer to the middle 
of 
its 30
-year range.  Our overall assessment is that equity valuations are somewhat 
more stretched now than they were just a few months ago. 
A variety of changes in the structure of fixed-income markets may add to the 
volatility of interest rates, and, perhaps, to the volatility of volatility.  FirstŠand I™m 

not referring to any panel quite yetŠ
increased electronification of the Treasury 
market could contribute to occasional and surprising spikes in volatility, such as that 

which occurred on October 15 of last year.  In addition, the continued decline in 

intermediation by dealersŠas illustrated by gross and net dealer borrowing, shown in 

the lower-left panelŠis consistent with anecdotes that new regulations have made 

dealers less willing to provide market
making liquidity, even in normal times.  A bond 

market selloff could also be temporarily amplified if investors in bond mutual funds 

rush for the exits, forcing funds to sell into an illiquid market.  The rapid growth in 

assets under management at such fun
dsŠshown in the lower-right panelŠincluding 
funds that hold less-
liquid assets, suggests that the scope for such an amplification has 
increased in recent years. 
The first panel of the next exhibit shows an estimate of the level of ﬁrunnableﬂ 
private money-
like instruments.  This measure of maturity and liquidity 
transformation includes cross
-holdings of money 
market instruments, such as when a 
money fund holds repo.  It is therefore an indicator of the vulnerability of the 

financial system through intermedi
ation chains that rely
Šat one link or more
Šon short-term funding.  The level of these runnables has been fairly stable at a relatively 

high level during the past two years, as growth in uninsured depositsŠ
the light blue 
regionŠ
has offset a decline in repo
Šin red
Šwhich suggests that the financial 
system remains moderately vulnerable to runs. 
A fairly bright
Šor should I say, 
green
Šspot on the financial-
stability map is 
leverage in the banking system.  As can be seen in the upper-
right panel, capital 
cushions at bank holding companies, as measured by both the Tier 1 common equity 

ratio
Šin blackŠ
and the leverage ratio
Šin red
Šhave increased notably.  This 
reflects both Basel III requirements and the resilience required in annual stress tests. 

As you know, no CCA
R bank fell below the stress test™s quantitative benchmarks in 
the most recent round, although three firms had to adjust their 
planned capital 
distributions. 
                  
    
    
      
        
    
                        
    As far as we can tell
Šwhich
, admittedly
, is not very farŠ
leverage in the 
nonbank financial sector continues to be a vulnerability.  As summarized in the 

middle-left panel, overall margin credit has moved down in recent months but 

remains quite elevated, and hedge funds appear to be using a fairly large amount of 

portfolio margining from prime brokerages to lever up in equity markets.  In addition, 

responses to the March SCOOS provided some evidence that counterparties have 

been demanding more leverage to fund non-agency RMBS, high-yield corporate 

bonds, and securitized CRE loans.  Unfortunately, leverage embedded in derivatives 

is hard to measure, so it remains difficult to assess the overall leverage of hedge 

funds, mutual funds, and other investment vehicles. 
Moving to the private nonfinancial sector, the middle
-right panel provides the big 
picture for
 households: Modest increases in household debt continue to be driven 

mostly by prime borrowersŠ
the orange line
Šthough debt of subprime borrowersŠ 
the black line
Šticked up in the fourth quarter.  Student loans and subprime auto 
lending have remained rapid 
even as 
delinquencies on these kinds of debt have 

moved up.  Although we do not currently consider student and subprime auto debt to 

be direct vulnerabilities for the financial system, we are alert for potential spillovers 

to other debt markets. 
As can be seen in the lower
-left panel, the debt
-to-assets ratio for all nonfinancial 
corporate businesses
Šthe black line
Šand for high-yield and unrated firmsŠthe red 
line
Šmoved up further in the fourth quarter, which suggests a continued buildup of 
the vu
lnerability of this sector. 
The lower-right panel provides a very brief roundup of the potential shocks to the 
financial system
 that appear most proximate.  A sharp rise in term premiums could 
precipitate a sudden drop in a variety of asset prices, especia
lly for those with 
stretched valuations.  Moreover, for reasons mentioned 
previously
, these shocks 
could be temporarily amplified if liquidity were to deteriorate just when it is needed 

most or if bond mutual funds were to experience large and disruptive outflows.  That 

said, the risk of a sustained amplification is mitigated by the apparently modest 

amount of leverage in the financial system.  We are also attuned to the possibility of 

damaging spillovers from a rate spike here to emerging market economies. 
As we 
concluded in a special memo, although blowback to the U
nited States 
through 
financial connections would likely be limited, a significant EME recession and a 

presumed increase in risk aversion would damage the U.S. 
economy as well. It is 

worth noting also that term premiums could, instead, stay low for longer than 

anticipated.  Such an outcome would be a shock to investors who have positioned 

themselves for rising yields and could also lead to a further buildup of vulnerabilities 

if investors are dr
iven to 
ﬁreach for yield
.ﬂ  Other potential shocks of note that have 
been around for 
a while
 include a disorderly Greek exit from the euro zone, 
significant geopolitical disruptions, or distress 
at a large global financial firm brought 
about by, say, 
legal penalties. 
I will conclude my prepared remarks by noting a few policy initiatives that the 
staff are pursuing related to specific financial vulnerabilities
, which appear at the top 
         
           
                       
      
       
     
    
    
       of the final exhibit.  
With regard to interest 
rate risk, 
the 
staff 
are in
dependently 
measuring the risks at banks and working with those banks to manage their 

exposures.  On market liquidity, the 
staff are undertaking a variety of projects to 
better understand changes in the structure of bond markets, including increased 

electr
onification, and are working with other agencies to prepare a public report on 
the Treasury market.
  Regarding 
asset managers, 
the staff have begun evaluating the 
potential for 
the growth of 
managers™ activities, perhaps through the use of leverage 
and 
liquidity transformation, to contribute meaningfully to systemic risk and 
whether 
reforms are needed. 
Finally, on leveraged loans, supervisors continue their 
monitoring efforts and will begin a more comprehensive Shared National Credit 

review in May.  
Tha
nks.  That concludes my remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.
  Questions for any of our presenters? 
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m look
ing 
at 
exhibit 2, 
ﬁAlternative 
Scenario
:  Stronger D
ollar.
ﬂ  What are the confidence bounds around these dotted lines? 
MR. KAMIN. Well, the simulations come from a DSGE model, but it™s not an estimated 
model.  So we don™t compute those, although I assure you that an estimated version of 
SIGMA 
that would allow us to compute those is on our long-
ter
m work agenda. 
The most tenuous thing is whether or not you will actually get a 10 percent additional rise 
in the dollar
.  As you can tell from the chart, that™s not a common occurrence.  That™s something 
that, broadly speaking, we think 
there 
might be a 1 in 10 chance of for a couple of years.  So that, 
in some sense
, is the most tenuous. 
In terms of thinking about the 
effects
 on net exports and then on U.S. 
real 
GDP, that™s 
actually a little bit more straightforward in the 
sense that the results from SIGM
AŠ
particularly 
for what I™m showing here, which is the 
net export 
contribution
Šare broadly consistent with our 
estimated trade models, and those don™t give you very different results.  So the 
effect 
of a higher 
dollar on exports and on imports is relatively straightforward, and obviously there are errors, but 
they™re probably not subject to huge errors. 
A larger area of uncertainty comes in 
when 
translating the effect of the change in net 
exports into GDP
, because there is some uncertainty there about the m
ultipliers
.  And there™s 
           
                       
   
          also some uncertainty about to what extent you want to build in a monetary policy response and 
what 
impact
 that has.  
So, for
 the net export contribution itself, I would guess that, 
relatively 
speaking, 
is 
not a huge confidence error.  The confidence errors would rise as you then translate 
that through 
to 
real 
GDP growth. 
MR. BULLARD.   Let me follow up with a 
slightly
 different question.  Over the p
ast 
25 years
, firms have become more globalized and 
have learned how to handle 
global currency 
fluctuations.  They adopt hedging strategies, and they put production in various countries and 

switch production in response to currency movements.  In light of those changes, should we be 

estimating effects of real exchange rate movements 
using 
data 
for the 1980s and 1990s? 
MR. KAMIN. Well, that™s an excellent question.  Let™s just say we periodically do revise 
our import equations, and we do look for signs of parameter instability.  So we™re alert to that 

issue, and we haven™t found any s
trong evidence of these changes in coefficients. There are 
other 
factor
s that, of course, are naturally parsed in.  They kind of correlate with what you 
mentioned, which is that, over time, 
the share of trad
e in the U.S. economy has grown, and that is 
ful
ly taken into account in our estimations because our models do incorporate the fact that, 
as the 
dollar changes exports and imports, those have a larger 
effect 
on GDP. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.
  Any other questions?  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you.  I have a question for Bill 
Wascher 
related to the Tealbook 
inflation outlook.  I think in your presentation you mentioned that the inflation outlook is 

trending up 
because
ŠI think you saidŠenergy prices are going to be going up, res
ource slack 
will be diminishing, and maybe imported goods pricesŠ
I can™t recall the entire list. 
Could you 
                
   
   
                       
      refresh my memory on the contribution of changes in longer-
term inflation expectations for 
delivering that increase in inflation? 
MR. WASCHER.  So
, over the medium-
term forecast
, our view is that the underlying 
rate of inflation is 1.8 percent, and that 
serves as an attractor for the inflation rate. 
MR. EVANS.  Inflation expectations, is thatŠ 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  We call it underlying inflation, but in some sense you may think 
of it as inflation expectations over the medium term. 
Over the longer run, 
that drifts up to 
2 percent because the FOMC says the target is 
2 percent, and 
because 
tightness in the labor 
market 
is pushing inflation up.  
So it doe
s serve as an attractor
, as one reason inflation moves 
back up toward 1.8 percent in the medium term and toward 2 percent in the longer run.  
But
, in 
addition, these other factors are important in getting there over the medium term. 
MR. EVANS.  All right. That™s helpful.  That is different 
from 
the way I was 
remembering it.  I thought that underlying inflation was pegged to your assessment of longer-
term inflation expectations
, and that they were still about 
1¾ percent
, but you™ve got aŠ 
MR. WASCHER.  That
™s right. I think that™s right.
  But maybe I™m not quite getting 
your question.  Over the longer run, we have those inflation expectations 
drifting
 up from 1¾ 
percent 
to 2 
percent. 
MR. EVANS.
    Right.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Yes, I want to compliment the staff on the new charts on uncertainty.  I 
think they are very helpful in thinking about the uncertainty 
associated with the forecast. 
Now, 
going on from what President Evans 
was asking
, maybe, the PCE inflation in Tealbook A, page 
69Šif I look at that, it looks, 
from
 the way the errors look on that forecast, 
like 
the staff has been 
                        
             
      
      underestimating PCE inflation.  Should I interpret this as being that we have upside risk to the 
staff™s inflation forecast? 
MR. WASC
HER. 
Which chart are you looking at?  The top one? 
MS. MESTER.  I™m looking at PCE inflation. 

MR. WASCHER.  That™s largely because of the energy price run-up in the mid-2000s.  I 
think we didn™t 
projec
t that, and I think that™s why the solid line, 
the median
, is above the data 
there. 
MS. MESTER.  But even the distribution looks likeŠ 

MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  Again, I think that™s because of the energy price shock.  
This is a 
relatively short sample with which 
we calculate standard errors around for PCE inflatio
n, for two 
reasons.  One is
, we don™t have data going back a long way, and two is, 
we think that this is 
a period over which inflation had different propertiesŠ
it was more stable recently 
than in previous 
periods.  
So, because of that, I think the influence of energy prices is more prominent here than 
it might be in the longer run. 
MR. ENGEN.  If I could add just one thing that amplifies that point, if you look in the 
middle right at core PCE, the median and the 
projected
 paths are virtually on top of each other, 
which is another way of showing that the total is being influenced by the run-up in energy prices 

and how it feeds into total inflation. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERL
AKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to follow up on 
President Evans™
s line of questioning.  During the 
intermeeting
 period, President Rosengren 
suggested the possibility 
of rais
ing 
the inflation target. 
If the FOMC were to introduce a new 
                 
           
       
              
     
  
        infla
tion target that was higher, would that have a higher gravitational pull 
in the staff™s model 
that we™d 
be pull
ed back to that higher target? 
MR. WASCHER.  In terms of modeling and the way we do it in 
the 
FRB
/US model, 
I think the answer 
is 
ﬁyes,ﬂ 
because we do have a small term that reflects the FOMC
™s stated target 
relative to current underlying inflation.  I think it would be gradual, but I think in 
the FRB
/US model, it would be a stronger attractor than a 
2 percent target. 
Also, i
f I used the Taylor ru
le, 
I think it would imply a much easier 
policy as well. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That™s true, 
a different
 reaction function.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Okay.  I suggest we take a break 
for 
15 minutes 
to get some 
coffee. 
When we return, we have a few 
people who would like to comment on financial 
stability
, and 
then we™ll go to the economic round. 
[Coffee break
] CHAIR YELLEN.  We now have an opportunity for people to comment on financial 
stability, and 
three
 people have indicated they would like to.  
President Rosengren, do you want 
to start 
us off? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank yo
u, Madam Chair. When I talk to asset managers in 
Boston, the biggest concern raised is the problem of liquidity in the secondary market 
for 
corporate bonds.  They worry that when we b
egin to raise rates
, a rush to sell positions in 
corporate bonds will occur, and a crowded exit with few buyers could lead to a rapid increase in 

the yield on corporate bonds.  At least some elements of this concern probably deserve greater 

attention. 
Firs
t, the average size of trades in corporate bonds has fallen significantly relative to the 
average size of trades prior to the financial crisis.  This may reflect an actual or perceived 
          
                            
   difficulty in transacting large trades 
due to
 weakened liquidity in the 
market.  This raises the 
concern that if a significant portfolio rebalancing were to occur, it may be difficult to sell large 
positions in a timely manner. 
Second, there has been a significant decline in the corporate bond holdings of broker-
dealers.  Acc
ording to the 
SEC™s FOCUS reports
, while J.P. Morgan held $29.5 billion in 
corporate securities in 2007, those holdings had plummeted to only $11.3 billion by the end of 

2014. Similarly, Credit Suisse held 
$30 billion in corporate securities in 2007, and their holdings 
collapsed to only 
$4.4 billion by the end of 2014.  
Such sizable declines in corporate securities 
holdings among these key liquidity providers lends some credence to the concern about potential 

liquidity problems in this market. 
Third, 
bond mutual funds
Šwhich were shown in the earlier charts on financial 
stability
Šand bond exchange-traded funds have grown significantly since the financial crisis.  
The exchange-traded funds pose a particular problem if investors view them as highly liquid.  
At the end of 2008, assets under management at exchange-traded bond funds totaled $57 billion.  
By the end of February this year, 
assets under management at 
exchange-traded bond funds had 
soared to $320 billion.  I
f investors assume that the corporate b
ond market is liquid and, more 
specifically, that their exchange
-traded fund shares will always be liquid
, and if they choose to 
sell as we tighten
, they may be surprised at the price at which they transact. 
In summary, the concerns with corporate bond market liquidity as we approach liftoff 
bear
 watching.  The degree of movement out of bonds is likely to be highly sensitive to the 
projected pace of tightening as well as 
to the timing of tightening.  An oversized reaction in this 
market could result in a bumpy exit from the zero lower bound.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you
.                   
  
        
     
           
   
          MR. TARULLO.  May I ask Eric a question? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sure. 

MR. TARULLO.  Eric, can you take it a step further and 
say what the implications of 
your concerns 
are 
for policy? Is it for monetary policy?  Are you advocating a relaxation of 
capital requirements? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  No, I am not advocating a relaxation of capital requirements.   

MR. TARULLO.  I didn™t think so. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I think it highlights that how we communicate around the time of 
liftoff actually is critically important for whether people decide that this is something they need 

to doŠ
to rebalance their 
portfolios quite quickly.  
I think the way that fi
nancial stability interacts 
with monetary policy is, 
it highlights 
that the communication issues become pretty important. 
MR. TARULLO.  That™s helpful.  Thanks. 

MR. LACKER.  Also, 
if it happens, we can say we talked about it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  All right.  Pre
sident Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to thank the staff for the 
excellent assessment of financial stability.  It™s my reading 
that 
the assessment again indicates 
that current policy has not produced any material signs 
of 
financial instability.
  Indeed, it appears 
that the main 
financial
-instability consideration for monetary policy at the moment is 
that a 
near
-term increase in the target range for the fed
eral
 funds rate could lead to financial instability.  
As the report says, 
ﬁTerm premiums
 in benchmark U.S. and other advanced economy bond yields 
are again near historical lows reached 
before the taper tantrum, raising the risk of similarly 
outsized market reactions at liftoff.
ﬂ             
                  
                        The s
taff also identified 
a vulnerability that could propagate this shock from the increase 
in rates.  Specifically
, page 4 of the assessment notes that changes in the structure of the 
Treasury market could amplify the effects of an initial rate move and lead to sudden swings in 
prices 
and liquidity. 
Now, how can we best mitigate this risk?  President Rosengren, I think, highlight
ed one way to think about this
, which
 is through communication, but I have a slightly different 
perspective on the answer to this question.  To answer this question, I think we have to 

understand why long
-term rates might rise dramatically in response to a small increase in short
-term rates. And here I believe that a key consideration is the policy signal associated with such a 

move in the near term.  Raising t
he fed
eral 
funds rate in the near term would mean 
they™re 
initiating liftoff when inflation is far below target and the growth outlook has been weakening.  

Liftoff in such an environment would indicate 
that the FOMC is considerably less willing to 
provide accommodation to respond to adverse shocks than financial market participants currently 
anticipate. 
As a result, they would expect less accommodation in general but especially so in bad 
times, and this expectation of higher interest rates and lower bond p
rices in bad times translates 
directly into higher term 
premiums
. Now, 
it™s tempting 
to conclude that we can somehow mitigate this potential financial 
instability only through 
reassuring verbal communication at the time of liftoff, but I think it™s 
difficu
lt for words to trump the communication content of our actions.  
So, in my view, 
we can 
best mitigate this financial stability risk by ensuring that our actions are always clearly connected 

to our pursued, 
declared objectives. 
In the current context, that
 would mean deferring liftoff 
until the economic data clearly indicate that raising interest rates is necessary for the FOMC to 

achieve its declared objectives of 
2 percent inflation and maximum employment over the 
       
  
                
    
       
               
  medium 
term. I™ll sa
y more about what this conclusion means for our policy deliberations 
tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I™m going to pick up on the same topic that President Rosengren 
introduced and President Kocherlakota discussed.  However, I will not be expressing my views 

on monetary policy at this time.  [Laughter] 
I think Governor Tarullo asked a great question:  
What do you do with this information? I™m going to go a slightly different direction based on 

something Josh said, which I found very interesting. 
I was struck by two sentences on page 17 of the QS report.  
The
y are 
right 
after each 
other.  O
ne is
 that large banks™ liquidity ratios continue to improve.  The next sentence is 
basically that there is less liqui
dity in markets.
  These two sentences are 
right next to each other, 
and immediately
, when I read this
, I said, ﬁWhat™s the connection here?  To what extent is the 
liquidity requirements or the capital requirements, for that matter, affecting the willingnes
s of 
broker-
dealers to basically make markets and provide market liquidity, especially in 
a stressed 
environment?ﬂ  But it also led me to what Josh pointed out, which 
is that this 
is apparently a 
longer-
term research project 
about market liquidity and understanding what™s happening there, 
and how much amplification we may see
, whether it™s in corporate bond or Treasury bond 

markets
, in response to shocks. 
My comment is that I think this is a really important subject not just for thinking about 
our policy decisions or policy communication, but more generally, to understand what™s 

happening in those markets and understand to what extent it is changes in regulation, changes in 

technology, 
or other things.
  Really
, my comment is wanting to see more on that sooner, 
because 
I think this is a key issue, 
as others have mentioned.
  Thank you. 
                   
         
                    CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Does anyone else want to comment?
  [No response]  Seeing 
no hands, let us begin the economic go-round 
with 
President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Fourth District economy continues to 
expand.  In April, the diffusion index of business contacts reporting better versus worse 
conditions was 23 percent, up from 18 percent in March.  Retail freight and both residential and 

commercial construct
ion firms reported improved conditions.  All manufacturers and energy 
firms reported worse conditions. 
Anecdotal reports suggest some slowing in the pace of growth in the first quarter.  
Factors cited by contacts reporting slower growth earlier this year i
nclude the harsh winter 
weather, spillovers from the 
West Coast port strikes, declining energy prices, and the 
appreciation of the dollar. 
The effects of weather and the strike are transitory.  Almost all of our contacts reported 
that the 
effects
 of the wi
nter weather 
have now passed, although I should note that it snowed in 
Cleveland last week
.  The effects of the port strike are expected to dissipate by the fourth quarter. 
The fall in oil prices continues to challenge firms engaged in energy development or 
extraction as well as their suppliers, like steel producers.  Suppliers of raw materials that use 

petroleum
-based products report a 
falloff
 in orders as customers run down 
their inventories in 
anticipation of further price reductions.  
My business contacts believe that oil prices have likely 

bottomed out, and that the effects of lower oil prices are likely to be temporary for most exposed 

sectors.  Of course
, that remains t
o be seen. 
Conditions in 
District 
labor markets continue 
to follow national trends.  The D
istrict™s 
unemployment rate, at 5.2 percent, 
is below the national rate 
of 5
½ percent and below the 
5.7 percent 
District average over 
the 2001Œ07 expansion.  Contacts 
in all 
sectors except energy 
                    
          
     
   
  
       reported increasing staffing in the previous six to eight weeks, although, except for construction, 
the additions were somewhat smaller than previously reported.  So far, 
wage pressures remain 

limited to occupations such as tr
ucking, skilled construction trades, and quantitative white collar 
jobs.  Prices of finished goods continue to be stable despite more businesses reporting declining 

costs for 
nonlabor inputs. 
Turning to the national economy, we have received a number of disappointing data 
reports since our previous 
meeting across several sectors, including manufacturing, business 
fixed investment, and consumer spending, and including the employment report for March.  
As 
was the case last year, there was very harsh winter we
ather, but this year we also had the port 

strike, the sharp drop in oil prices, and the sharp appreciation of the dollar.  Similar to last year, 

we have seen a growth slowdown in the first quarter, and we are trying to extract the signal about 

future growt
h from the incoming data.  This is difficult to do in real time. 
A good case can be made that this is a temporary setback
, just as it was last year
, and 
that 
is forecast in the Tealbook.  The effects of bad weather and the 
West Coast port strike are 
transi
tory.  Using a Bayesian VAR model augmented to include weather indicators, my staff 

estimates that the unusually cold weather reduced GDP growth by 0.9 percentage point, and 

there will be some rebound in the next couple of quarters. 
We have seen the negative effects of lower oil prices on energy
-related firms but not 
much positive effect on consumer spending, although that is likely to come, and oil prices appear 

to be stabilizing.  Dollar appreciation has been a drag on exports and the profitability of fir
ms with multinational operations.  But as the rate of appreciation slows, the drag can be expected to 

diminish as well.
  The slower growth seen in our trading partners might be a reflection of the 
slower growth in the United States
.  If our growth picks up
, it could be that theirs will as well. 
                     
             
            
      
    In addition, not all of the incoming data were negative.  The rate of job openings reached 
another cyclical high, and initial claims are very low, just below the trough reached in the last 
economic expansion.  
These 
indicators suggest that the weakness in payroll jobs in March could 

be temporary.  Although the Conference Board™s 
consumer confidence measure was down in 
April, consumer sentiment came in high, and underlying fundamentals for consumer spending, 

including improved balance sheets, remain quite good. 
The news on inflation was also a bit better over the intermeeting period. Core inflation is 
modestly firming.  Both headline CPI and core CPI increased 0.2 percent in March for the 

second month in a row, and core CPI inflation edged up to 1.8 percent on a year-
over
-year basis. 
The Cleveland Fed™s median CPI measure, which helps predict headline inflation over the 

medium term, has remained near 2
¼ percent since April of last year.  The Federal Reserve Bank 
ofCleveland™s measure of the 
10-year expected inflation rate was essentially unchanged in April. 
So t
his is the positive view of things.  Of course, there is also the possibility that the 
slower growth will be more persistent and inflation developments will 
worsen.  I don™t believe 

we have enough information right now to reach a firm conclusion today, and we don™t have to.  

We can remain agnostic until we see more data over the next couple of months.  Incoming data 

will help us determine whether the slowdown 
in the first quarter is proving to be temporary, like 

it was last year, or whether it is pointing to something more fundamental. In particular, we are 

going to get two employment reports before our June meeting.  These are going to be quite 

important in m
y own thinking about the economic outlook.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Recent economic data have had a 
distinctly weaker tone since our 
previous 
meeting.  The March emplo
yment report indicated little 
              
       
                      overall improvement in labor markets, the unemployment rate was unchanged, and payroll 
employment growth was surprisingly weak.  Similarly, wage and price data have yet to show a 

clear trend toward our 2 percent inflation goal
. While some of the weakness can be attributed to 
the severe weather in some parts of the country, many of the higher-frequency data before and 

after the harsh winter weather have also been on the soft side. 
As a result, in my view, neither of the conditi
ons for liftoff articulated in the March 
FOMC statement 
has 
been sufficiently met at this time.  The March 
Summary of 
Economic 
Projections reflected some significant changes in longer-
run variables.  The central tendency of 
the longer-run unemployment rate has slipped from a range of 5.2 to 6 percent in June 2012 

down to 5 to 5.2 percent in March.  
Similarly, participant estimates of the long
-run equilibrium 
federal funds rate have declined.  The central tendency in June 2012 ranged from 4 to 

4½ percent, bu
t now it is down to only 3½ to 3¾ 
percent.  Our assessment of these key variables 

has changed significantly, which, 
in retrospect
, is not surprising, 
considering changes in 
demographics and productivity since the financial crisis. 
While I and many other participants have lowered our estimates of one of our dual 
mandate goalsŠthe natural rate of unemploymentŠwe have not engaged in any comprehensive 
discussion of our other goal, the inflation target.  That target has remained unchanged at 

2 percent since it w
as adopted in 2012. 
We have learned a great deal about conducting monetary policy in a low-
inflation 
environment since 2012.  I am fully aware that we should have a high threshold for changing our 

inflation target, 
as frequent changes would undermine its usefulness.  But the accumulated 
weight of economic experience suggests, in my view, that a reexamination of our inflation target 

is warranted for several reasons. 
                          
     
                
         First, the choice of an inflation target was largely b
ased on research both here and abroad, 
indicating that the likelihood of reaching the zero lower bound and the cost of being at the zero 
lower bound was small.  This research suggested a relatively low probability of reaching the zero 

lower bound, typically below 5 percent, and relatively brief spells at the lower bound once 

reached, usually a couple of quarters. 
In part, this optimistic read could have been based on faith 
in the efficiency of alternative monetary policy tools.  However, the experience of 
the past 
decade has been less favorable.  Today most major developed countries are at the zero lower 

bound, and, despite employing alternative policy tools, none has yet exited, even though we are 

now more than six years past the financial crisis. 
In shor
t, the research on the expected cost of 
hitting the zero lower bound has not been consistent with the economic outcomes we have 

observed. 
Second, we have revised our assessment of variables that should affect 
the probability of 
hitting the zero lower bound.  The most obvious example is the lowering of the equilibrium 
federal funds rate.  With the same inflation target, a decline in the equilibrium federal funds rate 
should 
increase
 the probability of hitting the zero lower bound.  
The most recent SEP 
submissions, for example, report a decline in the equilibrium real rate of more than 50 basis 

points, a
nd this assessment is echoed among private forecasters and market participants.  If one 
of the rationales for setting a positive inflation target is to reduce 
the frequency of hitting the 
zero lower bound, a lower equilibrium real rate implies the need for a higher inflation target to 

reduce this probability. 
On a practical note, the fact that Japan, the 
United Kingdom, Europe, 
and the United States have each h
it the zero lower bound and have remained there for a very long 
time should make us wonder whether the global convergence to a value of 2 percent for the 

inflation target was misguided. 
       
  
              
                
      Third, we have learned more about the cost of being at the zero lower bound.  After more 
than six years, we have still not returned to the 5 to 5.2 percent unemployment rate range that the 
SEP central tendency currently indicates is consistent with longer
-run unemployment rates.  
While the new tools of quantitative easingŠpurchasing mortgage-
backed securities and 
lengthening the maturity of our holdingsŠhave resulted in growth faster than we otherwise 

would have experienced, we have missed both elements of our mandate for more than 
six years 

now. 
This is not an acceptable outcome.  The consequences of not being able to exit the zero 
lower bound more quickly have been a long period of underutilized resources and 
below
-target 
inflation that risks eroding the credibility of the central bank.  A higher inflation target would 

surel
y have given us more room to lower real interest rates 
using
 our conventional policy tools, 
likely saving hundreds of thousands of jobs. 
Despite our willingness to alter other variables, we have not recently had a 
comprehensive review of our choice for the 
inflation target.  In light of the accumulating 
evidence that inflation targets globally may have been set too low, this choice may have resulted 

in a great cost to the global economy in terms of lost economic output and employment.  Thus, 

we should have a fuller discussion of our choice for the inflation target before we set our longer-

run strategies at the beginning of next year. 
In addition to the longer-run implications of the inflation goal for monetary policy, a 
higher inflation goal would have more 
immediate policy implications.  Entertaining a higher 
inflation target would imply an even larger inflation shortfall, compelling us to wait even longer 

before lifting off. 
A weaker version of this proposition suggests both that we should delay liftoff 
until we see clear evidence that inflation is increasing, and that we should be willing to entertain 
      
          
      
       
             
      an inflation rate that exceeds our current target. This strategy would
, of course
, be akin to price-
level targeting, a notion that President Evans and other
s have previously discussed. 
In summary, we should recognize that the economy™s performance over the previous six 
years has a bearing not only on our estimates of full employment and the equilibrium federal 
funds rate, which many of us have adjusted in the SEP, but also on the inflation target.  I 

understand the concern with shifting an inflation target that we set after years of deliberation and 

following years of success in bringing inflation down.  
But our failure to hit either of our 

mandated goals for six years and running demonstrates the potential cost of an inflation target 

that is too low.  Recognizing the many complications that a change in the target would entail, I 

believe we should have a more fulsome discussion about what the 
previous 
decade of
 economic 
history has taught us about the optimal inflation rate.  Should we be willing to entertain an 

increase in the inflation goal, this would, of course, 
have implications for the timing of liftoff, 

which we will be discussing tomorrow.  Thank you, Ma
dam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would 
like
 to ask President Rosengren a question.  You 
are implying that the only margin for adjustment is on the inflation target rate.  Presumably there 

is another margin for adjustment, t
aking a lot of steps to make a future financial crisis of the type 
that we experienced in 2007, 2008, and 2009 less likely, right?  Because you could argue that 

one reason why we are in this position is because we had a really, really bad financial crisis.
  So, 
in principle, one could take steps to make the probability of a financial crisis l
ower
, and that 
would presumably lessen the need to change the inflation target.  How do you think about that? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If you think you can significantly change 
the probability or 
amplitude of those shocks, then you are right.  But the equilibrium federal funds rate has come 
              
            
    
   
      
         
         
   down quite a bit.  Our own internal estimates of what that implies for how frequently we will hit 
the zero lower bound are that it is substantially higher given that most of the time the equilibrium 

federal funds rate that many of those models were estimated on was 4
½ percent.  We are now at 
3½ percent
ŠI actually think you could make an argument that it is lower than 3½ percent.  
So if 
you have 
an equilibrium federal funds rate that is lower, the implication is that 
you hit the zero 
lower bound more frequently unless you think you can dramatically alter either the frequency or 

severity of having the kind of shocks that we experienced. 
CHAIR YELL
EN.  Isn™t it the case that some of the steps we would take to reduce the 
odds of a financial crisisŠ
strengthening capital and liquidity
Šmay actually
, by raising the cost 
of intermediation
, lower 
the 
equilibrium real rate? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, I 
think that™s right.  But my point is just that the 
room you need depends on the size of the shocks that you are dealing with.  And if you do other 

things and reduce the size of shocks, that also should be a factor.  
I don™t really disagree with 
a lot of th
e points that you made, but it seems to me that that™s not the only potential marginŠ 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I™d just raise one other countervailing argument 
that
, certainly
, the experience around October 15 of the very sharp movement in financial markets a
t a 
time when no real economic news was 
occurring makes me wonder
ŠI am not convinced yet that 
all of the actions we have taken have necessarily
, dramatically changed the probability or likely 
severity of shocks 
in the future from 
what we experienced before
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
In that shock, though, implications for the real economy 
were 
trivial. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  In that case. 

MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair? 
              
    
                
       
      
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  I appreciate you
r bringing this up, President Rosengren.  Just one 
comment
 about your rhetoric on this.  Missing the inflation target over six yearsŠif you look at 
headline inflation year over year, it was above target in 2011 and 2012, and it came back down.  

I know you like to think in terms of core inflation, but I think this is an issue for that piece of the 

puzzle.  When you 
evaluat
e the Committee over that kind of a 
time 
frame
, I think you have got 
to look at headline. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I would say 
that 
hitting an inflation target temporarily 
because 
of an oil price shock is a P
yrrhic victory.  You care more about the underlying rate of 
inflation. 
MR. BULLARD.  These are the prices people pay. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  No doubt we will return to this.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART. 
Moving right along.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the 
intermeeting
 cycle, my staff conducted 56 interviews separate from our board 
meetings. We 
focused the interviews on any indications in their businesses that would confirm the weakness 

indicated by first
-quarter data and, more to the point, suggest 
that 
first
-quarter weakness might 
persist. 
We found that overall business sentiment remains quite positive, somewhat at odds with 
our reading of the incoming data.  On balance, our contacts and directors portrayed demand a
s continuing to improve at a steady pace.  We noted, however, that compared 
with
 the previous 
cycle, their optimism is accompanied by a hint of caution.  We heard more reports of negative 

effects of the dollar.  Exporters, port operators, and firms with significant foreign operations all 

noted market or other challenges that they attributed to the 
dollar. 
         
  
            
           
           
        
   As expected, we heard reports 
of investment 
pullback and layoffs in oil and gas 
exploration and production firms as well as in 
oil services companies.  That drag is being 
partially offset by greater investment activity in business sectors benefiti
ng from low energy 

prices. 
We also continued to hear reports that firms are trying to hold on 
to margin improvement 
coming from fuel and other commodity cost declines. 
Declines in gasoline prices have yet to translate into a meaningful boost in consumer 
spending.  A director with knowledge of consumer markets commented that product categories 

that historically have been leading indicators of stronger consumer activity
Što wit, apparel, 
eating outside the home, and moviesŠhave not yet signaled an upturn. 
We received positive reports on real estate investment activity, both commercial and 
residential. Architects and contractors indicated improved pipelines.
  Our banking contacts 
report that new mortgage and investment activity is strong. 
Regarding employment, we heard continued concern about turnover and retention.  At the 
same time, we detected little change in reports this round regard
ing wage inflation.  On that 
subject, although most data indicate that the trend in nominal 
wage growth remains flat, a 
measu
re constructed by my staff from the C
urrent 
Population Survey 
does show an acceleration 
in 
year
-over-
year
 wage growth in the first quarter.  Wage growth increased to a 3 
percent pace in 
the first quarter, up from 2.8 percent in the fourth quarter and up fr
om 2.4 percent a year earlier. 
Continuing on employment, I™ll mention something we heard for the first time from three 
large employers in quite different businesses.  All said they have begun shifting their work forces 

away from part time toward full time.
  They all cited the high managerial and logistical cost and 
quality challenges of a large, part-
time workforce. 
              
               
                
             
  We™ve been struggling to reconcile these generally positive anecdotal reports with the 
hard data on the first quarter and early indications of 
second
-quarter performance.  Our tracking 
estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth is just marginally above zero, at the low end of the 
spectrum presented in the Tealbook. 
Our tracking model is a straight statistical model with no 
judgmental overrides.  We wo
uld not claim it™s the most accurate read of the first quarter, but it™s 
what the raw data are telling us, and we™ll have an official reading soon enoughŠtomorrow 

morning.  
At this point
, I™m holding to the view that weather and other factors played a 

sign
ificant role in first
-quarter weakness, and that significant payback can be anticipated in the 
current quarter. 
We also observed
Šand this is nothing more than an observationŠthat weak 
first
-quarter growth has been a pattern during the recovery, normally giving way to a stronger 

rest of the year. 
We™ve made a small adjustment to our full
-year GDP growth forecast to reflect a weaker 
first quarter, but otherwise 
we have kept our forecast for growth and inflation unchanged from 
the March meeting.  We made no m
aterial change to our outlook.  We have growth resuming a 
run rate between 
2½ and 3 
percent
, with second-quarter growth above 3 
percent. 
A strengthening of consumer activity from the first quarter is a key factor in our outlook.   
We currently judge the risk to our growth and inflation outlooks as tilted to the downside.  
With the greater uncertainty I perceive at this juncture, the Tealbook alternative scenario titled 

ﬁPersistent 
Slowdown in 
Economic A
ctivityﬂ captures my concern that my outlook may be 
overly optimistic.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As many have already noted, the recent 
data have been disappointing, but it is worth noting, 
as Preside
nt Lockhart just did, that over the 
                      
               
   
      
past four years, 
first
-quarter GDP growth has averaged more than 2 percentage points lower than 
growth during the rest of the year, and there is no single smoking gun that can explain this string 

of seasonal aberrations
. E
ach year
, the winter slowdowns have proved to be temporary. 
So, if past is prologue, I expect the same pattern will occur this year
, with an anemic Q1 
followed by above-trend growth for the rest of 2015.  
I™m confident that the underlying 

momentum in th
e economy once again will be more apparent as the first quarter fades in our 
rearview mirror. 
This is consistent with what I™ve been hearing from my business contacts.  In particular, 
the fundamentals of the economy remain quite positive.  Solid job growth should lift income and 

consumer confidence further, helping to pave the way for continued consumption growth.  In 

addition, highly accommodative monetary policy will continue to boost spending, and these 

factors are very evident in my 
District.  In fact, 
some sectors of the economy, 
the 12
th District 
economy, are red hot.  An executive in the tech sector recently mentioned that to retain talent, 
some tech firms are now offering 20 percent or more pay raises. 
And if that wasn™t enough, 
they™re also throwin
g in housing for good measure, and in the Bay Area, housing is something 
that is very hard to come by and obviously very dear.  The other thing that we heard was that you 

can be vested
 in stock options 
after 
one month.  So this is an amazing time in the Silicon Valley 
economy, and about half of my staff ran off to apply for jobs. 
In addition, I will mention that some of my contacts in different sectors, including 
commercial real estate
, have emphasized the abundance of financing that can be obtained at very 

generous terms.  It™s an issue that I noticed
 was highlighted in both the S
LOOS
 and the QS 
reports, and we™re hearing about that in our D
istrict, too.
  Of course, continued low inflation 
remains a key issue.  I view the recent low inflation readings as being consistent with an 
                                 
              economy still operating below potential and facing temporary disinflationary factors.  Important 
questions remain.
  In the remainder of my remarks, I™ll focus on two of these issues.  
The first 
is, what signal should we be taking from the market-
implied measures of inflation compensation
?  And, second, what™s the empirical relationship between wage growth and inflation? 
The softness 
in inflation of late would be a lot more troublesome to me if it was also 
accompanied by a clear decline in inflation expectations.  This kind of scenario is discussed in 

the Tealbook alternative scenario simulation.  But so far, the weight of evidence sug
gests that 
this isn™t happening.  Long-run survey expectations from households and professional forecasters 

remain well anchored. 
In addition, as I pointed out in the past, long-run inflation expectations 
implied by a Phillips curve model estimated over the past 15 years, a period during which our 

credibility was firmly established, were also 
well anchored 
at 2 percent. 
Now, of course, the one discordant note comes from the market
-implied measures of 
inflation compensation.  Inflation compensation has fall
en significantly since the middle of last 
year, and while much of the focus has been on longer-
horizon measures
, there™s also a question 
about what signal we should take about the nearer-term inflation outlook. 
My staff looked at this question, and they conducted a forecasting comparison between 
measures of inflation compensation and five other competing forecasts, among them a random 

walk forecast and also the survey from the Survey of Professional Forecasters.
  We wanted to 
avoid liquidity issues that are 
associated with shorter
-term TIPS
, so they looked at inflation 
compensation derived from inflation swap rates
.  T
hese typically move very closely together 
with inflation compensation derived from the 
Treasur
y market, but 
are 
based o
n trading in a 
deeper market.
  Here we™re looking at one- and 
two
-year
-ahead inflation forecasts 
for 
headline 
CPI inflation. 
             
       
  
  
               
    
  
      
         
The striking result, which is very robust in all of their experiments
, is that forecasts based 
on inflation compensation were the worst performers of all 
the measures.  Basically
, inflation 
compensation did not give useful information about where inflation was going relative to survey 
forecasts. 
So, 
really
, looking at inflation compensation for insights into the future path of 
inflation 
is not supported by 
the data. 
One problem with our analysis is 
that 
data limitations preclude doing a similar exercise 
for long-term inflation expectations.  I™m going to go out on a limb here 
and say 
that the results 
we have for one- and two-year inflation compensation not being a useful predictor for future 

inflation will apply 
also to
 longer-term inflation. We don™t have that much data right now, but in 
five years when the transcript come
s out, we™ll see whether I was right or wrong. We™ll wait for 
that. 
Again
, President Kocherlakota has highlighted the factŠin a memo that he co
-authoredŠ
that 
inflation compensation 
is not a 
reliable forecast for inflation because it reflects 
other aspects of risk associated with different inflation outcomes. 
But I want to mention another 
interesting 
finding in our work 
about inflation compensation, and that is that these one
- and two-
year
-ahead inflation compensation measures are 
very highly correlated with recent past inflation, 
especially with pa
st inflation associated with movements in oil prices.
  That 
puts into 
question 
how to interpret this. It is a very similar result that we™ve found in the past when we looked at 

household surveys.  Household surveys of inflation expectations tend to be ver
y sensitive to 
lagged inflation, especially with regard to oil price movements, and for this reason we have 

tended to discount movements in household inflation expectations when the movements are 

driven by energy prices.  M
y staff suggests using a similar 
caution when trying to interpret 
inflation compensation measures as an indicator of people™s views on future inflation. 
      
    
                     
          
       The second issue I™ll discuss briefly is that of 
nominal wage growth.  A
s has already been 
mentioned, wage growth has been stuck around 2 percent for most of the recovery.  And, 
as economic theory would tell us, employee compensation makes up a huge fraction of a firm™s 

cost
s.  Y
ou would expect 
there
 to be a pretty tight relationship between nominal 
wage 
growth 
and price inflation, b
ut thi
s connection has been remarkably hard to find.  Many papers and 

research projects have looked at this, and
, basically, if you look back at the history of the 
literature, in every business cycle there™s a whole bunch of papers written about the relationship 

of nominal 
wage 
growth and price inflation.  T
he consistent finding through this literature is that 
it™s really hard to find any relationship between nominal 
wage 
growth and future price inflation.  

Recent research by Jim Stock and Mark Watson, and also some really nice work done at the 

Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland and elsewhere
, has shown that the additional information on 
wages or labor compensation has 
done little to improve the accuracy of standard inflation 

forecast models.
  My understandin
g is that 
the 
staff™s inflation forecasting models tend to be 
these 

price Phillips curve 
model
s or models that don™t really emphasize 
nominal 
wage 
growth. 
The lack of a close empirical link between 
nominal wage growth and future inflation 
likely refl
ects several factors that have affected labor markets in recent decades
Šsome of which 

I™ve talked about in the past.  
One is that 
nominal 
wage 
growth is probably being held down by 
rigidities in wage setting
 that kept wages from falling during the downturn and have 
been 
restraining wage growth as the economy improvesŠ
that is, there is 
downward nominal wage 
rigidity. 
The second is 
that 
globalization
, changes 
in unionization, and 
changes in technology 
have affected the share of productivity gains that are go
ing to workers, and 
that distorts the 
            
      
   
      
      
      
     
  
      
       relationship between wage growth and price inflation.  Put another way, the labor share 
of 
income 
has fallen dramatically since the 1980s. 
To summarize, based on the evidence accumulated over the past several decades
 of extensive research on this topic, there™s little or no information 
to suggest that 
aggregate wage 
data should inform our medium-term inflation outlook.  Now I™m going to break my rule that I 
stated earlier
ŠI do not view a 
rise in 
nominal wage growth as a necessary condition to be 
confident in the return of inflation to 2 
percent. 
All told, our current low inflation rates, I think, 
are pretty easy to understand in the context of transitory factorsŠ
import prices, energy prices
Š and the fact that there is st
ill some considerabl
e slack in the labor market.  As the labor market 
moves back to maximum employment, and 
as these transitory factors dissipate, I expect inflation 

to move back to 2 
percent. 
President Bullard mentioned 2011.  I think we should learn a lesson from that.  We did 
see inflation rise quite a bit 
as a result of a rise in some special factors.  We were experiencing 
high inflationary pressures due to 
large increases 
in the price of oil and other import prices, and 
what we did then, 
I think
, is the right thing.  We looked past the transitory effects of those and 
looked more broadly 
at the long-term inflation outlook, and that is how I am viewing it, too.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank
 you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask an information question? 
The 
research 
that 
you mention
ed is 
very interesting, but 
I am not sure I followed the details.
  The inflation compensation measures 
were one-
to two
-year horizon expectation
sŠa
nd you also 
had survey measures of inflation 
expectations. 
       
    
  
        
                          
             
          MR. WILLIAMS.  The horse race 
was 
basically 
this:  W
e aligned the inflation swap rate 
one year ahead with 
the swaps of month
s 13 to 24 aheadŠo
ne year ahead
 with one year ahead.  
And then we looked at the 
Survey of Professional Forecasters 
and Blue Chip 
for each year. 
MR. EVANS.  At the same horizons? 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Same horizons. 

MR. EVANS.  I see, and those were helpful? Because
, if I understand some of the Board 
work, they use 
these 
long
-term inflation
 expectations for their modeling because, 
as attractive as 
it is theoretically to use a short
-term expectation, nobody can find a good measure of short-
term 
inflation expectation
s.  
Isn™t that right, Bill? 
MR. WASCHER. 
We use the longer
-term inflation exp
ectations in our models.  That™s 
right. 
MR. WILLIAMS. 
Yes
, but the question I™m asking is:  What do you think inflation is 
going to be over the next four quarters? 
The 
SPF is actually a very good forecast.  This is 
roughly as good as the Tealbook.  I
t™s
 asking what 
inflation 
is going to be over the nextŠ 
MR. EVANS.  Well, but the Tealbook won™t use any short-
term inflation 
measures, 
that™s 
my understanding. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  No, no, no.  I™m just looking at the forecast itself. 

MR. EVANS.  Oh, yes, but thos
e forecasts are lousy.  They might be better than the other 
ones, but they™re all lousy.  
MR. WILLIAMS. Well, I think the research says that the Tealbook is maybe a little bit 
better than the SPF and Blue Chip over the next year or twoŠ 
MR. WASCHER. 
Just 
in terms of forecasting? 
There™s probably not much difference. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  So it™s basically the same. 
                           
   
   
       
           MR. EVANS.  The
 Tealbook does something which is not in line with theory, to use 
long-term inflation expectations for a one-
year
-ahead inflation because, well, it kind of works, 
right? 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes
, we view the anchoring of inflation expectations as best 
approximat
ed by long-
term survey measures of inflation
 expectations. 
MR. 
EVANS
.  Yes
, that™s why I was asking the 
question about 
whether I understood you 
right, you™ve currently got it anchored at 1¾ percent and are hoping to goes up to 2 percent. 
MR. WASCHER.  Right. 
MR. 
EVANS
.  But at any rate, I™m done.  
Well, I mean, it™s interesting. I appreciate that. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Please proceed. 

MR. EVA
NS.  Okay.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  For the most part, my directors and 
business contacts expect that the recent spate of soft economic readings will be short
-lived.  The 
one report that seems to sum it up the best came from the 
chairman of Manpower who, when 
talking about soft first
-quarter numbers, said none of his clients are getting depressed about it.  
The view seems to be that there is enough momentum from last year that growth should pick up 
soon. 
Separately, I didn™t hear of any meaningful reports 
of wage or price pressures from my 
contacts.  My own outlook for the real economy continues to be for 
real 
GDP growth to run 
between 2
½ and 3 percent over the remainder of this year and next.  Our assumptions for 
potential output growth are somewhat strong
er than 
in the Tealbook, so our GDP path translates 
into a very similar reduction in resource gaps as the Tealbook™s.  By the end of 2016, we have 

the unemployment rate down to around 5 percent, which is my current assessment of the natural 

rate. 
           
      
               
                  
 My inflation forecast has not changed.  Like the Tealbook, I do not see inflation reaching 
target until sometime in 2018 or 2019.  I should again point out that my assessment of 
appropriate monetary policy underlying this forecast has lower rates than most people around the 

table. 
Now, I want to spend some time today talking about why this outlook leads me to favor a 
whites
-of-
their
-eyes approach for our policy response to rising inflation.  I have talked about risk 
management many times before.  Today I want to art
iculate three additional reasons the data lead 
me to prefer a cautious approach to raising rates. 
First, forecasting inflation is inherently 
difficult, and that™s the discussion that we were just having.  This implies a high burden of proof 

to say we are 
sufficiently confident that our currently low core inflation will move back to 

2 percent in a reasonable period of time. 
Second, despite near-
zero nominal rates and a large 
balance sheet, I am not convinced our current policy stance is all that accommodat
ive to begin 
with.  And, third, I actually see benefits to risking a modest overshooting of our 2 percent 
inflation target. 
Let me start with why it should take strong evidence to have confidence in an outlook of 
low inflation rising back to 2 percent.  Anyone who has looked at the forecasting performance of 
statistical inflation models knows that everyone™s abilities in this area are limited.  Indeed, there 

is a body of research that shows it is not that easy to be a random walk forecast
.  Even the best-
performing models seldom forecast a rapid change in inflation, and they always imply substantial 

forecast uncertainty.  That said, we do have many analytical reasons to think our current low 

inflation will rise at some point. 
Most of the commentary I hear at this table centers 
on the 
economy regaining traction, resource gaps closing, and the upward gravitational pull of high and 

stable inflation expectations, like in the Tealbook forecast. I also suspect that simple mean 
            
      
                 
  
       
   
          
         reversion probably plays a role in 
these forecasts as well. I agree that these forces will 
eventually deliver.  The question is, when?  Taking until 2019 to reach our target is not 

acceptable to me. 
Given all of these difficulties in forecasting inflation, my own preferred dashboard of 
indicators is mostly a list of factors coincident with rising inflation
.  While measures of labor 
market slack are important, I would not rely on them alone, 
as it is possible something has 

changed in the structure of the economy that makes those historical benchmarks less trustworthy.  

In addition, I will continue to look for increasing core inflation, faster wage growth, and firmer 

market
-based measures of inflation compensation to provide corroborating evidence of stronger 
inflationary pressures. 
As I sai
d, the absence of statistically strong leading indicators 
suggests 
that 
these observations are likely to be more coincident than predictive. But at least once we see 
them, we can have more confidence that inflation is moving up persistently.  Until then, 
I remain 

wary. 
Now, my second pointŠthat current policy is not as accommodative as we might thinkŠ 
comes out of the model analysis.  
A fundamental benchmark for thinking about the level of 
monetary accommodation and inflation pressures is the difference bet
ween the actual real rate of 
interest and the equilibrium
, or Wicks
ellian
, real rate of interest.
  As Milton Friedman said, low 
interest rates alone do not mean monetary policy is accommodat
ive.  The relevant question is 
whether, after adjusting for inflation, our current real federal funds rate is far enough below the 

equilibrium real rate to achieve our policy objectives in a reasonable amount of timeŠ
that is, for 

inflation to actually get up to 2 percent, 
as the forecasts embody. 
I think the answer to th
at question is ﬁno.ﬂ  There are a number of simple observations 
that suggest that the current equilibrium rate is quite low.  Namely, even with our interest rate 
         
        
       
     
  
    
    
       
      
         
and balance sheet policies in place, we still see the continued existence of resource gaps, a lack 
of any meaningful upward movement in inflation, and relatively low levels of capital spending 

despite piles of cash on corporate balance sheets. These cash stockpiles are an indication that 

expected real returns on physical investment are not very hi
gh. 
To put a number out, the Tealbook-
consistent equilibrium real rate shown in 
Book 
B, as 
circulated over the weekend, 
is negative 0.1 percent.  Some might look at the current real funds 
rate of minus 1.18 percent, as reported in the Tealbook, Book B, and 
say we have adequate 

accommodation in place.  I don™t agree.  
Recall that the Tealbook™s equilibrium real rate is 

calibrated to close the output gap in 12 quarters.  It says nothing about inflation.  In the Tealbook 

baseline, the inflation gap is still wi
th us until 2019.  That would mean that inflation would have 

to run below target for more than a decade 
and, t
o me
, that is simply too long to be considered 
the result of appropriate policy. 
I want to mention that President Bullard 
referred to the fact 
tha
t PCE 
inflation rose to 
2 percent in 2011 and 2012 on the strength of commodity price increases.  I think the reason we 

focus on core 
inflation is
 that 
core is a better indicator of what inflation is likely to be next year, 
because th
e shocks in headline PCE often are transitory.  T
he real test
, I would say
, is, when did 
the Tealbook ever forecast inflation two years out as being at 2 percent or above?  I think that 

has 
not been the case for quite some time. 
While we can 
all 
lament the 
fact that there are large uncertainties regarding the value of 
the equilibrium real rate of interest, uncertainty over inflation forecasting and the stance of 

monetary policy accommodation go hand in hand.  Logically, because the equilibrium rate has a 

str
ong bearing on the inflation outlook, uncertainty over it ought to translate into comparable 
uncertainty over inflation itself.
  In other words, how can we declare we are confident that 
         
      
    
   
                   current low inflation is headed back up to 2 percent unless we are also confident that our policy 
setting relative to 
the 
equilibrium real rate is able to return inflation to target
? This brings me to the third reason my outlook is premised on a whites-of-
their
-eyes 
policy approach.  I recognize that the usual policy lags mi
ght mean that a delay in tightening 
could cause inflation to modestly overshoot 2 percent sometime down the road.  But so what?  Is 

that such a big cost?
  No.  On the contrary, it could be a benefit.  Considering how long inflation 

has been below target, adopting a policy that allows the possibility of such an overshoot actually 

seems necessary to support the credibility of our symmetric inflation objective.  If we find 

ourselves with the federal funds rate at 1 percent or a little bit above that while infl
ation is still 
too low, we could easily regret the conservative credibility that we
™ve built up. 
I would 
also 
say that if we are not willing to allow an overshoot of our inflation objective, 
then I think we should definitely 
be having the conversation that
 President Rosengren was 
suggesting we have in terms of the appropriateness of the level of the inflation objective, if it is 
something that we are not allowed to overshoot with any reasonability.  I think that™s important.  
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR Y
ELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb. 

MS. HOLCOMB.  And now for something completely different.  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  The Texas economy has decelerated since I last reported to the Committee.  Continued 

low oil prices, the strong dollar, and a weaker national economy pushed state employment down 

by almost 12,000 jobs in March, the first decline in 40 months.  Over the first three months of the 

year, combined job growth averaged a positive but still dismal 0.7 percent, down from 4.2 

percent d
uring the fall of 2014.  Our forecast for December-over-December job growth, which is 
      
           
                           derived from the Texas Leading Index, now stands at 0.5 percent.  That™
s down from a forecast 
of 1 to 2 percent growth six months ago. 
Besides oil and gas, the manufacturing sector has seen the greatest slowing.  Companies 
in the computer and electronics industry say that they are losing opportunities as the appreciating 
dollar pushes up the relative price of U.S.-made capital equipment.  Chemical producers report 

lower se
lling prices and margins and lower exports.  Producers of primary metals have noted 

increasing import competition, too.  Companies in the professional and business services 

industry have been indirectly affected by both low energy prices and the strong dol
lar, 
particularly those with a significant fraction of their clientele in the energy and manufacturing 

sectors.  There have been some reports of adverse spillovers from energy to financial services as 

well. 
Our most up-
to-date information comes from our Te
xas 
Manufacturing and S
ervice 
Sector 
Outlook Surveys.  The latest manufacturing survey results, 
released only yesterday
, show 
production declining in April for the second straight monthŠ
the first consecutive two
-month 
decline since the recession. 
The 
New 
Orders 
Index, too, has registered its worst two-month 
performance since the recession, posting readings of minus 16.1 and minus 14.0 in March and 

April, respectively.  In contrast, our latest service sector survey 
results
, released this morning
, show the headline revenue index rising to 14.6 in April from 10.7 in March.  April™s reading is 

the highest reported so far this year, but 
it is considerably lower than levels reported through 
most of 2014. 
Despite slower job growth, the Texas unemploymen
t rat
e continues to fall, and at 
4.2 percent in March
, it reached its lowest level since July 2007. We have anecdotal reports of 
laid
-off energy workers shifting into construction, especially along the Gulf Coast, 
where skilled 
         
             
  
   
    
          
      
  
    construction workers remain
 in short supply.  The wage and benefit ind
exes from our 
manufacturing and service sector surveys indicate that upward wage pressures are somewhat less 
intense than they were last year.  Looking ahead, health-
care contacts are concerned about losing 
experienced workers in a coming wave of retirements.  In finance, our bankers report flat 

demand and unchanged standards across all major loan categories. 
Oil prices have moved irregularly upward since last month™s FOMC meeting, with WTI 
closing some of the gap 
with 
Brent.  Y
ear-to-date volatility has been driven by conflicting supply 
developments, including unexpected increases in OPEC output
Šname
ly, Saudi Arabia™s 
production was up 4 percent in MarchŠinventory buildups in the U
nited 
States
, and reports of 
slowe
r growth in U.S. oil production.  If the Iran negotiations successfully conclude in June, that 
country could ramp up its output by more than 700,000 barrels per dayŠ0.7 percentage point 
of 
world supplyŠby the end of 2016, which would be enough to lower the 
price of crude between 
$5 and $15 per barrel in 2016, all else staying constant.  The conflict in Yemen is another source 
of uncertainty.  Yemen itself is a negligible producer of crude oil.  However, the threat of wider 
conflict between Saudi Arabia and 
Iran
, and Yemen™s proximity to the fourth-
busiest ch
okepoint 
for crude oil flows in the world, have created fears of supply disruptions. 
Our energy industry contacts tell us that the number of drilled but uncompleted wells, or 
DUCs, has increased between 33 and 50 percent since the end of last year. These are wells that 

have been drilled but are kept out of production.  They are underground inventory.  
New capital 

projects are difficult to initiate, but spending continues on existing contracts.  U.S. oil production 

is expected to peak within the next two to three months.  We are also likely to hit above-ground 

storage constraints within that time 
frame.  Drilling costs are down 20 percent, partly as a result 
of real efficiency gains and partly as a result o
f cheaper labor and equipment.  
There is cautious 
                                       optimism that the worst is over, coupled with recognition that we
™re unlikely to see a return to 
$100-per-
barrel oil any
 time soon.  Repercussions and adjustments in the broader Texas 
economy are ongoing. 
We are a bit more sanguine about the national economic outlook today than we were a 
couple of meetings ago.  It appears considerably less likely now that we will blow through full 
employment at full throttle.  That revised assessment is based on predictions from a small suite 

of models we use to forecast real activity two to four quarters out.  Although each model relies 

on its own set of financial and policy indicators, all are now telling a consistent story
:  solid if 
unspectacular GDP growth, on average, in the second and third quarters of 2015 and a gradual 

deceleration in employment growth over the course of the year, with the unemployment rate 

leveling off in the neighborhood of 5 percent heading into 2016.  
We expect 
trimmed 
mean PCE 
inflation, our measure of the underlying trend in headline inflation, to average about 1¾ 
percent 

over the next four quarters.  As compared with the Tealbook, we are more optimistic on both 
halves of the dual mandate, b
ut we
™re certainly not only
 in the same ballpark as the Tealbook, 
but in the same outfield.  Hopefully, it™
s not left field. 
Although we are looking forward to tomorrow™s GDP report, we don™t expect to take a 
strong signal from it, whatever the number turns out to be.  The first est
imate relies on a lot of 
guesswork, and in any case, 
GDP growth is volatile from quarter to quarter.  As a result, we
™ve 
not found real-
time estimates of lag
ged GDP growth to be especially helpful for forecasting at 
the horizons that are of interest to us.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Data on economic conditions in the Eighth 
District have improved notably during the 
intermeeting
 period.  The pace of job creation was 
           
           
   
   
     
        revised up for 2014, and preliminary data for 2015 has generally been positive.  
The 
District 
unemployment rate continues to decline and stands at 5.7 percent today, according to the most 
recent reading
Šonly slightly higher than the national rate. 
According to the revised BLS d
ata, 
District job creation occurred at about twice the pace 
in 2014 as compared 
with
 2013, which was itself revised higher.  One of the largest revisions 
was in the Louisville MSA which was revised from an
 original estimated value of 2.3 percent 
growth to an updated value of 3.8 percent.  By sector, notable upward revisions occurred in 

transportation, manufacturing
, and professional and business services.
  Correspondingly, 
Louisville™s average hourly earnings growth is significantly faster than the national 
average. 
On the downside, one of the most notable developments in the local labor market was the 
announcement by U.S. Steel that they would temporarily idle their Granite City, Illinois, 
plant
, laying off over 2,000 employees effective in May.  Media repo
rts suggest that the layoffs are 

due, in part, 
to a rise in imports of relatively inexpensive Chinese steel
Šsteel that
, evidently, the 
Chinese do not need in their home market. 
On this dimension, 
my recent intermeeting visit to China
, combined with discussions 
with CEOs and my interpretation of some hard data, has suggested to me that trend growth in 

China may be notably slower than commonly appreciated.  I think this goes beyond the relatively 

weak reported growth rate 
in the first quarter 
to a trend rate 
of growth as low as 4½ percent.  
Chinese GDP statistics are notably opaque
Ša topic of macroeconomic discussion for the 
past 15 

years or moreŠbut corroborating data and anecdotes now seem to be diverging more sharply 

from official reports, suggesting that a 
Chin
ese slowdown is to be taken far more seriously this 
time.
  The proximate cause of the slowdown is likely the ongoing anticorruption campaign, 
                 
                       
       
     which is reportedly casting a very wide net and is likely creating a chilling effect on new 
business formatio
n and business expansion. 
Turning to the national outlook, I have five main areas for comments on the current 
narrative for the U
nited S
tates, 
as reported in the Tealbook, 
FOMC speeches
, and popular 
commentary.  The comments are in the following areas:
  one, potential over
-interpretation of the 
Q1 slowdown; two, an unemployment forecast that I think is not credible; 
three, assumptions 
about 
r* that may be suspect; four, over-interpretation of the likely effects of the value of the 
dollar on U.S. growth pros
pects;
 and, five, underappreciation of the risks of asset price bubbles 
during the next two to three years as rates remain exceptionally low.
  I™m going to comment on 
the first three of these today.  I™m not commenting directly on inflation because I think
 the 
situation in that dimension has not changed greatly during the inter
meet
ing period.  I continue to 
expect inflation to return to target and eventually overshoot 2 percent in 2016. 
On the first issue, potential over-interpretation of the Q1 slowdown, d
ata 
are 
clearly 
weaker on a tracking basis since our 
previous meeting.  GDP will be reported tomorrow 
morning, and the s
taff has penciled in an estimate close to zero. But suppose we take the median 
of the nowcasting table reported in the Tealbook, which 
is 
an 
approximately 1½ percent annual 

growth rate of GDP in the first quarter.  On that basis
, the year
-over-year growth rate would be 
3.3 percent.  I think this number gives a better sense of the underlying pace of growth in the U.S. 

economy and provides 
a better point of reference 
for 
shaping GDP expectations for the 
remainder of this year. 
In addition
, I think that seasonal factors for Q1 are being called into 
question.  We considered Q1 GDP growth averages versus averages for Q2 through Q4 over 

differe
nt time periods
, excluding recessions
, since the mid
-1990s.  Average Q1 real GDP growth 
        
                           has been notably lower in these subperiods.  This broad-
brush analysis suggest
s that low Q1 
growth rates are not occurring by accident, and that Q1 seasonals may need revamping. 
The second issue is unemployment projections balancing out at about 5 percent over the 
forecast horizon despite easy monetary policy
, by conventional definition.  I do not think that 
such a forecast is credible, and I continue to disagree with th
e labor force participation 
assumption behind it.  A key 
paper in the 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
Šby Aaronson 
and others
, published 
in 
2014Šsuggests that labor force participation has been dropping 
according to demographic factors since 2000, 
and, furthermore, that this downward trend will 
continue through the forecast horizon.  This suggests that, on balance, there will be no sustained 

upward improvement in labor force participation and, therefore, that unemployment will 

continue to drop into 
the 
4½ to 4 percent range over the forecast horizon, barring any major 

disruption in the U.S. economy.  This dynamic would be very similar to what was observed 

during the 1990s expansion and again during the 2000 expansion.  On both of those occasions, 
unemployment moved into the low 4 
percent range. 
Previous staff predictions in this area have emphasized increases in labor force 
participation but have turned out to be wrong.  Indeed, the predictions given in the S
ummary of 
Economic P
rojections have also re
lied
, in part, on this story and have also been wrong.  
The 
median SEP forecast as of September 2012 for unemployment at the end of 2014 was too high 
by more than 1 percentage point.  The same was true of the median SEP September 2013 

forecast for unemploy
ment. 
So what™s the bottom line?  We™re charting a course for very low interest rate monetary 
policy based on an unrealistic assessment of future labor market performance, and this will harm 

FOMC policymaking in the quarters and years ahead.  
We can, of co
urse, cite other labor market 
                         
  
   
  
    
        
         
         indicators and thereby bring to bear more information on overall labor market performance.  The 
Board of Governors™ l
abor 
market 
conditions index does exactly this, conveniently summarizing 
information on many different dimensions of labor market performance.  
The 
Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis calculated that the value of this index is comfortably above its long-run 

average since 1986.  This indicat
es that
, based on the totality of available information, labor 
markets are n
ot weak but instead are relatively strong viewed in historical perspective. 
I like this 
index because it brings all information
 together in one place and avoids cherry-
picking particular 
indicators that may or may not be indicative of overall labor market 
performance. 
The third issue is 
r*.  Some commentary has suggested that 
an r* parameter in a 
Taylor 
rule is 
low based on estimates of 
Laubach 
and Williams, which
, combined with relatively small 
inflation and unemployment gaps, would suggest, through a Taylor-
rule
-type calculation
, that 
current policy is approximately the policy recommended by the rule.  This argument could 

rationalize current policy settings, although it would suggest that polic
y is 
perhaps not as 
accommodative as people woul
d intuitively think. 
One comment is that the value of 
r* is highly 
uncertain
, either from a theoretical perspective or a measurement perspective.  Time
-varying 
r* Taylor rules are relatively untested and do not represent the empirical tradition behind Taylor 

rule estimation and recommended policy outcomes. For this reason
, I am skeptical of using 
time
-varying 
r* as a rationale for current policy settings. 
The value of 
r* from a broader perspective should represent the 
Wicksellian 
natural rate 
of interest
, which one might view as governed by the real rate of interest that would prevail in 
an economy without frictions and without monetary policy influence.  
In a wide class of models, we 

know what the 
real rate of interest would be.  It would be the sum of the rate of productivity 
growth and the rate of labor force growth.  These factors alone would drive the real output 
      
   
            
       
    
             
  growth rate in this class of models.  
My staff calculated an 
r* value based on such a view.  It 
turned out to be 2 percent today, and this seems like a good benchmark for 
r* from which to 
calibrate Taylor rule policy recommendations.  Such recommendations would suggest that policy 
is indeed accommodative today, which would match most people™s intuition about current policy 

settings. Interestin
gly, this value of 
r* has historically been somewhat lower than the 
Laubach
-Williams measure
.  It
 has been near zero in recent years, but as of today has moved above 
zero to 
a value of about 2 
percent. 
The bottom line is that there are many ways to look at this value of 
r*, but a sensible 
guess is that 
r* is 
2 percent or higher, meaning policy today is accommodative, 
as intuition 
suggests.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you. 

MR. TARULLO.  M
adam Chair, if I couldŠ
President Bullard
, I was a little bit confused 
by what you were saying about labor force participation, 
and particularly the staff™s assessment 
of it.  My understanding of what the staff has been saying is that while they project a downward 
trend in labor force participation because of demographics, they also assess the decline in the 

immediate post
-crisis years to have been substantially steeper than that
.  And what they were 
predicting
Šand continue, I think, to predict, 
unless Bill 
corrects me
Šis a less steep decline or a 
flattening
-out of current labor force participation
, which eventually has their projected 
demographic trendŒbased participation rate converging with the actual participation rate.  And 

that, I think, is what™s been
 happening over the p
ast year and a half or so
, during which, 
with a 
little bit of fluctuation up and down, 
the labor force participation rate 
has been 
roughly stable, 
which I think is bearing out the staff™s expectation of the convergence of their projected trend 

with actual labor force participation. 
       
        
         
                 
      MR. WASCHER.  Yes, I think that™s how I interpret it as well.  I don™t think what we 
have in the forecast is at all at odds with the 
Aaronson and others paper of 2014.  The gap we 
have in there is roughly what we estimated in that paper, and as Governor Tarullo indicated, we 
expect the downtrend in the participation rate to continue 
and the actual participation rate to 
close the gap by falling less than the downtrend we have. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  First Vice Presiden
t Prichard. 
MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Economic activity in the Third District 
slowed during the first quarter.  While still expanding, the rate of expansion has been below 

expectations.  However, it appears that the recent slowdown may be tem
porary, and that 
sentiment is widely held among contacts in our region.  Unemployment in the region ticked up to 

5.7percent in March
, with Pennsylvania experiencing a significant decline in employment, 
enough that the first-
quarter job growth in the state 
was actually negative.
  However, both our 
April 
Manufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey 
and 
Nonmanufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey 
indicate that the manufacturing and service sectors expanded employment in April and point to 

further job growth and capital expenditures over the second half of the year.  One prominent 

manufacturer in the region indicated that his businesses are poised to grow rather more robustly 

in the second half of the year once they have worked through the necessary inventory correction.  

Although he doesn™t anticipate 2015 to be as strong as last year, the second half of the year 

should see solid growth. 
In response to a special survey question on the effect of the dollar™s appreciation on the
ir manufacturing activity, respondents who ha
ve exchange rate exposure indicated that the 
appreciation negatively affected their operations. 
However, our District does not overly engage 
in foreign trade, 
with exports
 accounting for only 10 
percent of revenues and imports 
         
   
              
            representing about 5 
percent
 of nonlabor costs.  
Thus, the overall effect of the dollar™s rise was 
fairly small 
for 
Third District manufacturers. 
Both nonresidential and residential construction weakened in March.  We are also seeing 
a softening in multifamily housing.  Reflecting th
e overall weaknesses in this sector, house price 
appreciation is also slower than in the 
nation as a whole, 
with prices
 growing in the 3 
to 3½ percent range.
  Retailers in the region have been report
ing healthy sales over the inter
me
eting 
period and modera
te year
-over-
year sales growth. 
Contacts report th
at sales are starting to be 
bolstered by lower gasoline prices, and consumers in the region remain highly confident.  They 

are also paying down post-holiday debt, and debit and credit card lines are declining.  Bankers in 

the region indicate that the growth in the commercial loan segment of their portfolios has picked 

up substantially, while other loan activity has remained fairly flat. 
Thus, our D
istrict reflects 
fairly well what might be transpiring in ot
her regions 
nationally
Ša bit of a step back in labor markets, 
a falloff in manufacturing activity
, and a lack of 
any significant improvement in residential investment.  This slowdown is well reflected in one of 

the series we produce in our real
-time resear
ch center, the 
Aruoba-Diebold-
Scotti Business 
Conditions Index.  The ADS uses six high-frequency data series to construct an index of current 

economic activity.  Those series include
, one, initial jobless claims through the week ending 

April 11 of this year; two, payroll employment through March; t
hree, industrial production 
through March; four, real personal income through February; five, real manufacturing and trade 

sales through January; 
and, six, real GDP through the 
fourth quarter of last year.
  The index is 
centered on zero, which indicates normal growth rates, and the index has recently turned 

negative.  However, we are receiving indications that the somewhat slower growth we have 
              
      
       
   
   
             
  wit
nessed is a temporary phenomenon, and that economic activity is expected to bounce back to 
trend growth rates. 
As mentioned by President Bullard, we also find that, 
historically
, first
-quarter GDP 
growth may not be adequately adjusted for seasonal variation.  Over the past 30 years, 
seasonally 
adjusted growth 
in first
-quarter GDP has averaged significantly less than growth over the 
remaining three quarters
Š1.8 percent as opposed to 2.7 percent.  Additionally, if one examines 
the timing of the 10 
weakest qua
rters over that span, six occurred in the first quarter and
, 50 percent of the time
, the weakest quarter 
was the first quarter of the year.
  Observations like 
these may point us to placing more weight on GDIŠ
gross domestic income
Šor on GDPplus, 
which incorporates the income side of GDP, in interpreting current economic activity.  GDPplus 

has the advantage that, unlike GDI, it is available with the same timing as expenditure
-side data. 
With that as background, we continue to project that overall economic act
ivity will 
accelerate modestly
, that utilization gaps will continue to progressively narrow
, and that inflation 
will continue to firm. With 
a substantial amount of data forthcoming before our June meeting, I 
expect that we™ll have a clearer view of the em
erging trends and confirmationŠor notŠ
that 
first
-quarter economic performance was, indeed, a poor harbinger of the year to come.  Thank 

you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  
President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming national data suggest that the 
economy hit a soft patch in the first quarter, which is consistent with the recent information on 

economic activity in the Fifth Federal Reserve District. 
At the same time, our reports indicate 
that the weakness is widel
y viewed as temporary.  Our diffusion index of manufacturing activity, 
released this morning
, was slightly negative in April, and that followed a reading of negative 8 
            
  
                       
       
   for March
.  B
ut our index of expected shipments six months ahead was a robust plus 38, a 
level 
that has not been exceeded since 2011.  
Similarly, our 
index 
for nonretail service
-sector activity 
was also slightly negative in April, but the index of expected demand six months ahead held 
steady at a pretty positive rate.  And the indexes for employment remain positive across all 

sectors. Retail revenue rose 
5 points to plus 17. 
More broadly, commentary from our directors and industry roundtable participants was 
more positive this month than last, and we™ve heard numerous reports about transitory factors 

having affected recent activity.  An executive at an engineering firm in West Vir
ginia said that 
ﬁweather has been the primary factor in our business slowdown.ﬂ 
Several other reports cited 
production slowdowns attributable to the West Coast port strike.  For example, a manufacturer of 

industrial safety products stated that production 
was interrupted by delays in receiving shipments 
of just one critical part manufactured in China.  These reports suggest that it™s quite reasonable to 

expect a rebound in growth in Q2. 
As usual, any discussion of labor markets these days turns quickly to the subject of 
shortages of skilled workers.  It does seem as if these shortages are having noticeable effects. 

For example, the CEO of a large building materials company told of a trucking company 

refusing outgoing shipments due to a lack of drivers.  
We also continue to hear about markets 
experiencing wage pressures
, and, while not universal at this point, the scope of these 

observations appears to have broadened of late.  This was most apparent in the reports from 

representatives of several staffing firm
s, both national and regional, who serve on our 
roundtables, including a regional representative from Manpower.  
One large staffing firm is 

telling clients to expect upward wage pressure ﬁin all skill levelsﬂ later this year.  Two grocers in 

Richmond recently announced double-
digit starting
-wage increases, perhaps 
in response to Wal
-         
     
       
     
  
                 
    Mart™s announcement.  A large auto manufacturer plans to raise starting wages for assembly line 
workers at a plant in our District from $13.17 an hour to $15.85 an hourŠabout 20 
percent. 
A lumber company in West Virginia has responded to a shortage by bringing in entry-
level workers 
from Puerto Rico, renting houses for them, and hiring an interpreter, all of which raise the cost of 
labor by 10 to 15 percent.  
These reports suggest that broader wage pressures may be about to 

emerge, although I recognize that wage acceleration is not yet apparent in the monthly figures for 

average hourly earnings. 
Turning to the national economy, as I said, we™
ve clearly hit a soft patch recently. 
Some 
of that softness was due to well
-known temporary factors.  Combined, these transitory factors 
could well explain a large part, if not all, of the first
-quarter slowdown.  
Moreover, this wouldn™t 

be, as many have noted, the first flat quarter we™
ve se
en during this expansion.  So the question 
is how rapidly economic activity picks up again from here as the effect of these transitory factors 

fade. I share th
is Tealbook™s optimism on consumer spending, and that™s based on robust 
income growth, solid consumer sentiment readings, and continued improvement in labor market 

conditions.  The rebound in car sales last month was an important piece of evidence that 

consumers have the confidence to boost spending in the months ahead. 
Turning to inflation, the late
st readings have been a bit firmer than expected.  Core CPI 
inflation averaged 2.3 percent at an annual rate from December to March.  The staff™s translation 

into core PCE inflation is 1.4 percent over the same three months, and that implies that Q4 will 

be the low point for core PCE inflation.  Oil prices appear to have bottomed out and the run-up in 

the dollar seems to have lost steam, so the transitory downward pressures on headline inflation 

are waning. Thus, it seems fairly clear to me that we are eme
rging from this inflation dip
, and 
inflation will be moving towards 2 percent in coming quarters. 
                      
         
             Looking ahead, as several of you have mentioned, we will receive more than the usual 
amount of data over the upcoming intermeeting period, including, importan
tly,
 two employment 
reports and two reports on personal income and consumption.  
If the data come in consistent with 
the Tealbook forecast, we would have solid evidence in hand at our June meeting that consumer 

spending growth had rebounded and that inflation was moving up.  If so, I believe the case for 

raising rates would be strong, s
o it seems premature to make any statements at this meeting or in 
the days immediately ahead, I believe, that could be interpreted as taking June off the table.  

Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Unemployment in the 
Tenth 
District remains 
very low at 4.2 percent, and recent employment growth has been modest but is mixed across 

states and industries.  Several 
District 
states are seeing sizable oil and gas layoffs, and negative 
spillovers are showing up in regional factory and transportation activity as well as in consumer 
spending 
areas 
and 
those that are 
energy dependent.  
Through the first quarter of this year, 
District energy jobs were down 4½ 
percent
, and firms in our latest energy survey expect 
their 
employment to fall by 12 percent this year.  District manufacturing is also feeling the 
effect, as 
the last time our manufacturing survey composite was lower than 
its April reading was in early 
2009. Firms responding to our energy survey, however, note 
that 
breakeven oil prices have 
fallen considerably as services costs have dropped, providing some encouragement for future 

activity as oil prices edge higher.  On the other hand, D
istrict states with virtually no oil and gas 
activity have seen a solid start to 2015.  Colorado, in particular, continues to grow rapidly, driven 

by strong tourism and construction activity.  
As a result, total employment in the region is up 
       
      
       
         
  
     
              slightly this year, and overall services activity in the District continues to grow despite the 
energy layoffs.  In agriculture, drought has worsened, although winter wheat production is 

shaping up to be similar to its recent five-
year average, and corn a
nd soybean planting intentions 
are generally strong.  Still, persistently low crop prices and elevated input costs continue to 

increase farmers™ short
-term financing needs. 
For the national economy, my outlook for growth over the medium term is little chan
ged
.  I assume that 
the softness in first
-quarter GDP proves transitory, as it has for the past several 
years.  Weather effects and the sharp decline in energy investment look to be important factors 

holding down first-quarter growth.  However, more persis
tent factors 
producing softer export 
growth and a broader slowing in new investment bear watching.  
Alternatively, personal 

consumption appears to have some upside potential, 
as there is yet to be a significant boost to 

spending from lower gasoline prices. 
March™s payroll numbers were clearly below expectations, though the labor market 
continues to improve in several aspects.  The services sector continues to perform well.  In the 

first quarter of this year, services added
, on average, 
179,000 additional jo
bs per month.  This is 
better than the 134,000 
average in the first quarter 
of 
last year.
  Overall, I expect average 
monthly payroll growth to drift down from the rapid pace of 260,000 per month last year to 

200,000 this year before settling down to a pace 
of around 150,000 next year as the labor market 
continues to tighten and growth moves to its trend level. 
Research by my staff also indicates improving labor market conditions, 
as reflected by 
the number of workers moving from lower-
to higher
-paying sect
ors
Šthat is, the extent of 
cyclical upgrading.  Their analysis shows that the rise in the quits rate over the past two years is 

primarily due to a higher quits rate in sectors with lower pay, like wholesale/retail trade and 
           
        
               
  
      
   
      
      leisure/hospitality.
  Tracking individual workers in these sectors using C
urrent 
Population 
Survey data shows 
that 
they have recently been moving into higher-
paying sectors, like 
education and health services, at rates similar to those before the recession. 
Turning to inflation, I expect
 inflation to remain somewhat below target due to lagged 
effects from low energy prices and a stronger dollar.  Inflation in some sectors, such as health 
care, have also notably slowed.  In addition, 
because of some of the current factors affecting 

inflation, year-over-year core could drift lower as stronger readings from a year agoŠ
core PCE 
readings from March to June of last year were 
running at a solid 2 
percent pace
Šdrop out of the 
12-month window.  
Such base effects have not affected 
my overall confidence regarding the 
medium
-term outlook for inflation, assuming 
there are 
continued improvement in the labor 

market and stable longer-
term expectations.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  I will start with a few observations 
about the Ninth District economy.  It™s generally robust, but the decline in oil prices is certainly 

creating challenges in some areas.  I will then turn to the national economy, 
where I see 

continued shortfall
s in aggregate demand relative to supply. 
Labor markets are tight in many parts of the Ninth District, 
with contacts reporting 
significant swaths of unfilled openings.  There are signs of growing wage pressures in some 

economic sectors and geographical are
as.  However, overall, wage pressures remain muted. 
Importantly, many businesses report having little or no ability to pass on wage increases to 

consumers in the form of price increases.  So this is actually a flip side of the argument that 

President Will
iams 
offered
Šhe indicated that he didn™t need to see wage increases to feel 
confident in the 
return 
of 
inflation to 2 percent. 
The flip side of this is that we might see wage 
      
       
             
   
    
           
   increases happening and still not see inflation
, because the question is whether those businesses 
experiencing the wage increases have 
the pricing power to pass that on.  The contacts 
that 
we talk
ed to in the intermeeting period suggested they do not. 
Contacts at businesses with an international footprint expressed concern during 
the 
intermeeting period about how the high value of the dollar would affect the demand for their 

products, especially in light of overall softness in global demand conditions.  And so
me of
 the 
comments that 
President Bullard
 offered about China echo things we heard from our contacts 
during the intermeeting period. 
Not surprisingly, economic activity has slowed greatly in the oil-producing areas of 
North Dakota.  However, overall confidence in the B
akken region remains high.  Many, if not 
most, of our contacts r
eport seeing the currently low level of economic activity as a welcome 
opportunity to shore up critical infrastructure needs in the western part of North Dakota. 
Let me turn to the national economy.  Both real and nominal variables are telling us a 
similar story, I believe:  
There is insufficient aggregate demand to use available resources in an 
effective fashion.  In terms of real activity, if we look back over the past five years since the end 

of 2009, real GDP growth has averaged 2.3 percent.  T
here is l
ittle sign of this pace 
quickeningŠl
ast year
, real GDP growth was only 2.4 percent.  H
ere I
™m using annual averages 
to get away from some of the seasonal adjustment factors that have been highlighted in previous 

interventions.  
This year
 now looks like it may be even worse than this weak average 
performance.  In the wake of the data that we
™ve 
received from the first quarter, Tealbook
, Book 
A, has downgraded its outlook for 2015 economic activity, and it now projects growth in this 

calend
ar year to be less than 2 percent.  We will get more information
, of course
, tomorrow 
morning along these lines. 
            
          
            
                      
  The persistence of these patterns has led some to conclude that they reflect a permanent 
downward shift in the productive capabilities of the United States.  I think we should be very 
cautious before accepting these claims. We saw significant improvement in all labor market 

metrics in 2014.  This improvement seems to have had 
little 
effect
 on the excess supply of 
human resources in the economy. 
We saw little upward pressure on compensation or on the 
inflation outlook.  This conjunction of low price pressures and strong employment growth 

suggests 
that the 
ﬁRoom to Growﬂ 
scenario i
n Tealbook, Book A, might be quite relevant.  And 
if you look at th
e implications of that scenario, the weakness of aggregate demand relative to 

supply creates concerns with respect to nominal variables. 
The outlook for inflation in 
Tealbook, Book A, 
is 
that it will be below target until 2019, well over four years from n
ow. 
Just to follow up on some of the discussion we heard earlier about inflation over the past 
few years, headline 
inflation 
did go above 2 percent in 2011, but I think if you go back over 
2008, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013, and 2014, in all of those years, 
it was below 2 percent.  In 2011, it 
was above 2 percent.  On average, over that time frame since the end of 2007, 
it™s been
 about 
1.3 percent. Market
-based longer-
term inflation expectations remain low. 
I want to
 say something about the prediction issue.  It™
s absolutely true
, I think
, that if 
you do horse 
races of th
e kind 
that President Williams talked about
, market-
based measures 
don™t really fare that well. I think it
™s actually because they™re 
of value to policymakers, not just 
to statistical 
forecasters, because we
™re interested in a different loss function.  We
™re not 
interested in just minimizing mean square
d error
, we™
re actually interested in trying to mitigate 
low inflation, especially when it
™s going to be costly to households.  And I th
ink that 
monitoring 
these market
-based measures of inflation expectations 
is helpful along those lines. 
         
             
   
    
  
    
          
     
       
     Tealbook, Book A, notes that we™
ve seen some slippage in Michigan survey measures as 
well
ŠI don™t want to put too much weight on that at this stage, but 
it™s something to watch.
 I think there are signs in these data that we may be facing a prolonged period of inflation running 
substantially below our target.  Now, why should we care about a possible downward slippage in 

inflation and inflation expectatio
ns? 
This builds on some of the remarks that 
President 
Rosengren already made, that p
ersistently lower inflation expectations translate to lower nominal 

interest rates.  Lower nominal interest rates translate into little recession
-fighting capacity for the 
central bank.  And such a reduction 
in policy capacity would be especially troubling because it 
would build on the policy capacity associated with a significant decline in the neutral real 

interest rate noted by President Rosengren.  
So this decline in inflation expectations really 

creates a first
-order loss in terms of what we are trying to accomplish 
because it increases the 
probability of hitting up against the zero lower bound. 
As President Rosengren 
suggested, the decline in the neutral rate of intere
st should lead 
us to consider raising the inflation target.  I see a great deal of possible merit in this
 suggestion.  
More generally, I think that it would be useful to have discussions about the long-
run goals that 
we have established.  We learn 
more 
over time
, and it™
s useful to take 
that
 on board.  
We d
on™t 
want to do it every year, certainly, but I think at intervals we should be taking on information and 

reevaluating the long
er-run goal statement.  
The 
Bank of Canada does this on a five-
year basis
.  Every five years they go back and relook 
at their framework and what they™
ve learned
, and 
I think there
™s something to be gained from that kind of systematic reevaluation of our framework.  
So I would be very supportive of further discussion of President Rosengren™s suggestion. 
With that said, first things first.  We actually need to forestall a possible decline in 
inflation expectations 
today 
generated by a failure to hit the current low target. 
During the 
               
          
           
         
  
  intermeeting period, Governor Haruhiko Ku
roda of 
the Bank of Japan visited Minnesota 
and 
gave an excellent speech.  He described the aggressive efforts of the Bank of Japan to stimulate 
an increase 
in inflation expectations.  As I listened to him, I was reminded yet again of how we 
need to do all that we can to avoid leaving our successors with the kind of tough situation that 

Governor 
Kuroda now faces. 
I don™t see that determination reflected in 
alternative B, but I won™t 
talk about that until tomorrow.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
  In terms of the economic 
outlook, I™m of two minds.  On the one hand, I™m more uncertain about the growth outlook and 

more concerned about the potential downside risks to growth.  On the other hand, I think the 

downside risks on the inflation side have lessened considerably.  A
t the last meeting
, I would 
have said that I expected further labor market improvement but was not yet reasonably confident 

that inflation would return to our 
2 percent objective ov
er the medium term.  Now, I would at 
least partly reverse things.  Conditional on further improvement in the labor market, I™m getting 

closer to being reasonably confident that inflation will return to our 2 
percent objective
, but I am 
less confident about when I will see further labor market improvement and how quickly it will 

occur. 
Turning first to the growth side
, it strikes me 
that 
there 
are 
a lot of crosscurrents right 
now, and it™s really difficult to assess the net 
effect
.  To me, this sharp slowing 
in payroll growth 
in March should not be a big surprise, however.  As I noted in my comments at the March 

FOMC meeting
, a big gap had opened up between payroll growth and GDP growth, so unless 
one thought that the productivity growth trend would remain ex
traordinarily poor, it seemed 

reasonable to expect 
either 
GDP growth to pick up or payroll growth to slow down.  A
s it turns 
      
        
           
   
              
            out, GDP growth slowed rather than picked up, s
o that left payroll growth to bear the brunt of the 
adjustment. 
As I assess the firs
t quarter, I do think there are both transitory and more persistent 
factors responsible for the slowdown.  On the transitory side, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of 
New 
York™s staff analysis
 does suggest 
that 
severe winter weather did have a sizable effect
. We 
put the 
impact
 at about 1½ 
percent on 
the
 annualized growth rate, slightly less than last year.  Having 
said that, I wouldn™t take that point estimate too literally. 
Also
, I do think the West Coast port 
slowdown did disrupt economic activity.  We had a small business advisory group meeting, and I 
was surprised that two out of the eight or nine businesses that attended referenced the port 

slowdown as hurting their businesses 
in the first quarter
Šthis is 
around upstate New York and 
New Jersey, and that™s not really where I would expect 
the 
port slowdown to actually manifest 
itself
, so I thought that was meaningful. 
There 
are
 also some more long-
lasting components as well. As Steve Kamin made clear, 
the dollar™s sharp appreciation has led to a deterioration in U.S. net exports, and the 
Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York staff estimates that a 15 percent appreciation of the broad rea
l trade
-weighted 
dollar, which is a little bit m
ore than we have right now in hand, would cut about 0.6 
percentage point from the level of real GDP after one year, and I think that™s pretty consistent 

with the Tealbook estimates.
  And I think it™
s important because that™s just the partial 
equilibrium effect.  If you have a trade drag, it also drains real income from the economy, so 

there™s also the risk of second-
order effects. 
Now, the second thing 
is that 
oil and gas investment is plunging.  I™m not sure how 
severe the knock
-on 
effects will be, but I d
on™t think we™re done yet.  Firms have been protected, 
in part, this year by hedging their future forward production by selling oil forward, and they™
ll           
        
       
                      
       
     
   
become more exposed to the current oil prices as time passes
, so I expect a downward trend in 
investmen
t to continue.  As Helen Holcomb pointed out in her comments about the Texas 
economy, the effect does seem to be quite a bit larger, I think, than expected.  
Richard Fisher 

said
Šin January, I 
believe it was
Šat th
at time he thought that employment growth in 
Texas, 
which was well above average compared 
with 
the country, would slow down to the national 
average.
  But if you look at the payroll data in March for states on a seasonally adjusted basis, 
payrolls in Texas fell by 25,400 people, which is pretty sizab
le for Texas. 
And it™s interesting 
that Oklahoma was the state with the second
-largest decline in payroll. So
, clearly
, the fall 
in oil 
and gas investment is having a significant 
effect
.  It™s rippling through to incomes
, and i
t™s rippling through into c
ommercial real estate construction
, so I think it actually has a more sizable 
effect than just looking at oil and gas investment itself. 
Third, I think the inventory accumulation, which I don™t think anyone has mentioned, 
looks to me like it™s poised to be a drag on growth.  If you look at the inventory-
to-sales ratios, 
they have been drifting up, and if you look at the rate of inventory accumulation in the first 

quarterŠ
well, we™ll see what we get tomorrow
, but it looks to be on the high side in terms of 
what™s sustainable over the medium term.
  So if you had to ask yourself, 
ﬁAre inventories going 
to contribute positively to growth or negatively to growth over the next year
?ﬂ 
They are 
almost 
certain to be a drag on growth.  In the face of 
all 
of these cro
sscurrents, I think the next few 
months of data are really important.  I™m really looking at what April and May look like.  And 

even if we get strong April and May data, I™m not really sure what to make of itŠi
s this just a 
bounce after first
-quarter weakn
ess, or is this the new trend? 
In contrast to the growth side, I am getting more comfortable that inflation is starting to 
stabilize and is likely to start dri
fting back up toward our 2 percent objective.  When I look at the 
         
                  
  
      
    
     inflation data and all the other factors that feed into the inflation outlook, I think most suggest 
that inflation
Šdespite a stronger dollar, lower energy prices, and still-
sizable slack in the labor 
market
Šactually seems to be stabiliz
ing.  So let me run through the evidence very q
uickly.  If 
you look at the three-month change in the core CPI, it™s now above 2 percent compared 
with 
a 12-month change of 1.8 percent.  Inflation compensation, 
as measured by the five
-by-
five 
forward TIPS versus nominal Treasury has moved up a bit.  
Surv
ey measures of inflation 
expectations are generally stable, and I would argue that wage compensation growth trends are 

stable to slightly higher. 
So the fears I had of inflation getting unanchored to the downside seem to have 
diminished.  I could imagine that things could have worked out quite differently.  We™d have 

lower headline inflation feeding through into core inflation
.  T
hat, 
in turn
, would 
depress 
nominal 
wage 
growth and cause 
inflation expectations to be anchored 
to the downside.  And the 
fact th
at we haven™t seen that at this point, I think, makes that dynamic much less likely.  So I™m 
much more confident now that inflation will return to our 2 percent objective, subject to having 

sufficient growth to continue to close the output gap.  Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This discussion has appropriately focused on 
the significantly weaker
-than-expected incoming data on first-
quarter economic activity.  The 
staff forecasts a r
eturn to higher growth of around 2 percent or more in the second quarter and 
the second half of the year, and we™ve heard similar forecasts during this round of discussion 

from several of the 
Reserve 
Bank presidents.  The Tealbook forecast is, not surprisingly, 
consistent with what we see in the charts given 
to 
us by Bill Wascher
Šin particular, the two real 
GDP forecasts and their fan charts
.  S
o there™s a fair probability that will happen, but it™s not a 
      
    
               
         
       
    guarantee that we™re going to bounce right back in the coming quarter and there 
have been some 
weak data in April. 
In terms of elementary textbooksŠlooking at C + 
I + G + NXŠthe Tealbook forecast
s expect the bulk of the rebound in the second quarter to come from consumption, which is a 
reasonable forecast i
n light of expectations for employment and real disposable income.  
The 
Tealbook also expects government purchases to rebound significantly, net investment to decline 

more slowly than it did in the first quarter, and net exports to decline at the same rate 
as in the 
first quarter.
  This is all very interesting, but of course, we™re waiting for tomorrow™s first 
estimate of first
-quarter growth to clarify
, perhaps, 
what happened in the first quarter. 
When you focus on recent growth rates, you get a fairly pes
simistic picture of what™s 
happening, and we need to remind ourselves that the overall position of the economy is good.  

Let me start with the labor market.  The unemployment rate remains at 5.5 percent, a level that is 

not that much above many estimates of the natural rate today and is not above estimates of the 
natural rate that we had going into the March meeting.  A year ago we didn™t think we™d reach a 
rate that low until 2016
.  A
nd, importantly, some, though not all, 
of the other labor market 
indicato
rs whose behavior suggested that the U-3 unemployment rate understated the extent of 
labor market problems appear to be returning to pre-
recession levels. 
So, from the policy 
viewpoint, the basic question on output and employment is whether employment wil
l continue to 
grow at a rate sufficient to bring further improvement in the labor market in coming quarters. 
The inflation rate remains below target, and that is a problem.  However, one gets the 
impression that while we are committed to looking through tr
ansitory factors
Šparticularly dollar 
appreciation and the decline in oil prices, 
and gasoline prices in particular
Špopular discussion 
both here and in Europe has not focused on what that means.  It does not mean focusing solely 
      
     
           
          
            on core inflation, because both energy and import prices affect core inflation.  Core PCE 
inflation was 1.3 percent over the 12 months through March.  According to Board staff estimates 

in the Tealbook, increases in the dollar, which are very unlikely to persist indefinitel
y, 
are 
holding down that figure by 0.3 percentage point this year, bringing what could be called 

nontransitory core inflation to something like 1.6 percent.  And current energy price changes are 

reducing core inflation by another 0.1 percentage point, which brings you to a nontransitory core 

inflation rate of 1.7 percent. 
Now, you might be concerned about this if the low core numbers were being reflected in 
declining inflation expectations, but the survey measures seem to be relatively well anchored.  

And a
ll this, again, seems consistent with the data presented in the 
bottom two charts in Bill 
Wascher™s handout
, which show inflation coming back rather quickly to just below 2 
percent. 
I expect that the transitory factors
Šwhich are, fundamentally, 
oil and th
e exchange rate, which 
may or may not turn around reasonably soonŠwill gradually abate and possibly begin to reverse 
themselves.  We only need them to abate.  And labor market slack will continue to diminish, 
putting inflation on a path that, over the medi
um term
, will take us very close to our inflation 
target.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  A lot of people have talked about Q1 and 
have posed the question, 
ﬁWas Q1 an aberration?
ﬂ I certainly
 hope that it was an aberration, and 
I expect that it has been an aberration. 
And I don™t think, personally, that 
we™re going to learn 
that much from the GDP number tomorrow morning.  I
f it
™s kind of low or really low, it may not 
tell us very much because
 we had a really low number in the first quarter of 2014, and that didn™t 

seem to mean very much a quarter or two later. 
       
      
  
           
   
         
    
              
         I actually think the question is not so much 
ﬁWas Q1 an aberration?ﬂ 
but more the 
question that was implicit in some of 
Vice Chairman D
udley
™s analysis a minute ago
: ﬁAre 
there 
things at work in the economy that will give us a growth path for the rest of the year that
™s somewhat lower than what many of us expected toward the end of last year
?ﬂ Not that it will in 
any way resemble Q1, bu
t that somehow there are forces that are restraining growth a little bit 
more than we would have anticipated.  
Vice Chairman Dudley
 suggested one in his presentation.  
Another possible explanation of that phenomenon, should it occur, is the one that 
I think lies 
behind the Tealbook™s alternative scenario of a persistent slowdownŠ
that is, 
that there is a kind 
of confidence problem that™s inhibiting consumer spending despite the extended improvement in 

income fundamentals because of job growth and mayb
e a little bit of wage growth
, as well. 
I think for that reason one has to be a little agnostic right now in awaiting data over the 
next couple of months
Šas President Mester
, Vice Chairman Dudley, and several other people 
have said
.  A
lthough, as someoneŠI 
think it was 
Vice Chairman Dudley
Šalso said
, even then, 
it™s not clear how much some of the questions we™
ve been asking will be clarified because 
there
™s going to be a certain degree of snapback.  So instead of trying to speculate about all of 
that, I wan
ted to put on the table in a little bit more detail something 
Simon had an exhibit on in 
his presentation at the beginning of this meeting and that is the phenomenon of negative interest 

rates on European sovereign debt.  This phenomenon may be relevant to 
an assessment of the 
most likely medium
-term U.S. growth trend because of 
its potential 
effects
 on financial markets 
and the dollar, potential downside risks, andŠ
and I
™m not going to talk about this, but it may be 
relevant to the 
great debate about s
ecul
ar stagnation. 
There have been negative interest rates on some shorter
-term European sovereign debt for 
several years now, but the last six months or so have 
seen a qualitative change in the 
       
     
             
   
       
                    phenomenon in a number of respects.  First, negative rates have m
oved down along the yield 
curve in European countries with the strongest credit reputations to the point that, as in the chart 
that Simon distributed, we now see negative interest rates in a nontrivial portion of 5-
to 7
-year 
debt in the stronger European sovereigns.  Second, yield curves, as he mentioned, are quite flat in 

these countries.  I just checked this morning, and the spread between German 
2-year and 10-
year 
government bonds is about 40 basis points.  That compares to a spread of about 140 basis points 

for U.S. T
reasury securities.
  The 30-
year 
bund is still trading positively but 
at 63 basis points, 
which is a pretty low number for a 30-year.  As everybody knows, the Swiss 10-year sovereign 

issue earlier this month went out at negative rates, and 
I believe that™
s the first time 
in history 
that any sovereign debt of that duration has been priced negatively.  
And 
so, as 
far as Thomas 
Jordan knew, he was setting a precedent, or at least his country™s government was setting a 

precedent. 
Currently, 
as S
imon™s chart shows, more than 35 percent of all euro-zone government 
debt carries a negative interest rate. As recently as two weeks ago
, I think
, it was up over 
40 percent. There
™s been a little bit of an interest rate change since then, which has affec
ted the 
yields in some of those medium
-term tenors.
  Substantial portions of some non-euro-zone 
sovereigns, notably Denmark and Switzerland, also are priced at negative rates, and some 

shorter-duration corporate bonds of the highly rated European firms are 
also priced at negative 
rates now. 
Clearly, this is all related to long
-standing European economic problemsŠand, 
more 
immediately, first the prospect and now the reality of the ECB™s QE program.  It
™s also related
, I guess, 
to the relative scarcity of sov
ereign debt instruments 
issued by countries like Germany 
that continue to run tight fiscal policies and large current account surpluses, notwithstanding 
                                 
  
   
  
           
 economic conditions in the euro zone more generally.  
The unprecedented nature of this 
phenomenon has caused most thoughtful analysts to offer only tentative v
iews of the relative 

importance of various 
stories that explain
 why investors would hold longer-
term sovereigns with 
negative yields.  
Logically, I think the explanations fall into three 
categories. 
First is gloom 
about the long
-term prospects for the countries in question.  Now, it™s true, there™s not a whole 

lot of high optimism to be found about European growth prospects, but almost everybody 

discounts this as a dominant explanationŠ
that is, the idea that there
™s going to be negative 
growth 
or deflation
 for 10 years in Europe. 
The s
econd group of explanations are based on investor inertia, basicallyŠwhether 
forced, as in the case of pension funds and some other institutions, which may be required by 
law 
or regulation to hold certain percentages of extremely low-risk bonds, or unforced, as in the case 

of other investors who are themselves unsure of what all 
of 
this negative rate stuff means and are 
waiting right now to see what happens, and maybe 
chan
ge their investment decision if things 
don™t turn around relatively soon. 
The third set of explanations is that, in an environment that doesn™t offer 
a lot of 
appealing investment options, 
there may be some plays available here.  For example, you may 

get capital gains if yields go even further into negative territory, or you may get exchange rate 

gains whether from short-
term developments that cause quick swings in currencies or from 
longer-term appreciations of currencies with very low inflation or even deflation.  That is, if you 

think that there
™s going to be very low inflation in Switzerland for a long time to come and you 
are a U.S. investor, and you think that there™s going to be inflation in the United States, you 

might actually end up profiting by that play.  
As an example of th
is search for an investment 
play, I took note of one analyst™s advice to his clients that the best play may be in bonds with a 
        
           
  
       
           good bit of convexity so as to m
aximize the chances of catching the wave of large market 
movements when these trends reverse. 
To date, as a very good 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Market
Source 
report 
indicated, there have been relatively few discontinuities observed in European debt markets.  But 
I think this is the point at which Herb Stein™s memorable aphorism comes to mind, because 

unless the medium
-term prospects for Europe are a lot worse than most people think, there™
s going to be a reversal of negative rates at some point.  Even 
if there
™s no near
-term reversal 
resulting from sufficiently enhanced growth prospects or from sufficiently significant policy 

moves, a nontrivial number of investors might, over time, 
overcome their inertia and start 

seeking positive nominal yields elsew
here. 
There are 
a lot of potential outcomes here, some of which are relatively benign.  Others, 
though, are of potentially greater concern.  For example, if enough investors were caught flat
-footed by an unexpected change in ECB policyŠand, paradoxically, an unexpected 
improvement in European economic prospectsŠ
there could be some pretty significant turmoil in 
relevant markets, although there we would have to ask ourselves how much the financial turmoil 

would be offset by the prospect of improvement in the real economy.  I think of 
even greater 
concern to us would be a decision by those investors who did not initially move out of European 

sovereign debt that they couldn™t take the uncertainty or the negative rates any longer.  The 

natural destination for the
se investors is
, of course, U.S. T
reasury securities
, and I think that 
some of the dollar strengthening we™
ve seen this year has been attributable to 
the existence of 
investors
 who have already made such a move.  And it is possible, though very hard to judge 
how likely, that many more could follow.  If they were to do so, the recent modest retracing by 

the dollar could itself be halted and reversed pretty significantly. 
                  
       
      
                  On this last possibility, it™s worth mentioning that, notwithstanding the notable spread
s between 
bunds and T
reasury securit
ies, some European investors have apparently concluded that 
the roughly 80 basis point difference between German and U.S. two-
year 
bond rate
s is 
insufficient to compensate for currency
-hedging costs and other risks.  And 
this calculus is
, I think, what may be contributing to some of the otherwise-
hard
-to-explain changes in the yield 
curves of some of the stronger European sovereigns, since fundamentals are not really changing 
there but you™re seeing some movement in those yield curves, which I take to be everybody 

repositioning
, trying to figure out the best defensive place to be right now.  So investors may be 
moving around within bonds that are either euro-denominated or effectively tied to the euro. 
But if that spread b
etween 
U.S. T
reasury interest rates 
and rates on European sovereigns 
were to widen, either because we raise rates or because QE and other developments in the EU 

drove yields down even further there, then more European investors might be tempted to take the 

Atlantic plunge.  And this, in turn, could cause some market dislocation in Europe, a renewed 
unwelcome strengthening of the dollar, or both.  This is pretty speculative right now, but 
certainly in a context in which the trajectory of U.S. economic perfor
mance is at least in some 
question after the 
past few months, I think this situation is another reason for us not to be in a 
hurry to raise rates, at least not until we
™ve had a chance to see how investors are adapting, and, 
most importantly, what their adaptation means for the dollar. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming data for the first quarter have 
been weaker
, overall, than expected, including data for household and business spending, 
industrial production, and housing starts and permitsŠ
a little bit different but quite similar to the 

first quarter of 2014.  In addition, the initial BLS report on the employment situation for March 
              
   
   
        
      
     
       was also much weaker than expected, and 
that™
s different from last year
, when payroll gains 
continued 
to be 
very strong right through the first quarter.  And the question, of course, is how 
much signal to take.  
One reason to discount these data somewhat are the transitory factors that 
are likel
y to reverse, including bad winter weather and the West Coast port disruption 
as well as 
the technical factors that have been discussed.  Another is that GDP data may eventually be 

significantly revised and is a noisy signal
Šand I thought that the new exhibit in Tealbook, 
Book A, on prediction intervals was interesting and useful on that point.  
In any case, it makes 
sense to me to take some signal from this year™s weak first quarter, both for labor markets and 

for GDP
.  I think the baseline staff forecast 
strikes a reasonable balance for the rest of this year 
by assuming higher GDP growth, but not a significant catch-up quarter like we had in the second 

quarter 
of 
2014. On inflation, I would tentatively say I feel a little better about inflation, which is n
ow 
forecast to run at about 1½ 
percent
 for Q2, well above the Q1 readings.  Survey expectations 
remain stable.  Breakevens have moved up modestly across the curve since the March meeting, 

seemingly driven more by oil prices and liquidity rather than changing expectations.  
In light of 
all of the recent market readings that suggest concerns about low inflation, it™
s an improvement
, for a change, 
to read stories that fixed
-income traders are seeing a greater likelihood of inflation 
getting back to mandate-consistent levels and less risk of very low inflation.  
Of course, we may 

overread these market movements, and it may simply be that TIPS got a little cheap relative to 

nominals, and traders acted on that.  The underlying story of a return to 2 percent inflation over 

the medium term, given GDP and labor market outcomes as forecast, continues to make sense to 

me.  And I look forward to gaining more confidence from the incoming data on that.  I would 
      
  
   
    
                        
   worry more about lower inflation in the case that the economy does slip into a lower gear in 
growth and labor markets. 
Looking forward, the positive narrative is that consumer spending will increase to healthy 
levels supported by low energy prices, high confidence, and much better labor market conditions. 

In fact
, going back to 
Stan
™s basic equation, you could say that the U.S. economy has grown at 
about 2.7 percent over the last two years, with net exports at around zero.  With net exports now 

contributing negative 0.7 to negative 0.8 percentage point, you have to ask, where is growth 

going to come from?  It™s not going to come from government spending
, it™s not going to come 
from housing investment, and it™s not going to come from business investment in a world in 

which
 drilling is being significantly reduced.  So it really has to come from consumption.  And, 
in fact, in the medium
-term forecast
, PCE growth accounts for well more than 100 percent of the 
growth.  That narrative, I have to say, makes sense to me, but it does amount to an airplane 

flying on one engine.  S
o far
, the combination of the weak spending data and high consumer 
confidence says that the consumer, 
in effect
, is now 
ebullien
tly saving. 
In terms of the risks, one, of course, is that PCE growth does disappoint.  Another one, 
frankly, is that
, in a 
world of still
-slow growth, a return to stronger growth here could well lead 
to a tightening in financial conditions not so much through the rate channel as through the dollar 

channelŠi
t may not be a rate tantrum that is really the threat this time.
  We will see
, by the time 
of the June meeting, 
whether there is progress in addressing Greece™s fiscal crisis or whether 

Greece, instead, is headed for control
s on capital flows
, sovereign default, and the like, with 
potential disruption for the U.S. economy.  
We™ll see two more
 employment reports and 
a lot 
more data.  And we™ll know, I think, at that point, something about whether the first quarter™s 
      
               
      
  
  
  
   
         
        
    disappointment is transitory
 and anomalous or, instead, marks some kind of real loss of 
momentum. 
Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to reflect briefly on the quarterly 
assessment of financial stability and then turn to the outlook. 
Although overall risks to financial stability in 
the United States remain moderate, one 
area that 
bears 
heightened scrutiny is the potential for spikes 
in volatility due to changes in 
market liquidity.  In particular, we should be asking whether episodes of severe volatility, 
like 
the wild swings we saw
 in T
reasury 
bond yields on the morning of October 15, 
are likely to 
become the new normal.  Bond inventories held by broker-
dealers have declined
, in some part 
due to regulatory changes.  Separately, and predating the onset of Dodd-Frank, changes in 

marke
t structure may be at least as important in some markets
, for which automated and high-
frequency traders may now account for a majority of the activity.  Coupled with the big run-up 
we™ve seen of investments in bond mutual funds, this raises the specter of amplification of 
volatility and fire
-sale dynamics at times when investors looking to cash out could be surprised 
by lower-
than
-expected liquidity.  Together, 
these changes to the structure of financial markets 
could increase the volatility of asset price 
responses. A modest increase in the average 
level of 
volatility shouldn™t be a concern, particularly if market participants respond with more rigorous 
risk management
.  But a lack of liquidity that leads to large and self
-reinforcing swings in prices 
and market freezes during periods of stress could pose threats to financial stability and would be 

especially concerning in the case of the U.S. T
reasury market, with its traditional benchmark 
status. 
                 
          
               
  
   
     I think it
™s premature to draw conclusions for financial 
stability.  Some of the 
preoccupation with the decline in dealer inventories may, 
in fact
, be misplaced, and I think 
focusing too much attention on the critical role of dealers as reliable providers of liquidity during 
severe stress episodes suggests a ver
y high degree of amnesia.  Moreover, bid-
ask spreads are in 
line with historical norms. 
As we
™re learning from the investigation of October 15, we also do 
not yet fully understand the implications of the growing role of high-
frequency traders in these 
mar
kets. 
With heterogeneity across their size, business models, and trading strategies, some of 
their activities may
, in fact
, contribute to market liquidity, 
while 
some 
may be destabilizing. 
And, finally, it™s unclear how much leverage or high-
quality liqu
idity is embedded in bond 
mutual funds and how vulnerable they might be to liquidity mismatch and fire-
sale dynamics. 
The Dodd-
Frank requirement for mutual funds to undertake stress tests holds some promise, but 
only if deployed rigorously.  In short, I a
m very pleased that we are putting intense focus on this 
issue, and I think it will only rise in importance as the date of liftoff approaches. 
Now let me turn briefly to the outlook in the United States.  The recent data on the labor 
market, aggregate spen
ding, and industrial output have been disappointing.  The key question 
that we are wrestling with around this table is how much of this unanticipated weakness 

represents a slowing in the underlying momentum of activity and how much is due to transitory 

dis
turbances
?  The preliminary conclusion I would draw from the surprises in the recent data is 
that the negative impulse to U.S. aggregate demand from the combined effects of the plunge in 

oil prices and the surge in the dollar seem to be at least as strong as we had expected, while the 

expected positive effects have not materialized so far. 
Turning first to the positive effects, recent shocks were expected to be reflected primarily 
in stronger consumption growth, but the recent data have been disappointing.  Some of the 
               
   
  
  
   
            
      
  preliminary indicators of consumer spending are often substantially revised, so we perhaps 
should not take too much signal from them.  Indeed, auto salesŠamong the most reliable of 

indicators
Šrebounded strongly in March.  Nonetheless, subpar data on retail sales have now 
persisted for four months, suggesting that temporary infl
uences or statistical noise 
are 
not fully to 
blame.  On balance, it™s possible that the forces boosting consumer spending may not be as 

strong as we might have hoped.  
Weaker
-than
-expected consumption would be very unfortunate, 
because strength in other ca
tegories of aggregate demand remains elusive.  The recent data on 
housing starts and permits, for example, suggest that this sector continues to struggle. 
On the negative side of the ledger, the drop in oil prices was expected to curtail business 
investment related to drilling, while the dollar™s rise was anticipated to reduce net exports. A 

broad variety of indicators suggests that these effects are materializing with greater force than 

had been anticipated.  Drilling investment looks to have dropped at an annualized rate of 

50 percent in the first quarter
.  And orders and shipments of capital goods, as well as business 
sentiment, have also been weak and suggest that overall business investment will edge lower 

over the first half of this year.  
A variety o
f indicators also suggest 
that the 
stronger dollar is 
weighing significantly on activity.  Net exports subtracted 1 percentage point from growth in the 

fourth quarter, and the staff estimates 
a contribution of minus 
 percentage point in the first 
quarter.
  The national manufacturing purchasing 
managers™
 diffusion index of new export orders 
has been in contractionary territory for the past three months.  Manufacturing production 

declined at an annual rate of 1 percent, and the outlook for internationally or
iented firms has 
worsened significantly in recent days. 
       
               
  
                
       
      
In parallel, the recent labor market data suggest a slowing in the 
take-up 
of slack. 
Average monthly payroll employment gains were 200,000, down about 60,000 from last year™s 
pace
, and all of the indicators of slack have moved sideways in the last month. 
Of course, there™s a danger in reading too much into this data.  It™s entirely possible we™
ll see the stronger trend in underlying activity that was apparent in the second half of the year 

reassert it
self.  But it
™s important to keep in mind the international context.  On the one hand, we 
have seen some encouraging data from the euro area
Šdata on retail sales and industrial 

production, in particularŠwhich holds out some promise that aggregate demand wi
ll strengthen. 
And the dollar™s sharp ascent seems to have stalled, at least for now.  On the other hand, 

negotiations between Greece and its creditors remain challenging.  And although the macro data 

are
 notoriously unreliable, Chinese GDP growth looks to have slowed noticeably in the first 

quarter.
  On balance, the foreign economic outlook suggests continued weak demand in some 
important advanced foreign economies and signs of faltering growth in some important emerging 
market economies.  In this context
, the threat to price stability from stronger demand growth in 
the United States seems quite limited. 
Let me close by touching briefly on inflation.  Recent data have provided some 
reassurance that underlying inflation is not moving lower.  Oil prices have moved up somewhat 
further since March, and the 
3-month moving average of core PCE inflation has increased from 

the very low level reached in January.
  Even so, current estimates of both the 3- and 12-month 
changes in core PCE prices point to an underlying trend rate of only 1.4 percent.  And while it™
s reassuring that survey
-based measures of inflation expectations are remaining stable
, and there 
has been some improvement in market-
based measures, th
e latter 
are still materially below the 
levels 
that preva
iled
 until the middle of last year. 
The overall picture should suggest at least 
              
     
         
        
                
        
some caution about attributing all of the recent softening to transitory factors and puts a high 
premium on incoming data as we assess the timing of liftoff, which is 
the topi
c for tomorrow™s 
discussion.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, thank you.  Thanks to everyone for another interesting and 
thoughtful round of observations.  As usual, I™
ll try to summarize a couple of main themes and 
add a few remarks of my 
own. 
Starting with real activity 
and 
the labor market, everyone agreed that the news has been 
generally disappointing since our last meeting, although views 
differed 
about its implications. 
With respect to employment, the March employment report show
ed unexpected weakness in 
payroll gains, but many of you emphasized 
that 
one shouldn™t make too much out of one month™s 
report.  And, still, average gains in the first three months of the year are running 
at about 
200,000, which is a respectable pace, especiall
y given how weak output growth looks to have 
been in the first quarter. Other labor market indicators during the intermeeting period were 
mixed but generally, 
I think
, imply little change in resource utilization.  The unemployment rate 
stayed at 5.5 percent.  Broader measures of labor underutilization ticked down one-tenth, but 
the 
labor force participation rate fell 
one-tenth, and the employment-
to-population ratio was 
unchanged.  You noted that 
the JOLTS
 job openings rate ticked up slightly, but there wa
s also a 
slight decline in quits and hires, and 
at least 
the Board™s labor market condition
s index was 
unchanged.  I noted some reports from business contacts about increases in turnover and the fact, 
as President George mentioned, that people who are 
ﬁtur
ning over
ﬂŠwho are quittingŠ
appear 
to be moving to jobs 
in which
 they™
re receiving wage gains. 
On wages, I think everyone agreed that aggregate measures suggest very little pickup in 
wage growth, although some of you suggested that the reports you™
re recei
ving from your 
       
      
    
                  
        
    
  business contacts are beginning to hint at a broader acceleration in wage gains and labor market 
pressures.
  That said, many of you noted that wage pressures are confined to particular regions 
and sectors
, such as high-
tech 
in Silicon Valley
 and San Francisco.  But, 
as President Williams 
noted, the implications of movements in wages for inflation and 
for 
our criterion of wanting to 
have reasonable confidence that inflation will move back 
are 
debatable, and at least in recent 
years it doesn™t 
look like there
™s that much of a close link between 
nominal wages and inflation. 
With respect to spending, everyone remarked on the unexpected weakness we™
ve seen in 
a broad range of spending and production indicators, including retail sales, housing start
s, orders 
and shipments of capital goods, nonresidential construction, drilling, exports, and industrial 

output.  And, of course, tomorrow morning we receive the first-
quarter GDP preliminary 
estimate.
  The underlying cause of the Q1 slowdown and its implications for future growth is 
obviously very important and unclear at this point.  Many of you mentioned, and cited evidence 

from your business contacts, 
of the importance of bad winter weather and the West Coast port 
dispute.  A number of you mentione
d the fact that we have a pattern here
Šover many yearsŠ
of 
Q1 being unusually weak, suggesting some residual seasonality in the GDP figures.  
Views on 
the size of these transitory effects differ, but if they are substantial
, then the prospects for a quick 
return to moderate growth should be good. 
On the other hand, a number of you mentioned that other explanations for weaker growth 
that may be relevant in the first quarter could have implications 
for the remainder of the year.  In 
particular, the dollar rece
ived a good deal of mention.  It looks like the dollar may be having a 
significant negative effect
 and that many of your business contacts mentioned the negative 
effect 
they™re seeing from the stronger dollar.  In addition, the decline in oil prices does seem to be 

having a significant effect
Šmaybe larger than we anticipated on business investment and 
       
      
                       
                
    drilling activity, and we haven™t yet seenŠ
surprisingly
, perhapsŠmuch evidence of a positive 
effect
 on consumer spending.  The anecdotes that you reported fro
m your business contacts were 
somewhat mixed, but I interpreted those as being reasonably positive in terms of not seeing any 
really significant changes in business prospects. 
On the international side, a number of risks 
were mentioned: 
Greece
; China, 
whose growth looks like it slowed more than expected
; geopolitical risks that bear on oil prices
; and 
a very interesting discussion, I thought, of what™s happening in global financial markets, 
with 

negative rates in Europe and the potential for a 
global reshu
ffling of portfolios that could raise 
volatility or could have very significant effects either on the dollar or interest rates and could be 

triggered by a shift in U.S. monetary policy. 
On the inflation front, incoming data came in pretty much as the 
staff
 had expected.  Core 
inflation was a touch higher than expected.  Oil prices were up somewhat since our last meeting, 

and the broad dollar exchange rate actually fell a little bit during the intermeeting period.  S
ome 
of you noted that these are welcome developments from an inflation perspective, as they indicate 

that the downward impetus 
provided by 
oil and the dollar to 
inflation is ebbing and shouldn™t 
continue. We had a nice discussion of measures of inflation expectations, with survey measures 

generally remaining stable and market-based measures of inflation compensation moving up 

slightly, although 
they are 
still bel
ow where they were last summer. 
President Williams™
s discussion about the relevance of these inflation expectations to inflation forecasts was 

interesting.  They don™t seem to be very good forecasts of inflation, and it is interesting 
that 
we have, 
I thin
k, 
repeatedly noticed that these measures are more heavily influenced by oil prices 
and movements in oil prices than, 
it would seem
, is reasonable. 
             
  
            
                   On the other hand, with respect to inflation and the outlook for inflation, a number of you 
suggested
, I thi
nk, that we could be in for a period in which inflation undershoots our objective 
for many, many years to come
 and, crossing over into the policy domain, suggested quite a bit of 
concern that we may be in for a very long period of an inflation undershoot.  That took us to 
some interesting observations on the question of 
what the equilibrium real rate is
; the possibility 
that it may be persistently depressed or not, as some think
; a debate about what
™s happening with 
the equilibrium real rate
; and the possib
ility 
that 
if the equilibrium real rate really is depressed
, what 
that implies for our monetary policy, and particularly for our inflation target, which is 
something that maybe we want to get back to and consider. 
Okay.  Let me just stop there as 
a summary
 of what I heard.  Are there any comments or 
corrections anyone wants to offer?  [No response] 
Then
 I™d like to offer some comments of my 
own, then we can quit and go to dinner.  I, of course, was also disappointed in incoming data on 

employment, spending, and production.  I recognize this may be just another soft spot, akin to 
what we saw last year and in a number of years past
, and I definitely think we should be careful 
not to overreact to what is a few weeks™ worth of news.  I find it reassuring that indicators of 
consumer confidence remain pretty upbeat, and I really haven™t altered my modal outlook for 

employment and output over the medium term.  I guess if I were updating my SEP forecast now, 

I would mark down projected growth this year, but modestly.  That said, I do find the widespread 

nature of the recent negative surprises disconcerting
, and, at a minimum, I am more worried 
about downside risk and 
am 
more uncertain about the outlook. 
In March my concerns focused on the external sector, and now I see question marks 
pertaining to the underlying strength of domestic aggregate demand as well.  I find it particularly 

disturbing that the slowdown in business investment appears to have become more widespread. 
                  
     
    
                In March the weakness appeared concentrated i
n drilling activity, and I think now we are seeing 
outright declines in real equipment outlays and nondrilling, nonresidential construction as well.  
The Tealbook assumes 
that investment in intangibles is still growing at a solid pace, but we 
actually have no idea what
™s happening there because reliable source data won™t be available for 
some time.  The broad weakness in business fixed investment may be partly explained by the 

slowdown in aggregate sale
s and output via an accelerat
or effect, but conceivably other factors 
that may prove to be more persistent may also be at work, and I worry about that. 
I™
m also concerned that we may not see a pickup in residential investment nearly as large 
as the Tealbook forecast
s this year.  Housing starts and permits have been incredibly weak even 
though mortgage rates are low, employment and income are rising, and demographic trends seem 

to call for a faster pace of building.  
According to staff calculations, 
if housi
ng remains weak 
it could shave 
¼ percentage 
point or so off the Tealbook projection of real GDP in the second half 
of this year and in 2016. 
I worry most about retail sales having been soft for several months now.  Savings rates 
moved up 1 
full percentage 
point since the fourth quarter despite large gains in employment, a 

sharp decline in oil prices, record equity prices, 
a solid increase in house prices, and low 
borrowing costs.  I suppose one could explain this by saying that bad winter weather and other 

transitory factors are at work here
.  I suppose supporting such an explanation is 
the fact that 
we did see strong auto sales in March, and consumer sentiment, even though the C
onference 
Board 
number fell today, is still pretty high.
  And I suppose, for tho
se reasons
, the Tealbook forecast 
seems reasonable to me, but I must say my confidence in the Tealbook forecast that projects that 

PCE growth is going to pick up to 4 percent really, 
to me
, is a leap of faith, and I worry that we 
may not see a pickup that™
s that 
large.
  And as several of you have mentioned, at this point the 
                          
         
             
    
  only real source of strength in the economy is consumer spending.  I
f there are question marks 
associated with
 consumer spending, that puts a lot of question marks on the outlook overal
l. I don™t think the risks from the external sector have diminished.  Maybe they have even 
increased to some degree. 
The s
taff has marked down estimates of export growth in the first 
quarter 
appreciably
.  It may well be that the drag 
generated by
 past dol
lar appreciation and slow 
foreign economic growth could be greater than previously assumed.  I also worry about the 
Greek debt situation
.  If Greece were to put in place controls on capital movements 
or, worse, 
exit the euro, 
I think it
™s hard to know what 
effect
 that would have on the dollar.  I™m not sure 
whether it would cause the dollar to appreciate or depreciate
, and 
I think there are reasonable 
stories either way. 
I certainly am hopeful that information between now and June will help us resolve some 
of these uncertainties. We will see
, certainly
, two more employment reports and a range of 
indicators on spending and production that could tell us whether we™ve been through a soft patch 
or if there
™s a more significant loss in momentum.
  But by June, 
the spending data for the second 
quarter will still be incomplete, and we shouldn™t underestimate the possibility that new data will 
confuse rather than clarify our assessments of the state of the economy. 
As for inflation, I don™t really have anything to add to what
™s been said.  Even though 
core CPI inflation came in a touch higher than expected, overall, the incoming data on wages and 

prices has been roughly in line with expectations.  My own outlook is little changed.  Both core 

and headline PCE 
inflation 
rates 
are running well below 2 percent and are likely to do so for the 
rest of the year, barring some major surprise in oil prices or a fall in the dollar.
  And the April 
Tealbook projects that headline inflation will be under 1 percent this year on a Q4-over-Q4 basis, 
                              and th
at core inflation this year is only going to run at 1¼ 
percent.  Those forecasts seem quite 
reasonable. 
Given this inflation outlook, the likelihood that employment and output will expand at 
only a moderate pace in coming quarters, and uncertainties about the global economy, I 
personally think it™s unlikely that the 
conditions we
™ve set out for a firming of policy will be met 
by June, but I have an open mind.  We™ve agreed to be data dependent, and that assessment could 

certainly change 
as we receive additional data on real activity and inflation in coming weeks. 
So let me stop there
.  We should probably break for dinner.  Tomorrow, 
Thomas will 
give his briefing. We may have to make some changes in the statement when we see what
™s in 
the GDP report, but I think we have enough time tomorrow morning to do that.  We™ll begin 
tomorrow 
at 9:00 a.m. 
[Meeting recessed] 
         
   
                       
            
          
   
    
              
  
   
                                                             
  
 April 29 Session 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  I guess 
we should get started
, and 
I™d like 
to first turn to Bill
 Wascher to give us an update on this morning™s GDP announcements. 
MR. WASCHER.
6  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll be referring to the handout 
titled ﬁMaterial for Gross Domestic Product Update.ﬂ  You 
have a table that 
summarizes some of the key aspects of this morning™s GDP data, and the first thing I 

would say is that it™s nice to be lucky once in a while.  [Laughter] 
As you can see 
from the first line of the table, the BEA™s advance estimate of real GDP 
growth in the 
first quarter was 0.2 percent at an annual rate.  That™s 
one-
tenth of 
1 percentage point 
higher than 
our estimate
 in the Ap
ril Tealbook. 
Among the major spending categories, 
real PCE growth slowed from 4.4 percent 
in the fourth quarter to 1.9 
percent in the first quarter, about as we had expected. 

Business fixed investment, which is labeled here by its official title, 
nonresidential 
private 
fixed 
investment, fell 3.4 percent, and residential investment edged up 
1.3 percent.  Again, both of th
ose were close to our expectations. 
The next three lines show some offsetting misses that turned out not to have much 
effect on the top-line GDP number.  In particular, government spending fell by less 

than we were expecting
, net exports fell by more, and 
there was a greater 
accumulation of inventories than we™d written down.  
In terms of their contributions 

to growth, net exports were estimated to have subtracted 1¼ 
percentage points 
from 
GDP growth in the first quarter, while inventories added 
¾ percentag
e point to 
growth.  I should note that, 
for these two categories in particular
, the BEA does not 
have complete data for the 
first 
quarter
.  In the advance GDP estimate
, inventories 
and net exports are based on two months of data and BEA™s 
assumed values fo
r the 
third monthŠin this case, for 
March. 
Our staff had a chance to look at the monthly assumptions and other details of 
both of these components, and Steve mentioned to me that his colleagues in the 

Division of I
nternational 
Finance 
are inclined to disc
ount some of the negative miss 
in net exports between their forecast and the BEA™s estimate.
  Going the other way, it 
looks as though the BEA wrote down a very high assumption for inventories in 

March, and we might be inclined to discount a little bit of that.  So I don™t know that 

it would have much effect on the top line.  B
ut I 
believe
 our thinking at this point 
would be that net exports aren™t quite as weak as the BEA has estimated, and 
that 
inventories may not be quite as large. 
The bottom of the table shows 
the BEA™s estimate of consumer price inflation. 
Total PCE prices fell 
2 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter, the same as our 
6 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
           
        
     
                
                                                                               
  
 Tealbook estimate, while core PCE prices rose 
nine
-tenths 
of 
1 percent, 
one
-tenth 
more than we were expecting. 
Finally, I
™ll
 just mention that real disposable personal income rose at an annual 
rate of 6.2 percent in the first quarter, while the saving rate came in at 
5.5 percent.  

Both of those figures were also close to our expectations.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Are there questions for Bill?  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. Bill, is the staff embarrassed that you missed this by 50 percent? 
[Laughter]  No, congratulations on this.  This is a good call, and I think it was useful information 
to bring to the Committ
ee.  It™s a tough job, and when you get something right, you should 
definitely take some credit for it. 
MR. WASCHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great.  Then let™s turn to Thomas, who is going to brief us on 
our monetary policy decisions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.7  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™ll be referring to the handout 
labelled ﬁMaterial for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.ﬂ 
At previous meetings and, indeed, yesterday, several of you discussed the 
possibility of market turbulence in the run-up to, or following, the onset of policy 
tightening.  Although the Committee now has communications tools, including the 
SEP, that it did not have at the start of previous tightening cycles, unexpected 

movements in yields and volatility, up or down, may nevertheless occur even if the 

expected policy 
rate 
path does not shift markedly.  The upper-
left panel of your first 
exhibit provides some perspective by showing the staff™s estimate of the 10-
year 
Treasury term premium over the past 25 years.  The vertical bars high
light three 
episodes:  the beginning of the tightening cycles in 1994 and 2004 and the taper 

tantrum in 2013.  Within the shaded 18-month windows around these events, term 

premiums moved substantially.  But they also did so at other timesŠ
and likely in 

res
ponse to factors other than monetary policy. 
The upper-
right panel isolates the episodes associated with the three shaded 
regions and, for reference, the current episode conditional on the staff™s assumption of 

liftoff at the September meeting.  As shown by the red line, in 1994, the term 

premium rose substantially in the months following the onset of tightening.  By 

contrast, in 2004, in blue, it moved up several months before the federal funds rate in 

response to stronger economic data that moved up the expected timing of policy 
7 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
                       
     
  
       
           
   
    
  
             
 tightening.  But the term premium then began to decline and continued to do so over 

the remainder of 2004Š
the well
-known ﬁconundrumﬂ episode.  Finally, in 2013, the 
term premium began to rise around the time of Chairman Bernanke™s JEC testimony 

in late May, apparently reflecting market participants™ reassessment of the outlook for 

asset purchases and possibly policy rates.  As shown in the middle-
left panel, these 
term premium movements may, to some extent, have reflected uncertainty about the 

future course of monetary policy.  The panel shows the width of the 90 percent 

confidence interval for the federal funds rate 12 months ahead, derived from options 

on federal funds futures. The term premiums are highly correlated with this pro
xy for 
policy uncertainty in the 1994 and 2004 episodes, but less so in 2013, presumably 

because uncertainty in that episode was driven less by the path of the federal funds 

rate over the next 12 months than by the course of asset purchases and longer
-term 
rates. 
These experiences suggest that, even in a context in which the FOMC™s policy 
communications tools are more extensive than in the 1994 and 2004 cycles, it may be 

prudent for the Committee to consider its likely response to unexpected changes in 

term
 premiums that might occur around the time when it begins policy firming.  A 
special exhibit in the ﬁMonetary Policy Strategiesﬂ section of the Tealbook, Book B, 

provides some background that might be useful.  As shown by the dotted black line in 

the middle-right panel, the staff projects that the 10-
year term premium will rise at a 
modest pace after the Committee is assumed to start raising the federal funds rate. 

This slow projected rise in the term premium reflects in part the waning effects on 

longer-t
erm yields of the Committee™s asset holdings.  The magenta line presents the 
path for the term premium in a scenario, labeled ﬁTightening Tantrum,ﬂ that is similar 

in magnitude to, albeit less persistent than, the rise in the term premium that began in 
May 2013 (the green line).  As shown in the lower-
left panel, in the ﬁtantrumﬂ case, 
optimal control would call for a more gradual increase in the federal funds rate for 
several quarters, with the federal funds rate running, on average, 35 basis points 

below 
the optimal control path associated with the Tealbook baseline (the black line) 
over the four years following the shock. 
Recent public discourse has largely focused on the specter of another market 
tantrum.  However, a repeat of the 2004 experience, in whi
ch term premiums 
remained surprisingly low for a while, is also a possibility.  For example, such an 

outcome might occur through the effects of the very large asset purchase programs 

that are under way in Europe and Japan.  The yellow line in the middle-
right panel 
shows a scenario for the path of the term premium that is similar to the 2004 

conundrum episode.  In this instance, optimal control would call for a federal funds 

rate path that is 40 basis points higher, on average, over the next four years. 
The 
lower
-right panel highlights a few caveats. The tantrum scenario abstracts 
from the possibility of widespread liquidity or solvency problems, a point worth 

mentioning in light of recent commentary about reduced liquidity in key markets, 

which Simon discussed in his briefing.  More generally, the scenarios do not examine 

the consequences of term premium movements that are associated with other 

disturbances.  If, for example, the term premium fell because of weaker economic 
           
                   
        
       
         
          
    
  
  activity abroad and associated fl
ight-
to-safety flows, the optimal policy response 
could be to keep the federal funds rate lower, not higher, than in the baseline.  Finally, 

the appropriate policy response to either scenario depends importantly on the 

persistence of the deviation of the t
erm premium from its baseline path, which will be 
known only in retrospect.  In response to such scenarios, policymakers may wish to 

emphasize that they will respond to financial conditions that are judged inconsistent 

with the achievement of the FOMC™s objectives. 
Turning to the draft policy alternatives, thanks to the excellent work of Bill 
Wascher and his colleagues, I can discuss the alternatives as distributed yesterday. A 

key issue for your decision today is how to convey the implications of recent and 

incoming economic information for the likely timing of policy normalization.  First, 

as indicated at the top of exhibit 2, assuming that the Committee decides to remove 

time
-based forward guidance from the statement, it will primarily rely on paragraphs 
1 and 2 to speak to its assessment of whether its criteria for liftoff
 have been met or 
when they are likely to be met.  In broad terms, with alternative B, the Committee 

would communicate that the conditions for an increase in the federal funds rate are 

not yet in place, while alternative C would suggest that those conditions will likely be 

in place in the near future.  Alternative A would indicate that the preconditions for 

liftoff are unlikely to be met in the near future. 
The second set of bullets summ
arizes how each of the three alternatives may 
shape expectations for the timing of liftoff.  On the Committee™s criterion that it 

would need to see ﬁfurther improvement in the labor market,ﬂ alternative B states that 

ﬁunderutilization of labor resources wa
s little changedﬂ over the intermeeting period, 
citing the moderation in the pace of job gains and the steady unemployment rate.  

Regarding the second criterion, that the Committee would need to be ﬁreasonably 
confident that inflation will move back to its
 2 percent objective over the medium 
term,ﬂ alternative 
B updates the description of recent data in paragraph 1 and retains, 
in paragraph 2, the expectation that inflation will 
ﬁrise gradually toward 2 percent 
over the medium term.ﬂ  Thus, alternative B does not signal a change in confidence 
about the inflation outlook. 
In addition, the Committee noted in the March minutes that the timing of the first 
increase in the federal funds rate would also depend on the evolution of economic 

conditions and the outloo
k.  In that regard, alternative B provides the judgment that 

the Committee sees the recent weakness in economic activity either 
ﬁin part
ﬂ or ﬁat 
least in partﬂ as transitory and indicates that, despite the first
-quarter slowdown, the 
Committee still expect
s economic growth at a pace that will lead to further 

improvement in labor market conditions.  Under alternative B, the Committee would 

remain fully data dependent and offer no time-based guidance about how soon the 

conditions for liftoff are likely to be 
met. 
By contrast, alternative C would communicate the Committee™s readiness to begin 
policy normalization in the near term.  Paragraph 1 indicates that, despite a steady 

jobless rate, ﬁsome labor market indicators suggest that underutilization of labor 

resources continued to diminish.ﬂ  It expresses a more positive reading of recent news 
               
    
    
    
           
    
    
              
                   
         
on inflation and notes that, although inflation remained below the Committee™s 

objective, ﬁit was no longer declining.ﬂ  In addition, paragraph 
1 of alternative C 

attributes this winter™s economic slowdown largely to transitory factors. Paragraph
 2 suggests not only that the Committee continues to anticipate moderate economic 

growth and further improvement in labor market conditions, but also that it now has 

become more (or perhaps somewhat more) confident that inflation ﬁwill rise 

gradually to 2 percent over the medium term.ﬂ  Having made those assessments of 

recent developments and the outlook, the Committee would adopt new guidance in 

paragraph 3.  Rather than repeating t
he criteria for liftoff adopted in the March 
statement, the Committee would announce that ﬁeconomic conditions mayﬂ or ﬁlikely 

will soon warrant an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate.ﬂ  While 

alternative C reintroduces a time dimension 
to the forward guidance, it also retains 
the more general data
-dependent statement that the timing of the adjustment would 
depend on realized and expected progress toward the Committee™s objectives of 

maximum employment and 2 
percent inflation. 
Finally, with alternative A, the Committee would express heightened concerns 
about the underlying strength of the economic expansion, downside risks to the 

outlook for the labor market, and possible persistence of below-
target inflation. 
In paragraph 1, in 
alternat
ive A, 
as in alternative B, the Committee describes 
underutilization of labor resources as ﬁlittle changed,ﬂ but it stresses that inflation 

ﬁcontinued to run well below the Committee™s longer
-run objective.ﬂ  It does not 

offer any judgment on how much of this winter™s slowdown may have been 

transitory. Additionally
, in 
paragraph 2™s assessment of 
the outlook, 
under 
alternative 
A it would be report
ed that the Committee now sees the risks to economic activity 
and the labor market as ﬁtilted to the downside.ﬂ And the statement would voice 
concern that ﬁinflation could run substantially belowﬂ 2 percent for a protracted 
period, and possibly that ﬁthe pace of improvement in the labor market could remain 

slow.ﬂ 
Given these risks to the outlook, alternative A 
introduces a somewhat more 
stringent precondition for the initiation of policy firming, stating in paragraph 3 that 

the Committee would need to see inflation ﬁclearly moving up towardﬂ the 

Committee™s 2 percent objective rather than being ﬁreasonably confi
dentﬂ that it will 
do so.  In addition, alternative A emphasizes concern about the inflation outlook by 

indicating that ﬁthe Committee is prepared to use all of its tools as necessary to return 

inflation to 2
 percent within one to two years.ﬂ All told, alternative A would 
communicate that liftoff appears unlikely for some time. 
Thank you, Madam Chair.  That concludes my prepared remarks, and I will be 
glad to take any questions. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there questions for Thomas?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHA
RT.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Thomas, I™d like to ask you about your 
thinking as you drafted 
alternative C.  Specifically
, I™m referring to the bracketed choices in 
                  
             
            
             paragraph
s 2 and
 3, and I™m interested in how the staff is thinking about the choice of the 
ﬁhas 
become somewhat more confidentﬂ
 and 
ﬁmay soon warrant an increaseﬂ language
, as opposed to 
the 
ﬁhas become more confidentﬂ 
and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ language. 
These two language options could be seen as a sequence of statements over, say, two 
meetings.  They could convey increasing certainty on the part of the Committee or increasing 

probability of a liftoff decision.  Alternatively, I can imagine choosing between these two 

language options 
at the 
meeting ahead 
of liftoff
, with the choice depending on the probability of 
the 
liftoff decision. 
So I can see a case for both of these interpretations of the alt
-C bracketed 
language as something we might consider in the future, and 
I wonder if the staff had either of 
these ideas in mind or 
if 
it™s just providing an option for this meeting alone. 
MR. LAUBACH. 
We also explored the choice between ﬁmayﬂ and ﬁlikely willﬂ 
in 
previous drafts of a
lternative C and in other materials that
, if I remember correctly
, were sent to 
the Committee ahead of the January meeting.
  In my view, just focusing for now on that, one key 
question is how the Committee wants to strike a balance between, on the one hand, sending some 

advance notice and, on the other hand, emphasizing data dependence.  So I think one key 

question for you at some point will be, how firmly do you want to express that the next meeting 

might be likely for liftoff
, and how do you 
balance that against 
the fact 
that
, of course, over
 any 
intermeeting
 period, yo
u will receive data that may change the 
course of policy?  T
hat™s some 
of 
the thinking that went into the considerations about 
ﬁmay
ﬂ and ﬁ
likely will.
ﬂ As to the ﬁsomewhatﬂ in 
paragraph 2, you
™re right that you can see a pair between
Š ﬁsomewhatﬂ in 
paragraph 2 could perhaps fit better with ﬁmayﬂ in p
aragraph 3 because it still 
emphasizes a little bit more that you™re reserving judgment.  So that™s certainly a possibility. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
          
   
    
     
          
     
      
           
     MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes
Šthank you, Madam C
hair.
  I had a question and a 
comment.  The comment is on page 1 of the handout that you provided, ﬁMarket Expectations 
and Policy Issues.ﬂ  I thought that was a very nice set of experiments, and 
I like the idea of 

having these three possible cases
 and 
lay
ing them out.
  My own thinking is, focus more on the 
tantrum case, but, 
certainly
, it™s useful for us to keep in mind 
the conundrum case as well. 
My comment is about the use of optimal control as a way to evaluate the appropriate 
policy response here.  
Whe
n I think about what was going on in these episodes
, it wa
s really that 
there were uncertainties in markets about what the 
Committee was trying to achieve with policy 
Šand you used 
the same language, I believe
, when I was listening to you. 
But
 optimal con
trol, 
of course, involves the 
assum
ption that 
what we were trying to achieve 
with
 policy 
is all pretty 
much common knowledge. 
For example, 
in the tantrum case, we might want a more aggressive response in order to 
rebuild lost reputation, 
in some sense
, abo
ut what we™re actually trying to achieve. In the 
conundrum case
, the same is true
Šwe might want to be even tighter than what™s built in here, 
because we™re actually trying to convince markets that we are really concerned about inflation 
getting too high.  
But
 in the tantrum case, 
we might 
be even easier than what™s described by 
optimal control, because we have this need to rebuild reputation in 
the eyes of the markets 
about 

the fact that 
we really
 care about getting inflation back up to 2 
percent. 
That™s a comment.  The question I had actually builds, 
I think
, on what Dennis was 
asking about alternative C.  I™ll ask the same question about a
lter
native B.  As you described on 
page 2, which was a great way to summarize 
what™s in the various alternatives, we™re really 

relying on p
aragraphs 1 and 2 to speak to the Committee™s assessment of 
the 
criteria for liftoff.
 I         
  
   
            
       
             
         guess we™re relying on the evolution of the data over time to allow the public to figure out what 
we think 
is relevant. 
Another way to proceed is to actually be more explicit about, 
ﬁOkay, we™ve had some 
incoming dataŠparagraphs 1 and 2.  We just saw GDP now.  H
ow does that affect the li
kelihood 
of liftoff in, say, June?
ﬂ  So we could have provided more explicit guidance about that in the 
statement in 
alternative B.
  And I guess my question is, what were you thinking in not doing 
this? 
MR. LAUBACH. 
I have 
two thoughts, perhaps, on that, and maybe Simon can also 
weigh in on 
at least one of them
.  N
amely
, as Simon showed you yesterday, there was a question 
in the primary 
dealer survey on which factors market participants view as most relevant for the 
achievement of reasonable confidence.
  So there is an indirect route in the sense that what you 
say in the statement will be evaluated even though you may not have a direct statement in there 

about how 
the Committee is no
w more or less confident than before.  Presumably, 
market 
participants will
 look at your characterization of these various factors and draw conclusions from 

that about how your confidence has shifted. 
I™m not quite sure how easy it would be to try 
to come up with a summary statement for 
the degree of confidence because, well, my 
guess is that various participants rank different 
criteria differently, and I think that
™s evident from your comments.  Therefore, I believe 
this is a 
step that™s left to market participants and the public in general to draw conclusions about this. 
MR. POTTER. 
Prior to the GDP release, I think 
the 
dealers put an average 
probability of 
13 percent on liftoff in June.  Let™s assume that™s moved down to 8 
percent 
or something 
right 
now based on the 
GDP release
.  If you felt that that 
8 percent 
was way t
oo low compared 
with 
the likelihood that you might lift off in June, then you might want to try 
to indicate something.  
                                          
    
      Before it was way too high, but it 
seems a little bit 
less likely that you would want to indicate 
something at 8 percent. 
MR. KOCHERLAKO
TA.  That™s helpful.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Are there other comments or questions?  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thomas, I wonder if you could, to help us understand these scenarios, 
refresh the Committee™s memory about the extent to which overnight 
short-
term interest rates 
that we influence directly through the federal funds rate target can affect economic activity in 
the 
FRB
/US model 
independently of the value
s of the 
5-, 7-, and 10-
year interest rates
, which appear 
to figure prominently in th
ese scenario
s. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  Monetary policy transmission 
in the 
FRB/US 
model 
is largely through 
long-
term rates
, so I™m
Šlet me think. 
MR. LACKER.  Entirely? 

MR. LAUBACH
.  Largely
Šwell, to varying degrees.  F
or example, there are some rates 
in there
, like
 the rate on auto loans, that arguably are not quite as long term.  So they are not only 
a 10-year Treasury 
yield
. But it™s true that the funds rate
, in and of itself, doesn™t carry a whole 
lot of weight in monetary policy transmission, but only through its ef
fects on longer
-term yields. 
By implication, 
these shifts in term premiums that we are considering in the scenarios are 

actually quite powerful.  So they do have 
a substantial macroeconomic effect
s. 
MR. LACKER. Well, 
I have two follow-ups.  One is, when I think about this, 
I have 
difficulty reconciling that structure with the impression that a sizable volume of bank lending 

among 
the bankers I talk to seems to be priced off LIBOR and other short
-term interest rates. 
The s
econd thing is, what would this imply for Taylor r
ules? 
Have we been wrong for 
years?  Should we have been including a ter
m premium thing that we accommodate in the Taylor 
           
  
       
   
     
      
  
  
    
  
  
               rules? 
Should we think about policy differently now that we™
ve got this transmission 
mechanism 
whose 
strength varies
 depending on what the term premium does? 
MR. LAUBACH
.  There are two separate aspects to this.  One is, what if monetar
y policy 
transmission also importantly works through term premiums?  That means that term premiums 
systematically vary with the path of short-
term interest rates. 
To some extent, that is actually the 
case in 
the 
FRB
/US model
Šnamely
, that the term premium is an endogenous function of 
expected future output gaps.  So to the extent that choices about the path of the funds rate affect 

the outlook for future output gaps, that has an added effect by moving term premiums 

endogenously 
as well. 
A separate ques
tion is, should a Taylor r
ule also take into account other financial 
conditions more broadly?
 And there, arguably, a Taylor rule that responds only to current 
economic conditions may have a shortcoming because it responds only to current inflation and, 

say, the current output gap, whereas financial conditions that you observe today, like movements 
in the dollar and things like that, clearly affect your outlook in the future.  So that is not an asp
ect 
that is captured by Taylor r
ules that
 just mechanically respond to current conditions.  Of course, 
for example, if you look at optimal control, 
it obviously knows about these things because it™
s run under 
perfect 
foresight.  Therefore, agents anticipate that changes in financial conditions 
today more broadly, including changes in term premiums, will affect the future outlook. 
MR. LACKER. 
Let me follow up further.  When I look at the plot in the upper-
left
-hand 
corner, if I took Taylor rules and incorporate this term premium, d
oesn™t that mean that an 

augmented Taylor r
ule should now predict interest rates 
2 percentage points higher 
for
 1994 than 
would a Taylor r
ule without that augmentation
?                            
         
    
          VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  That™s a
ssuming you have a time-constant equilibrium 
real rate, but the equilibrium real rate could be moving, too. 
MR. LACKER.  Yes, there
™s that.
  There™s the gap.  There™s inflation.  But now we add 
the term premium
, and that™
s poi
nting in the other direction by 2 percentage points. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  If you look just at, say, the lower-frequency movement, it now seems 
as though, 
on a
n almost secular or at least a highly persistent basis, the term premium seems 
about 2 percentage points 
lower than it was back then.
  That is an effect that arguably ought to be 
reflected already in current conditions. 
MR. LACKER.  Current conditions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  If you thought about a sudden drop right nowŠ 

MR. LACKER. 
What about the current Taylor r
ule?
  Shouldn
™t it be in the current 
Taylor r
ule, too
?  We should include 
it. MR. EVANS.  It™s in the current Taylor rule through current conditions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  W
ell, I think the point I
™m trying to make is that this 
is a 
secular 
downshift 
in the term premium from a mean of what looks like around 2 percent in the 1990s to 
about close to 
zero
 now.  But that™
s not a recent development
, that™
s been persistent since
 the 
mid
-2000s.  T
he decline in the term premium
, in and of itself, arguably had, at some point, 
a stimulative effect
.  Assuming that this really occurred in isolation
, as I referred to in my briefing, 
you could seeŠ 
MR. LACKER.  So it
™s affected the current gap and the current inflation rate. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  Exactly. 
MR. LACKER.  But your optimal control says that, even given the current gap and the 
current inflation rate
, there should be some response of the funds rate to the term premium. 
               
  
   
     
                         MR. LAUBACH. Yes
, but those are projected future changes in the term premium, not 
where it is today
.  So my point is, if you had just observed 
in recent history a 
2 percentage point 
decline in the term premium, then if that had happened in isolation, 
that should indeed affect 
your outlook.  Your outlook should be stronger, all else being equalŠagain, wit
h the caveat ﬁall 
else 
being equal.ﬂ  If the 2 percentage point decline occurred in the context of a flight to safety, 

that™s no longer so obvious.  But if that had recently occurred, then, indeed, 
there is a little bit of 

a discrepancy in terms of your standard Taylor rule response only to current conditions.  If these 

current conditions haven™t responded yet to that decline in the term premium, then there is a bit 

of 
a tension since 
you project that 
that decline in the term premium, in itself
, actually is going to 
provide a boost. 
If you think, for example, about the staff projection, 
it is, very importantly, driven by our 
assessment of financial conditions today and over the projection period.  So the Taylor r
ule does 
take account of that over the projection period. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Governor Fischer, do you have a two-hander? 
MR. FISCHER. 
Yes, it™
s a two
-hander.  
What is the correlation between the term 
premium and the difference between the short
-term rate and the long-
term rate?  Is it high? 
MR. 
LAUBACH
.  The correlation between the term premium and the slopeŠ
sadly, I do 
not know this right off the top ofŠ 
MR. 
POTTER
.  It has to be high on a daily basis. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It has to be high. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Yes, i
t would be high. 
MR. POTTER. 
That™s because the short
-term
 rate is not moving that much
, because the 
FOMC
 is not moving 
it, but the 10-year is moving around every day. 
                                      
    
         
         
  
         MR. EVANS.  Yes, arithmetic, I guess. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS. 
My question is related to P
resident Lacker™s topic, but I guess it
™s really more about how we think about movements in the term premium in general.  A
s I understand 
the 
FRB
/US model and 
the way you described it, Thomas, is that these 
movements 
have very powerful effects because they affect all asset prices. 
They 
affect mortgage rates, the 
stock market, and the 
exchange rate. These 
movements are really spilling over throughout 
financial conditions, 
and 
so have a very powerful effect on GDP, employment, and inflation. 
The research on the effects of QE
ŠI™m thinking of the work of 
Vis
sing-Jorgensen 
and 
KrishnamurthyŠa lot of the research has looked at this and 
seems to have called into question 

whether there
™s this full pass
-through of T
reasury term premi
um effects onto private rates, 
such 
as corporate bond rates 
and 
mortgage rates, 
as well as asset prices in general.
  I guess the 
question is, to what extent are you buying into the story that maybe the term premium doesn™t 
affect financial conditions as fully as the FRB
/US model would tell you? 
Or how do we think 
about some of the more recent research in terms of these simulations? 
MR. LAUBACH
.  I think the short answer to that is, what I have here on the handout and 
what is being shown in the 
ﬁMonetary Policy S
trateg
iesﬂ section of Teal
book, Book B, of course, 
buys fully into the FRB
/US view that, to the extent that long rates matter for re
al a
ctivity, 
changes in the term premium are in 
long-
term
 rates.  So no distinction 
is drawn between
 whether 
the movement 
is in the expectations compo
nent or in the 
term
-premium component
. We could certainly 
try 
to look at how the results will change.  Broadly speaking, my 
expectation would be 
that 
the lines 
you see in the lower-
left 
panel 
are based on 100 
percent
Šthat 
                     
     
                 
        is, t
erm premiums are worth 
exactly 
as much as changes in expected future interest rates
.  Then 
you can shave that if you thought that a more reasonable estimate was, say, 50 percent. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you.  The second comment is really to President Lacker.  
This 
is why you have a 
time
-varying 
r*. In my view, this is the argument for thinking about the fact 
that the term premium changes over decades.  Other factors
, such as 
risk premi
ums
, the equity 
premium, 
and the sovereign risk premiumŠlots of things change in the 
economy
, whic
h is 
basically the argument not to have a constant 
r*. Your point is exactly right.  On its own, the term premium going down would argue for a 
higher 
r*. So what™
s really striking is that 
Laubach
-Williams, which just tries to let the data 
decide, has 
r* falling all 
of 
the way to zero, despite the fact that QE and other factors have 
pushed the term premium down.  T
he way I view this is
, there are these factors pushing 
r* up, but the other factors, the headwinds and the other things, are just so much more po
werful that
, on net, they push 
r* down.  Through the lens of 
r*, everything makes sense.  [Laughter]  Thank 
you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Why don™t we begin our round now?  O
ur first speaker is 
President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m looking forward to hearing 
President Williams™
s remarks through the lens of 
r*. [Laughter]  We™
ll see how that goes. 
Madam Chair, I favor alternative A.  My rationale for alternative A is based on the modal 
outlook for prices and employment, the risks to that outlook, and the zero lower bound.  On the 

benchmark outlook in 
the 
Tealbook
, Book
 A, you see 
that inflation does not return to the 
FOMC™s target of 2 percent until 2019, which is four years from now.  We should take steps to 

facilitate a fas
ter return of inflation to target.  These additional steps would also help boost 
           
   
    
                          
  
   
    employment over the medium term.  
Our congressional mandate calls for us to achieve 
maximum employment and stable prices.  If we are able to simultaneously create more jobs an
d impro
ve our performance on the price-stability goal, we should do so. 
That™
s the argument 
just 
based on the modal outlook alone.  It provides a clear 
justification for the policy course described in a
lternative A. 
I think this argument is enhanced 
by consideration of the risks to the outlook.  I agree with the Tealbook, Book AŠthe risks to the 
outlook for prices and employment are to the downside.  The standa
rd risk
-management 
considerations that are often advanced by the Committee suggest that these fut
ure downside risks 
bolster the case for current accommodation. 
When we think about the zero lower bound, as recent Brookings 
conference paper 
by 
President Evans 
and his colleagues 
makes crystal clear, these risk
-management considerations 
are significantly 
enhanced by the presence of the zero lower bound.  The past five years have 
taught us that when we™
re close to the zero lower bound, as we expect to be over the medium 
term, we will not be able to mitigate downside risks as effectively
 as we would like.  A
s President Evans™
s paper points out, this means that we should make policy choices so as to 
strengthen the economy in advance of these shocks hitting.  That, again, argues in favor of the 

kind of stance described in a
lternative 
A. So I see three arguments
 in favor of a
lternative A
Šthe modal outlook, the risks to the 
outlook, and the constraints on policy imposed by the zero lower bound. 
As I
™ve indicated in the past, I believe that it is important for monetary policy decisions 
to take account of the macroe
conomic risks created by potential financial instability.  My own 

reading of the QS report is that the main financial stability risk we face right now is actually 
          
         
      
     
   
                
associated with higher, not lower, interest rates. This will build on some of the work that 
Thomas was showing us earlier this morning. 
In May 2013, we began to tighten policy while we were still apparently several years 
away from achieving our macroeconomic objectives.  Market participants lost confidence in the 

willingness of the FOMC to buffer the economy against adverse shocks, and we saw a rapid 

increase in the term premium. If we raise the target range for the federal 
funds rate when 
headline inflation and core inflation are both running so low, we risk sending the same message 

that we did in 2013, and, accordingly, 
we risk seeing the same rapid run-
up in the term premium. 
Madam Chair, the modal outlook for inflation is too low.  We can best address this 
deficiency and simultaneously create more jobs by making clear, as 
alternative A does, that we 

are willing to use all 
of 
our tools to return inflation to target within one to two years, and that 
such a determined approach
 in 
the pursuit of our mandated objectives is also the best way to 
manage the risks we face, especially
 near the zero lower bound. 
I™d like to conclude by suggesting a topic for a possible research briefing
.  I
t builds on 
President Bullard™s comments yesterday and
, actually
, the conversation we were just having 
among 
President Williams, President Lacker, an
d Thomas.  I think it would be really useful for 
us to understand the work going on in the System on 
r*Šwhat™s determining it and 
what
™s moving it around.  It plays, actually, a pretty critical role, even in the statement itself.  So I 

believe
 exposing the Committee to the research going on in the System on this would be very 

valuable.  
With that, I
™ll conclude.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Today™
s GDP report confirms what we 
alr
eady knewŠ
that GDP growth slowed significantly in the first quarter. It™s too early to 
       
                  
   
  
       
      
     
 determine whether that slowdown will be persistent or whether it will be t
emporary, as last 
year™s first
-quarter slowdown turned out to be.  With no decision on the table, we don™t have to 
make that determination today.  
June™s decision is going to be data dependent, 
and we™ll be receiving important 
information
, including two monthly employment reports, 
to help
 come to a decision about liftoff 
in June.  Thus, I think it™s important not to signal anything today about a June decision.  
I support the spirit of a
lternative B today because
, at this point
, I favor data dependence 
and the meeting-by-meeting nature of the decision of liftoff.  
I believe it is appropriate to 

acknowledge the slowdown in growth and employment in paragraph 2, but then to maintain the 

characterization of the risk
s to the outlook for economic activity and 
the labor market as nearly 
balanced.
  However, in my view, the tone of the first paragraph on inter
meet
ing developments is 
too negative.  I think some of that negativity comes from focusing too much on short-
term 
changes 
in economic indicators instead of providing the Committee™s assessment of changes in 
economic cond
itions that matter for a policy decision. 
I do appreciate some of the changes that 
were made between the first draft of statement language that was circulated and the draft on the 

table today that addressed this issue of tone, but we have to remember that the public doesn™t see 

the evolution of our drafts. 
The 
Tealbook, Book B, 
tells us that the intention of 
alternative B is to avoid any date
-based guidance and ret
ain the option of beginning policy normalization in June if the data and 
outlook justify it.  
My concern is that 
alternative B doesn™t seem to achieve this.  My concern is, 
it™ll be read as our signaling that we™ve taken June off the table when that™s not the case, and it 

would be inconsistent with our data-dependent approach. 
             
  
    
           
                      Since our 
March meet
ing
, market expectations have shifted to a later liftoff and 
a flatter 
policy 
rate 
path.  In normal times, 
such a shift would be reflecting their assessment of the 
incoming data for the economic outlook, and we might want to take some signal from it.  
But 
as we prepare for liftoff, markets are particularly sensitive to our communications.  The shift in the 
expected policy 
rate 
path may not be providing any independent assessment of the economy.  
Instead
, it might be reflecting the market™s view of the Committee™s view. 
As former Chairman Alan Greenspan once said when discussing how difficult policy 
communications are, ﬁPeople hear what they want to hear.ﬂ  In such an environment, 
we must be 

even more careful than usual not to say things that could be misinte
rpreted
, even if they™re 
factually true.
  Of course, anticipating how the market might react to anything 
we do say is a 
difficult task. 
Turning to language specifics, in paragraph 1, I would opt to say ﬁgrowth slowed . . . , in 
part reflecting transitory f
actors,
ﬂ rather than ﬁ
at least in part.
ﬂ  And at this point, I understand 
that the rest of the language is pretty well locked down, but I would like to suggest one change.  

Instead of 
ﬁGrowth in household spending declined,ﬂ 
can we say ﬁH
ousehold spending 
continued to grow
, although at a slower pace
ﬂ? Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  So you said 
that, 
instead of 
ﬁGrowth in household spending 
decline
dﬂŠwhat did you want? Just review what you wanted to say instead. 
MS. MESTER.  Ye
s.  ﬁHousehold spending continued to grow, although at a slower 
pace.
ﬂ CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  
President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I support 
alternative B, including the 
statement and President Mester
™s suggestion concerning ﬁin part.ﬂ 
                 
        
                    
I see t
he decision 
at this meeting on both policy and statement as straightforward.  So I™d 
like to spend a few minutes looking ahead and thinking aloud about statement language 
possibilities in alternative economic scenarios, obviously evidence
d by incoming data, and 

alternative liftoff decision scenarios. 
I expect it will be evident in this round that there is some desire to keep June an active 
option.  In any event, I think having various communication strategies in mind could help the 

Committee achieve as smooth a policy transition as possible and reduce the chances of avoidable 

and unwanted market volatility associated with liftoff.  For my part, I™m not so optimistic that by 

June we will be able to make a clear and plausible case that the economy is on track 
in terms of 
our two decision criteria.  Having repeatedly emphasized the data dependency of our liftoff 

decision, I think it™s important that we not cause impartial observers to scratch their heads about 

the data on which we™re basing a liftoff decision.  I expect 
that the data picture will be 
sufficiently inconclusive by the time of our next meeting to justify waiting a bit longer. 
As my earlier question to Thomas indicated, I™m trying to think through how 
communication might evolve in the coming meetings should we decide not to move in June.  As 

I suggested in framing the question for Thomas, there are a couple of ways the language options 

in this meeting™s 
alternative C might serve as a template. 
The ﬁ
has become 
somewhat more 
confidentﬂ and 
ﬁmay soon war
rant an increaseﬂ language option
, combined with the ﬁhas become 
more confidentﬂ and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ version
, could be viewed as a 
sequence of statements o
ver two meetings in advance of the liftoff decision.  
Alternatively, the 
two v
ersions could be viewed as distinct choices
, with one or the other selected depending on the 
degree of certainty or probability the Committee wishes to convey, presumably in a statement of 

the meeting just ahead of the liftoff meeting. 
         
             
             
          
        Having said all 
of 
that
, my sense of 
opinion in 
the Committee is that there is not a lot of 
appetite for signaling liftoff two meetings in advance, even if couched in very tentative terms.  I 
also doubt there™s much support for a move to language along the lines of a
lternativ
e C unless 
the liftoff decision is highly probable.  So I have difficulty actually envisioning circumstances in 

which we might choose to use the softer ﬁ
has become 
somewhat more confident
ﬂ and 
ﬁmay soon 
warrant an increase
ﬂ version in a
lternative C. 
Where 
this leaves me is the view that the most 
feasible approach to some amount of guidance in advance of a liftoff decision is the ﬁhas become 

more confidentﬂ and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ choice.
  I apologize for walking 
everyone through my tortu
red thought process.  [Laughter] 
It™s certainly possible that we will receive a string of data reports between now and June 
that is strong enough to justify pulling the trigger.  If we were to move in June, 
the advance
-
signal decision will be moot, of cour
se.  In that case
, the question becomes whether the June 
statement ought to address what comes next
Šthat is, provide some more concrete guidance on 
what is the Committee™s expected path of policy over the subsequent meetings. 
As I said at the top of my remarks, 
I just want to air some communications 
considerations.  I think it would be helpful to further discuss the question of whether to provide 

advance guidance and, if so, how to phrase it.  And it™s not too early to start thinking about ways 

to prepare the public for the path of policy 
after 
liftoff. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
alternative
 B.  The data to 
date have 
not 
met the conditions we provided in the Marc
h statement for raising rates.  I am very 
skeptical that these conditions can be met by June.  
With t
wo quarters of weak real GDP growth, 
        
  
             
  
              
  
  
   
  
       
we once again are faced with a forecast of improvement
Šthe data reflect broader
-based 
weakness. 
In addition, interna
tional conditions since the 
March meeting have become more 
worrisome.  The frustration among Greek leaders when talking with European policymakers is 
palpable, while the European policymakers I spoke with seem
ed to have more confidence that 
any problems as
sociated with a Gree
k default could be readily contained. 
I am less confident 
that a smooth resolution will be achieved.  Moreover, I worry that this misplaced confidence 
in the likely 
containment of spillovers arising 
from a possible Greek default may ge
nerate 
conditions that make default even more likely. 
As I discussed yesterday, it is possible our inflation target is too low, given the 
accumulating evidence that we set the target based on research that underestimated both the 

likelihood and severity of being at the zero lower bound.  If we are willing to entertain a higher 

target, then a later liftoff would be further justified.
  In part, this would also indicate a higher 
standard for moving, shifting from reasonable confidence that we are moving toward our 

inflation target to just plain confidence that we are moving toward our inflation target. 
As the 
data to date should not make us even reasonably confident, this distinction will become more 

relevant at future meetings, presumably in the fall. 
In term
s of language, I would take out the ﬁat least,ﬂ and I would keep ﬁin part reflecting 
transitory factors.ﬂ
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
First Vice President Holcomb. 

MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
There
™s no denying that the bulk of data 
on real activity released since our March meeting has disappointed expectations.  However, a 
                              
       
      
    
     review of what has happened and what may be revealed to have happened argues for maintaining 
flexibility with respect to the tim
ing of liftoff. 
Labor market conditions continue to improve, albeit at a slow pace.  We™ve also seen the 
trade
-weighted exchange value of the dollar fall slightly against other major currencies and the 
price of oil move irregularly upward.  So we have some reason to think that the two main forces 

that have driven down headline inflation and which might pose a threat to long-
term inflation 
expectations are abating. 
Measures of core inflation have ticked upward. 
In the University of 
Michigan survey, longer-term inflation expectations edged downward in April™s preliminary 

report but remain within their recent range. 
Between now and the June meeting, the information that we will receive may shed new 
light on jobs, retail sales, consumer sentiment, and the overall health of the manufacturing and 

nonmanufacturing sectors.  We will also have two new reports on trimmed mean PCE inflation 

and household inflation expectations. Several of the current uncertainties hanging over the world 
economy may be at least partia
lly resolved.  It seems to me to be well within the realm of 
possibility that the information we receive between now and June will warrant a policy response. 
I believe it is important, therefore, that a June liftoff remain on the table. 
While
, technically
, there is nothing in the language of a
lternative B that takes June liftoff 
off the table, I do have some concern.  I can readily imagine people in the financial markets and 

business press drawing the conclusion that June action is all but impossible, given the lack of 

foreshadowing in a
lternative B.
  This move in market expectations could prove to be an 
impediment to Committee action.  Therefore, the language in paragraph 3 of a
lternative C with 
the ﬁmay soonﬂ option is attractive, 
as it more clearly indic
ates that June remains a viable option. 
On the other hand, a
lternative B states the Committee™s intention to take timely action once its 
         
            
    
                 
  criteria have been met
.  With the possibility of continued uncertainty on both fronts, 
I support 
alternative B.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, although with a 
language change, which I will get to toward the end of my remarks. 
I first wanted to say that I agree with people that once w
e have removed the forward 
guidance, as we™ve now done, every meeting should be a live meeting in which the possibility of 

a change in the federal funds rate can be on the table.
  Having said that, though, we still have 
different assessments as to how like
ly it is that we think we
™re going to want to raise the federal 
funds rate target range in the next couple of meetings.  I, for one, don™t think it™
s very likely at 
all.  But I do 
believe
 that we should not do anything that formally takes it off the table. 
I wasn™t going to comment on this, but 
President Lockhart
™s 
thoughtful observations did 
provoke me to say a couple of things on how to begin moving forward.  I think I™m coming out 
in a somewhat different place, although only in a tentative way, and would 
like to hear other 
people™s views on this.  I™d be reluctant to put back into paragraph 3 at some point an indication 

that, one or two meetings from now, we are more likely to move.  T
he reason 
is, I think that 
becomes a form of calendar guidance of its o
wn.  J
ust as
, when we put in the quasi-
calendar 
guidance before, saying, ﬁWell, 
this isn™t really calendar
Šit™s all data dependent,ﬂ the markets 
all read it as calendar guidance
, I think the same thing is going to happen now if we put in 

language such as t
hat included in paragraph 3 of a
lternative C. 
My preference would be that we use paragraph 2 as the vehicle for beginning to 
communicate a change in the Committee™s collective view as to where the economy is headed, 

which
, it™s hoped, actually begins to, I would say, 
increase some volatility a little bit as people 
        
           
         
  
      
  
       begin to think 
liftoff
 is more likely but is not a done deal.  T
hat 
way, we don™t have a surprise at 
the meeting in which we eventually lift the target range, but it is not de facto occurring just by 
the inclusion of language in paragraph 3 at a meeting before we™
ve actually decided to lift the 
target range. 
As I said, my current view is that June is very unlikely as an appropriate time to increase 
the target range.  I thought that paragraph 1 as originally circulated a week or two ago actually 

hit about right the factual characterization of the economy.  It™
s fairly
 hard to argue with the 
proposition that the data w
ere 
rather 
disappointing and pretty bad, yet paragraph 1 began with 
something sayin
g that it was 
ﬁin part reflecting transitory factors.ﬂ  M
ost important, 
I think, the 
beginning of paragraph 2 communicates that ﬁAlthough growth in output and employment 

slowed during the first quarter, the Committee continues to expect
–ﬂ In other words, 
the basic 

direction of the 
Committee™s expectations ha
sn™t changed, notwithstanding the disappointing 
developments reported in paragraph 1. 
Notwithstanding the fact that I thought the original paragraph 1 got it about right, I
™m okay with most of the chang
es that have been made since the original language was circulated, 

although I wouldn™t want to see us going too much further to try to look for the cheery in a way 

that would obscure what™
s actually happened.
  The one exception, Madam Chair, is the 
sentence 
on inflation, which is the second-
to-last sentence in paragraph 1.  Back in March, that sentence 
said ﬁInflation has declined further below the Committee™s longer-run objective, largely 

reflecting declines in energy prices.ﬂ So the phrase 
ﬁlargel
y reflecting declines in energy pricesﬂ 
was, in effect, explaining how the decline had gone further below.  It was an explanation of the 

delta. 
                                
       
  
       
 I think the language that was circulated 
originally to the Committee a week or two ago is 
now in a
lternative A
, and the language is as follows: 
ﬁInflation continued to run well below the 
Committee™s longer
-run objective, largely reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and 
decreasing prices of non
-energy imports.ﬂ  There, the way I read it when that language wa
s circulated was that now this 
phrase 
ﬁlargely reflectingﬂ in effect explains the ﬁwellﬂ part
Šwhy 
it is ﬁwellﬂ below.  But as it
™s been modified, the sentence now reads ﬁInflation continued to run 
below the Committee™s longer-run objective, largely reflect
ing earlier declines in energy prices 
and decreasing prices of non-
energy imports.ﬂ 
I don™t think it
™s the case that all of the difference between the Committee™s target and 
where we are right now is explained based on the earlier declines in energy prices 
and decreasing 
prices of non-energy imports.  On the contrary, as many people pointed out yesterday and a little 
bit today already, we haven™t been hitting the inflation target for quite some time now.  And if 

you pull out housing inflationŠ
which
, of cour
se, is largely a function of rents imputed to 
homeownersŠthen you have an awful lot of continuing questions 
about how much inflation 
there is. 
As a factual matter, I think we should modify that sentence to say something like the 
following: 
ﬁInflation cont
inued to run below the Committee™s longer-
run objective, partly 
reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non
-energy importsﬂŠ
or something just making clear that that second phrase does not account for all of the difference 

betw
een the Committee™s target and where we are right now. 
Finally, like those who have gone before me, I would prefer removing ﬁat leastﬂ in the 
first sentence.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 
                   
                             MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Our March statement provided forward 
guidance only as far ahead as this meeting, and it effectively said we were going to go to a 
meeting
-by-
meeting
, data-dependent approach to decisionmaking.  From now on, that™
s the right 
thing to do, and I think 
tha
t™
s imp
ortant.
  This means we will not be in the business of 
telegraphing interest rate moves in the previous meeting™s
 statement.  I support the observations 
President Lockhart made on this.  A
n important corollary 
of that is that we should not be 
encouraging pe
ople to believe we won™t raise rates without having sent a telegraph on the issue 
in the previous meeting™s 
statement. 
Concerning 
alternative 
C as a stalking
-horse for future statements, I don™t feel the need to 
include language like that in paragraphs 2 or 3 
at a meeting prior to liftoff
.  So I agree with 
Governor TarulloŠevery meeting should be live, and we should, to the extent that we have the 

opportunity, condition people to expect that we could move without forewarning, perhaps.  
A critical aspect is today™s characterization of the economy
, especial
ly in the first 
paragraph.  As I said in the earlier round, a substantial amount of data is scheduled to arrive 

between now and our June meeting.  If those reports are reasonably close to what the Tealbook is 

forecasting, they
™re going to show a rebound in consumer spending growth, and they™re going to 

show a firming in the monthly inflation figures. 
In that case, there could well be a strong argument for raising rates in June.  Now, we 
don™t know for sure the data will come in that way, and we don™t know for sure there won™t be 

some looming concerns on the horizon that alter the outlook. We could find we™ve hit a more 

prolonged soft patch.  I
n that case
, we may be inclined to delay raising rates when we get to 
June, and I™m open to that possibility.  But, in view of the information we™
re going to get, I think 
it™s very important not to take June off the table. 
        
  
                 
   
         
          As I said, the critical aspect is how the statement characterizes the data, and that focuses 
attention on the first paragraph.  T
he revisions that were made between 
the 
beginning of last 
week and the end of last week in the first paragraph were good, important, and 
necessary
.  But I 
agree with President Mester that the first paragraph still has somewhat of a ﬁglass half
-empty
ﬂ tone, emphasizing the empty half of the glass I guess you™d say.  I support her suggestion for 
changing the characterization of household spending.  I 
also 
support Governor Tarullo™s change 
of ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpartl
y.ﬂ I think he™
s right on there. 
But I 
believe 
that the inflation sentence in 
alternative 
C is more balanced and fair
, as it acknowledges that inflation is no longer declining.  
It calls that out. 
Central bank communication i
s all about what you choose to call out, and I 
think it would be fair to call out that inflation isn™t declining
.  S
o I™d put that suggestion on the 
table. 
Regarding 
the phrase ﬁat least,ﬂ 
I™ve 
been wrestling with that in my mind.  Certainly, in 
a broad-brush kind of way, you can see how including it might make things a little more dour than 
they ought to be, as President Mester argued.  But, on the other hand, ﬁat least in partﬂ means 
that the amount that™
s attributable to transitory factors is 
ﬁin part
ﬂ or ﬁgreater than in part.ﬂ  F
rom 
that point of view, 
ﬁat least in partﬂ seems to me like a more upbeat assessment than just ﬁin part 

reflecting.ﬂ But I could be persuaded either way on that.  Those are my comments on language, 

Madam Chair.  Thank you very much. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank y
ou.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m going to make three comments here.  
First of all, I support President Kocherlakota™s call for a symposium on 
r*.  We could probably 
benefit from getting a lot of views on the table about th
is important parameter in our models
Š         
  
    
                 
    
        
  
  
   how we
™re thinking about it and how that thinking shapes policy choices.  So that would be an 
excellent thing to do, if we could fit that in at some point. 
That leaves me with two comments.  One is about building credib
ility for data
-dependent 
policy, and the other is about shading policy to prevent asset price bubbles.  On the credibility 
question, as we all discussed yesterday, recent data ha
ve been relatively weak.
  We have been 
trying to build credibility 
regarding 
a data-dependent policy 
being the basis for rate decisions 
as we go forward.  
I guess my assessment so far is that we have indeed built some credibility, even 
considerable credibility, 
regarding 
a data
-dependent policy rate for the period ahead
, despite the 
fact that we haven™t moved the policy rate for six and a half years.  And that™
s an achievement. 
Markets
Šappropriately
, in my viewŠmoved the likely date of liftoff back in response to 
weaker
-than-expected readings on the U.S. economy during the intermeeting period.  That™
s exactly what you™d expect to observe if policy is data dependent.  If we can maintain this type of 

credibility as the 
data wax and wane during 2015, we™
ll be in excellent shape at the time of 
policy liftoff, whenever that should arrive, in the sense that there will be few surprises in the 

markets at that juncture. 
The more we can do to convince people that we™re going to 
react to the data
 and be clear 
about what data we™re going to react to, the better off we™
ll be
.  I™m hopeful that the day of the 
first move will be an anticlimactic event because we have credibility that that
™s what we 
were 
going to do.  T
hen we make the 
move, and it™s pretty smooth.  I think we™
re well on the way to 
that, but we probably have more work to do during the spring. 
Let me turn to the second comment on the shading 
of 
policy.  The staff™s forecast is that 
there will be a smooth glide to the steady state.  This forecast envisions unemployment only a 

few ticks lower at the end of the forecast horizon in 2017 than it is today.  This is not my 
        
                   
          
    
     
    baseline forecast. 
I envision unemployment falling well into the 4 percent range over the 
forecast horizon,
 barring any large negative shock to the U.S. economy.  This is what happened 
in the 1990s and in the 2000s, and I think it™
s a good baseline forecast of what
™s going to happen 
again this time. 
Simultaneously, the labor market conditions index, which takes 
into account all aspects 
of labor market performance, will continue to rise far above its average value
.  So we
™ll be 
talking about, 
in the years ahead
, a very robust labor market performance when compared 
with 
metrics on past labor market performance in 
the U
nited S
tates
.  This is going to constitute a 
boom phase for the U.S. economy, notwithstanding this morning™s GDP report, which I think is 
going to prove to be temporary. 
The boom will be associated with about 3 percent growth, at least for a time, in the U.S. 
economy.  That 3 percent growth, while not stellar, is still about 1 percent higher than the 

potential growth rate for the U.S. economy.  T
his is very similar to the 1990s
, when we had years 
in which 
we were at 4
 percent in an economy that had a 3 
percent potential growth rate. We
™ll be growing at 3 
percent for a time in an economy that has a 2 
percent potential growth rate. 
Inflation will rise
, go through the inflation target, and be higher than 2 percent over parts of the 
forecast horizon. 
Duri
ng this period, interest rates will remain exceptionally low by historical standards. 
We™ve already committed ourselves to that by saying 
that
, even 
when 
we start to normalize, it 
would be very small and very gradual.  You could throw in that my view is t
hat this policy rate, 
as we
™re envisioning it over the next couple of years, 
will be below the likely natural rate of 

interest, the 
r* value.  I
n this sense
, we™re going to provide accommodation as currently 
                         
        
        
      envisioned all 
of 
the way through this boom phase for the U.S. economy.  This is how I™
m thinking about it. 
Now, the boom period, combined with exceptionally low policy rate settings, is a recipe 
for asset price bubbles.  Asset price bubbles have plagued the U.S. economy during the 1990s 
and 2000s and have been a major point of debate at this Committee over the p
ast 20 years. 

These bubbles are not in our models.  They were not in the past 20 years, they™
re not in our 
models today, and we don™t see any component of this in our standard presentations on w
hat we 
should do about monetary policy.  So we do not have a good understanding of where these 

bubbles come from or how to control them when they occur.  Furthermore, bursting asset price 

bubbles can have devastating consequences for the U
nited S
tates
 and the global economy.  It™
s no small matter if this thing gets going and develops. 
The basic strategy, in my view, should be to head off this kind of possibility.  We™ve had 
boom-and-bust cycles during the 1990s and the 2000s.  What you™d like to do this time around is 
not to 
have that boom
-and-bust cycle
.  Then you™ll get a longer expansion, and you
™ll 
get better 
outcomes for everybody. 
It™s true that we have an improved macroprudential stance today, and that 
will help 
mitigate some of the more severe consequences of a bursting bubble.  But untested 
macroprudential tools alone are, in my view, insufficient to rely on, given the exceptionally dire 

consequences of bursting asset bubbles not just for the U.S. economy, but 
also 
for the global 
economy. 
The prudent policy, in my view, is to combine our efforts on macroprudential policy with 
a sensible monetary policy that hedges our bets in the direction of prevention of the kind of asset 

price boom-and-bust cycles 
that we
™ve
 experienced during the 1990s and 2000s.  I think we 
      
   
                    
       
    
     
  
  
      should be shading in the direction of slightly higher interest rates than we would otherwise have, 
on the grounds that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure on this dimension.  We do
n™t 

have very good knowledge of what these bubbles are or how they form, so we should be hedging 

our bets on this.  This is an important reason to get going on a modest normalization program 

when the opportunity ar
riv
es, which I expect it will later this y
ear. 
Let me turn just to alternative
 B for a minute.  I support 
alternative
 B, 
as written, for 
today, without the ﬁat leastﬂ phrase 
in the first paragraph.  T
he ﬁin partﬂ covers the bases there, 
and I don™t think we need to add anything more to that. 
I do 
agree with President Mester™s suggested change. 
The wording ﬁG
rowth in 
household spending declined; household
s™ real incomes rose stronglyﬂ is a little bit jarring, and I 
like President Mester™s suggestion there that would smooth that out a little bit. 
I agree with Governor Tarullo and President Lacker that we should not try to reintroduce 
calendar
-dependent language as liftoff nears.  We™re trying to get away from that, so we should 
not try to do that.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  P
resident Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  President Kocherlakota made a good case for 
alternative 
A, and I™m sympathetic to his view, but I can support a
lternative B.  I continue to 
believe that economic conditions will most likely be consistent 
with an appropriate time for 
liftoff being sometime in 2016.  I currently think, based on data, that it will take until then for me 

to be reasonably confident that we™re on course to achieve our inflation objective within an 

acceptable time 
frame. 
The information we™
ve received since our 
March 
meeting has not changed my opinion on 
this.  Indeed, I™
m a little nervous over the latest data on activity and their implications for further 
                    
                            
             slower reductions 
in resource slack. The recent stabilization of energy p
rices and 
the 
dollar are 
positives.  But, 
as I discussed yesterday, I need to see a good deal more broad
-based, concrete 
evidence before being confident that underlying inflation trends actually are heading up with 
adequate momentum.  But, having said that
, we
™ll see how the data evolve. 
Let me make a couple of comments about other things people have mentioned.  I agree 
completely that we have moved to the point 
at which 
it™s a meeting
-by-meeting decision.  
They
™re all live decisions on the rate increase, 
so data conditionality, by itself, is all we need.  I 
don™t think we need special language, 
either
, to signal our intent. 
I agree completely with Governor Tarullo on the paragraph 1 language on inflation.  I had 
noted that myself.  T
he problem is that the 
previous iteration had talked about the gradientŠ 
inflation declining
Šand now it
™s a level concept
Šﬁcontinued to runﬂŠ
but it leaves the same 
factors in place. 
So if you add, as I think you said, ﬁ
part
ly reflecting earlier declines,
ﬂ that would 
take care of 
that.
  Alternatively, if you leave the language, you could also add ﬁand resource 
slackﬂ as part of the explanation, but the more minimal ﬁpart
lyﬂ would probably be better there. 
I™m indifferent on the language about 
household spending
 growth that Preside
nt Mester 
indicated.  I™
m a little worried that it
™s going to sound like 
the message you communicate 
when 
you go out and say, ﬁI support so-and-so 1,000 percent.ﬂ  When you say, ﬁHousehold spending 

continued to grow,ﬂ the alternative to that is a recession.  If household spending doesn™t grow, 

it™s a recession, so I
™m not quite sureŠbut, 
at any rate, that
™s fine. 
On ﬁ
consumer sentiment remains high
,ﬂ these are factually correct observations, 
but
 I™
m a little worried that it might be risky.  After all, we
™re thinking that the energy price declines are 
transitory.  Gas prices are going to go up, and we know that sentiment goes down when gasoline 

prices go up.  
So we might be providing a different bright line for people looking for a bright 
            
  
    
      
                 
     
  
  
    sign here.  Then, if you see that one go down, 
it might have a little more of an implication than 
we intend
.  B
ut otherwise, I don™t have a problem with that.  I support a
lternative B. 
Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B and the latitude it 
offers the Committee to consider a change in policy at its next meeting. 
In terms of guidance that we can glean from policy rules, the benchmarks in the 
Tealbook, Book B, continue to generally suggest 
that 
the funds rate should be higher than its 
current setting. Granted, the equilibrium real rate, or 
r*, we
™ve been discussing remains 
depressed and raises 
questions as to whether these benchmarks are providing appropriate 

guid
ance today. 
At the same time, common frameworks used to estimate 
r* also provide an estimate of 
potential GDP in which 
declines in 
r* go hand in hand with lower potential.  
For example, the 
current Laubach
-Williams framework indicates that 
the equilibrium real rate is negative, though 
it also implies that output is actually above potential.  So
, while policy should incorporate a 
lower equilibrium real rate into the appropriate setting of the funds rate, it also should not neglect 

the implications for potential GDP and the output gap.  For example, using the lower 
r* measure 
and positive output gap in the Taylor (1999) rule with inertia suggests a higher current funds 

rate.  The Taylor (1993) r
ule indicates a setting above 1 percent, even with the lower equil
ibrium 
real rate.
  I don™t take the positive output gap to completely reflect current conditions by any 
means, since some labor market slack remains.  However, this example illustrates 
that 
taking on 
board a lower equilibrium real rate may also imply a sma
ller output gap. 
      
              
          
              Finally, although this is not a decision for today, I note increasing uncertainty about the 
timing and effects of ceasing reinvestments.  I
™m a bit concerned in looking at the market 
participant surveys and noting that expectations on the 
timing of when reinvestments will be 
ended are quite diffuse. For example, a slight majority of dealers expect 
Treasury reinvestments 
to end in the first quarter of 2016, but then expectations are spread over the next four quarters 
into 2017.  This is somewhat concerning, especially given the risk highlighted in the QS report 

and recent IMF financial stability reports that longer
-term rates could increase sharply 
approaching liftoff.  Or the Committee could be facing another conundrum in which longer-
term 
rates 
remain low.
  I think we should try to manage some of this risk by providing more guidance 
on the timing of reinvestment, perhaps incorporating 
it into the SEP or perhaps just 
distributing it 
on an internal basis for our own use, to think about 
expectations on when we anticipate ceasing 
reinvestments.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Prichard. 
MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I view the evolution of the draft 
alternative 
B to finally contain entirely data-dependent language.  This is a very positive 
development and, 
I believe
, an essential step on the path to policy normalization.  I also interpret 
the language in alternative B as leaving our options open for beginning normalization at any 
future meeting 
as we are
 informed by incoming data. 
My biggest concern with a
lternative B is its overly weak interpretation of the current 
economic environment.  As I mentioned yesterday, expenditure-side data for Q1 over the past 

30 years appears to be suffering from poor and pe
rhaps incorrect seasonal adjustment.  An 
ind
icator that incorporates income
-side data, GDPplus, which was posted to 
the website of 
our Real-T
ime 
Data Research 
Center this morning, indicates that the first quarter may not be nearly 
             
              
     
    
          
   as weak as many of the 
nowcasts
 being reported.  GDPplus grew at 1.65 percent in the first 
quarter after growing 3.3 percent 
on a year
-over-
year 
basis
 in 2014:
Q4. 
Further, 
I suggest that the Committee consider
, now or in the future, 
simplifying its 
assessment of the labor market. 
Many labor market indicators paint a relatively healthy picture 
of the labor market.  F
or that reason
, I would favor deleting the third full sentence in 
paragraph
 1Šagain, either now or in the futureŠand simplifying it.  T
hat sentence begins with 
ﬁA range of labor market indicators–
ﬂ  This sentence is fairly imprecise, and it adds little to the 

meaning that is already embodied in the preceding sentence.  The idea would be to seek every 

opportunity to boil the FOMC statement down to its essence by eliminating sentences that don™t 

add particularly to meaning or understanding. 
I am otherwise supportive of the suggestion to eliminate ﬁat leastﬂ and 
of the other 
suggestions that have been made.
  Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Presid
ent Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B.
  Let me respond to 
some of the language suggestions first.  Like others, I would not include the phrase ﬁat leastﬂ in 

the opening paragraph.  That™s not needed.  It™s even unclear. 
On Governor Tarullo™s suggestion, I think he™s absolutely right.  I would put ﬁpartly 
reflecting earlier declines in energy pricesﬂ in the penultimate sentence in 
paragraph 1. 
That™s 
exactly right.  In the recent data, core is running about 1 per
cent.  O
verall 
inflation
 is running 
at around zero over the past couple of quarters, but 
it was 
obviously negative in 
the first quarter
.  There are a lot of factors going onŠPresident Lacker made this point, too.  T
hat™s just accurate 
and, 
I think
, better.
  Paragraph 2 is really 
the place in which we do the heavy lifting and explain 
how we interpret things. Paragraph 1 is really about the data. 
         
                              
  
    
   
     
   I™ll 
make a comment about data dependence in 
paragraph 1.  T
his is part of life. We™re in 
the data-dependent mode.  Paragraph 1 is going to describe the data.  We had only a month, 
really
, of data here.  This is a very small sample, but these are the data we have, and I think we 
have to just describe them accurately. 
The part of the statement 
in which we try to expl
ain how we interpret 
them 
is 
paragraph 
2. In that respect, 
I thought 
paragraph 2 did a nice job of making the point that, yes, the data 
have been weaker.  Yes, we™ve had th
ese 
factors in terms of inflation
.  But, basically
, our outlook 
hasn™t changed much.  I™m not concerned so much about the weakness or the signaling in 

paragraph 
1 as currently stated
, because I think that™s the way the data have been.  It™s just a 
small sample, and
, of course, we™ll get a lot more data bef
ore our next meeting.  So I™m fine with 
that. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo and others who™ve commented on where the future 
statements should go, obviously President Lockhart started us down that road.  I strongly agree 
with Governor Tarullo and, 
I think
, P
resident Evans 
as well as
 some others that we shouldn™t be 
going back to trying to put some quasi-
date
-based guidance in there.  That whole thing of how 
we have to take a couple 
of 
steps before we act is a kind of straightjacket we don™t want to get 
ourselves in. We™re in a good place now on our statements, and I wouldn™t want to see us move 
back to that. 
Now, my own view in terms of the outlook hasn™t really changed based on the data we™ve 
seen in the 
past month, 
which is similar to what 
others have mentioned.  
First
-quarter 
data seem 
to be distorted by some seasonal factors and other factors.  We™ve been down this road before.  

In terms of the inflation data, I haven™t changed my view there, 
either. I still have 
the 
view that 
inflation 
will come back over the next couple of years to our target. 
                    
                               
  But this is 
all 
forecast
, and we™re now in the data-dependent mode.  When I™m asked 
when I think we™ll be raising rate
s, I say,
 ﬁI might have a view on this, but I don™t know.ﬂ 
I try to avoid tal
king about June, September, December, or whichever year because it really depends 
on how the data 
come in
, how they influence our outlook, and what the right policy is. 
That™s a hard message for us to get across
, because we™ve been focused on June versus 
September versus December or whatever.  So I™ve been thinking a little bit outside the box here 
about how we can, beyond this statement, get to a more data-dependent approach.  
Madam 
Chair, I have a suggestion for you.  I made you a special T-
shirt 
[Laughte
r].  The message reads 
ﬁMonetary P
olicy Is
 Data 
Dependent.ﬂ 
CHAIR YELLEN.  How about one for everybody? 

MR. WILLIAMS.  I have a whole box of them.  You wear this around, and then I think 
that™
ll make the point pretty clear
.  We won™t have to worry so much aboutŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Fantastic. 
Love it. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you. 

MR. 
TARULLO. 
Have the softball team wear th
ose. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Another great idea.  Oh, I have one 
last comment I want to make
Š sorry
.  [Laughter] 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You can™t top that, 
John. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  No, I know.  Actually, 
President Kocherlakota
, I can
Šin this way.  I 
would like to second the comments of 
President Kocherlakota
 and 
President Bullard about 
having more of a discussion 
regarding 
the natural rate of interest, 
with 
r* e
stimates
 obviously 
being at the center of this.  I get a lot of feedback, pro and con, about this, and there is some 
                    
              
      
  
           literature developing on 
this besides just the Laubach
-Williams 
model.  So I really do think that 
having a further discussion about 
that wo
uld be helpful. 
The basic logic of Laubach
-Williams is actually pretty simple.  Over the 
past five years
, output growth 
has been averaging 2.3 percent
ŠI™m picking up on President Kocherlakota™s 
point yesterday about 
how L
aubach
-W
illiams
 works.  The 
trend
 growth in our model is 2.0 
percent
.  I think that™s consistent with most people™s views. So we™re getting growth of 
0.3 percentage point above trend over five years, while the real federal funds rate has been about 
minus 1.7.  The only way you can interp
ret this statistically is 
to think 
that the real rate gap
Š basically
, the 
amount of monetary stimulusŠis very modest over the p
ast five years, and this 
hasn™t changed in our model. 
What 
Laubach
-Williams is telling you is simple.  We™ve had negative real rat
es for five 
straight years.  Output growth has been just a smidgen above potential.  Therefore, 
there™s really 

not much monetary stimulus relative to the neutral rate going on.  This is something we should 
discuss further, but, 
basically
, that™s how the mo
del interprets the data.  If the equilibrium real 
rate really were 
2, growth would have been a lot faster than 2.3.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I had read about the T-
shirt in the 
media, and I™m glad to see the real thing in front of us. 
But the 
more 
serious thing 
is, President Williams summarized a number of people™s 
comments that we want to get away from being date 
dependent.  One challenge 
with regard to 
that is the way the 
Summary of 
Econom
ic 
Projections presents our policy outlooks.  That™s very 
date dependent.  In fact, that™s what I™m often asked about
:  ﬁBoy, it looks as though everyone™s 
saying 2015. What do you think about that?ﬂ  So it™s something to be thought about
.  I
f we™re 
        
         
    
                       really trying to get away from date dependence, I think that says something about how we want 
to be talking about interest rates in the 
Summary of 
Economic P
rojections as well. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  That™s a good suggestion.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FIS
CHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d like to first discuss briefly the inflation 
target issue that arose yesterday
, and then turn to the monetary policy decision and explain why I 
support 
alternative 
B. Yesterday President Rosengren
, supported by President Kocherlakota and one or two 
others, 
suggested raising the target inflation rate, a suggestion that™s also be
en made by 
Olivier 
Blanchard.  I believe 
that 
we should constantly be reexamining all 
of 
our assumptions about 
monetary policy and the behavior of the economy, but that, 
particularly in the case of targets, we 

need to be very careful about our public stance. 
With regard to our public stance, we fixed a target inflation rate in 2011 and announced a 
2 percent target in 2012.  The setting of a 
target inf
lation rate was a major achievement and
, to 
those outside the S
ystem
, a major surprise
.  We need to be very careful indeed about reopening 
that decision and that discussion. 
The argument for raising the target inflation rate is that the higher target would permit 
normal monetary policy to attain a more negative real rate of interest than is now possible.  That 

is true, but there™s not so far been public discussion of the negative aspects of a higher inflation 

target. 
The main cost, I believe, relates to Al
an Greenspan™s definition of the desired inflation 
rate as a rate such that inflation is not taken into account in routine economic decisions.
  In 
particular, at around 4 
percent inflation
, we very likely would see the return of indexation into 

relatively 
short
-term contracts, including labor contracts.  Monetary policy becomes much more 
difficult in heavily indexed economies, in part because the inflation rate typically becomes more 
                  
        
    
  
      
               
  variable the higher the indexation rate and 
because 
the probability that t
he dynamics of inflation 
become unstable increases. 
A second cost relates to the credibility of the inflation target and of the F
OMC
.  It is possible that we should, at some future point, 
raise the inflation target
.  But if we 
go out now and 
start a public discussion about the inflation target, we will undoubtedly be asked why we™re 
raising the target and what the effects of doing so are likely to be.  
There are answers to these 

questions, but the answers may well reduce our credibility precisely at a time when reasonable 

people regard us as the most credible and most professional of the macro policymaking 

institutions in the United States. 
WeŠthat is, the participants in this meeting
Šshould not take that risk.  We should not 
go public with any doubts that we might have about the goals of monetary policy.  At the 

moment
, we™re in the middle of the process of trying to normalize monetary policy.  We should 
always be reconsidering our policy framework, but there are times to go public and times not to 
do so.  That is why our discussions of the target inflation rate should continue within the Federal 
Reserve System and within the Committee, and that is why it is fine that Eric raised the issue in 

yesterday™s go
-round, but we should not go public with that discussion. 
Turning now to the monetary policy decision, yesterday™s discussion, 
in which almost 
every participant said, 
rightly
, that 
the key issue is whether first
-quarter weakness i
s transitory or 
a signal of a longer-term weakening of growth, and this morning™s announcement 
of the first 
estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth make it clear that we should wait before making a decision 
to change the interest rate. I say that while bearing in mind an almost true maxim I once heard:  

ﬁThe situation is never clearer in the future.  It™s just unclear in a different way.
ﬂ  [Laughter] 
         
      
       
       
        
           
    I support 
alternative
 B, in which the first three paragraphs do a good job of showing that 
we are watching the data carefully
, and that the probability of a June liftoff has declined, but that 
June remains on the table. As weak as the incoming data have been and as threatening as 
the 
many black clouds that are out there 
are, it remains important to keep June as a possible liftoff 
date.  How could it be possible?  Well, we™ll receive two more employment reports before the 

June meeting.  If we see very high payroll gains in April and May and if the unemployment rate 

comes down to, say, 5.3 percent while the spending data firm as expected, it would be reasonable 

to argue 
for liftoff. 
Some might suggest that we should wait just a little longer to be sure
, since September 
isn™t really that different from June
, to perfect our communications about liftoff or to reexamine 
the tools we intend to use to raise the interest rate.
  That would mean that even in the face of very 
good data, the June versus September decision would be a close call.  But in making that call, 
we 
need also to take into account the importance of our credibility, which would require us to act 
when the conditions for acting that we have set out are fulfilled. 
Turning to the bigger picture, my views on when to lift off were influenced by the very 
helpful paper that was sent to this Committee in January by 
Oliver d
e Gr
oot, 
Etienne 
Gagnon, and Robert 
Tetlow
, whose results I quoted in the March FOMC meeting.  In that paper, they 
compared the probabilities that policymakers might regret their decisions under early and late 
liftoff scenarios.
  Using random draws from historical shocks, they show that the probability that 
we would fall behind the curve and wish that we had tightened sooner was negligible if we go on 

the early side but 
was close to 
10 percent if we wait a year longer
.  In contrast
, the difference 
between the probabilities that we would need to retrace our steps if we go earlier, 10 
percent, 

rather than later, 
5 percent, w
as not as great. 
        
        
              
           
       
Now, it™s a very good paper, but it™s not obvious where we are today relative to going 
early or
 going late.  Nonetheless, all in all, I found that analysis very useful, and it helped 
persuade me that we should seriously be contemplating lifting off soon.  It further helped 
convince me that ﬁ
early and gradual
ﬂ is a much better approach to raising the 
interest rate than 
ﬁlate and steep.
ﬂ  Of course, in the event, 
we may have to raise the rate faster or slower than we 
anticipate, but, 
at this stage
, we have to work with expectations. 
I™d also like to relate to the argument that we™re only in this relati
vely good position on 
employment and 
this 
potentially good position on inflation because the interest rate is so low, 
and that, therefore, we should not move anytime soon.  It™s undoubtedly true that the U.S. 

economy would not be in this relatively favorable position if the F
OMC
 had not moved rapidly 
after Lehman Brothers to the zero lower bound and then undertaken three rounds of QE 
as well 
as Operation Twist.  I believe history will show that the 
Federal Reserve
Štogether with the 
decision to recapitalize 
the banking system, in which the Treasury and the Congress played 
critical roles
Šsaved the United States from a second Great Depression. But we need to realize 
that, at some point, we have to put the interest rate back into action as a tool of monetary policy.  

In so doing, 
we™ll not only begin to activate a more normal way of undertaking monetary policy, 
but we™ll also be sending an extremely important signal to businesses and households that, 
after 

seven years
, the American economy is ready to exit the Great Recession and begin the return to 

normal. 
When should we do this?  The answer is, we should do it w
hen an interest rate higher 
than we have now is still consistent with 
the closing of the output gap.  I believe that, on the 
inflation rate
, the 
staff 
forecasts we heard yesterday from Bill Wascher are far less pessimistic 
than what I™ve heard around this table this morning.  I
t™s true we™ve got negative inflation in the 
          
           
  
    
                         
  
   first quarter, but it™s very important to note that forecasts of core PCE inflation 
are somewhere 
well above 1 
percent, and that when you take the special factors into account, it™s expected to 
rise not to 0.7 percent, but to 1.7 percent, which is very close to target. 
We should also note that even the 
r* in the Tealbook, Book B, is about 110 basis points 
above our current real federal funds rate, suggesting that a sooner liftoff would not be 
incompatible with further progress toward our goals if the situation improves.  Or, to put the 

criterion in the words of 
alternative 
B, we should move when the Committee ﬁ
has seen further 
improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 

2 percent objective over the medium term
.ﬂ  And I expect that will happen reasonably soon.  
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B.  On the 
statement
, I support taking out ﬁat leastﬂ and changing ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpartly.ﬂ 
More broadly, paragraph 1 initially struck me, and continues 
to strike me
, as fairly 
downbeat.  But what saves it for me is this comment about how household real income is rising 

strongly, which I think really sets out our narrative for just how much we™re counting on 

consumer spending and is a pretty strong statement in a context of weak spending.  
So, overall, 
it achieves a level of balance, and I™m fine with it with those changes. 
In terms of forward guidance, I™ll just add that I 
believe 
it™s a very bad idea to surprise 
the market with l
iftoff.  I would avoid calendar-based guidance.  I would let the data speak.  I 

would let the statement
, the minutes, 
and the speeches speak. 
I do think the market will get it. 
It™s very unlikely that the people in this room would be approaching a decision to lift off the 

interes
t rate
, with all 
of 
the attention we™re getting, and that this would be a surprise to the 
        
         
     
   
                    
  
   
          
   market.  T
hat™s incredibly unlikely. 
In fact, my guess 
is, as we approach that, it™s not going to be 
a surprise to the market, 
in light of 
all of 
the transparency and all of the attention being paid. 
More broadly, I think that policy is right where it™s supposed to beŠlooking at incoming 
data to see whether the liftoff narrative still holds together, that narrative being reasonable 
growth that is strong enough to support further improvement in the labor market at a meaningful 

pace and inflation moving up to 2 
percent in the medium term. 
The sense I had at the beginning of the year was that the labor market would continue to 
heal fairly quickly in a context of moderate growth, and I thin
k there™s a better
-than-
even chance 
that something like that narrative will reemerge as we leave the first quarter behind, just 
as it did 

in 2014.  
So, as I said yesterday, I feel good about where the current Tealbook forecast is, and 
I consider that to be still on the same path we were on
Ša little bit slower, but a reasonable path. 
I do have to admit I have a concern now, though, that the speed limit on U.S. growth may 
now be closer to 2 percent than 3 percent, because of the drag gen
erated by
 the behavior of net 
exports, and that improvement in the labor market will also slow down as a result.  TimeŠand 

dataŠ
will tell
.  Monetary policy can respond and really has already done so through 

expectations.  It may 
limit further tightening bu
t doesn™t feel 
as though 
it can reverse 
the 
tightening 
in financial conditions that we have already experienced. 
In the case of returning closer to the old path that had strong job growth, we™re close to 
the natural rate.  Monetary policy works with long lags.  Zero isn™t the right number.  This 

remains for me a very satisfying approach if we do get back to that path, and, 
again, that™s my 

modal case. 
The lower path is just much tougher. We™re still close to the natural rate. We™re still 
eliminating slack
, but at a much slower pace, and I think 
that, 
more important, 
the economy is 
       
                      
              more vulnerable to an unwanted tightening 
in financial conditions and probably in a nonlinear 
way. 
I would still want to lift off, just a little bit later
.  But I would point 
out that the 
communication challenges and the risks are much less attractive. 
I™d be very happy to see data come in that would justify liftoff in June or at any meeting 
subsequent to that
.  But, 
having resisted predictions so far for the most part, I™ll co
ntinue to do so 
today.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  I support a
lternative B.  It seems appropriate for the 
statement to recognize that incoming data ha
ve shown softness across a range of 
spending 
categories
, in industrial production as well as in labor market conditions. 
Although there is reason to believe that some of the weakness reflects transitory factors 
or statistical noise, my best guess is that some of it also reflects a more persi
stent slowing in 
economic momentum.  In particular, the negative effects of dollar appreciation and weakness in 
activity abroad on net exports and business investment, as well as the negative effects of earlier 
oil price declines on drilling and mining, appear to be greater than expected, and the boost to 

consumption has not materialized. 
This softness of recent data
, along with the advance estimate of GDP, 
leads me to favor 
removing the bracketed ﬁat leastﬂ language from the first sentence. 
I also support Governor 
Tarullo™s modification to the sentence on inflation.  T
hat is simply a more accurate statement. 
By the same token, reflecting our uncertainty about the persistence of these effects, it is 
appropriate to include mention of some continuing positive economic signals, such as the 

relatively high level of consumer sentiment.  For that reason, I support the additional words in 
        
  
           
            
        
       paragraph 2, which stress that, 
despite the weaker data, the Committee continues to expect the 
economy to expand at a moderate p
ace. 
For those who worry 
that p
aragraph 1 is too downbeat, I would note this is significantly 
counterbalanced by the fact that a
lternative B makes few changes to 
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the 
March statement, including importantly reiterating that the risks to
 the outlook and the labor 
market are nearly balanced rather than emphasizing downside risks in light of recent data. 
In my view, the incoming data, on balance, do not suggest we™re appreciably closer to our 
two conditions for liftoff.  The incoming data on the labor market do not provide evidence of 

further improvement.  If anything, the softer tone of the aggregate spending data raises the 

possibility that labor market improvement may stall this year.
  My reading of the data on 
unemployment, labor force p
articipation
, and the number of employees working part time for 
economic reasons is that slack remains.
  Nonetheless, we™ll have two additional labor market 
rea
ding
s to help with our assessment before the June FOMC deliberations. 
Meanwhile
, the modest improvement we™ve seen in putting a floor under inflation falls 
short of our standard of reasonable confidence.  We™ve seen some encouraging movement in 

core CPI, although core PCE remains persistently soft relative to our 2 
percent target. 
The recent 
firming
 of oil prices and the recent 
plateauing 
in dollar appreciation raise the possibility that we 
might be seeing an inflection point
, but further appreciation seems likely
, accelerating wage 
growth has 
yet to materialize, and market
-based measures of 
inflation expectations remain soft, 
although they™ve shown some improvement as the price of oil has firmed. 
It™s possible that the data we 
will 
receive 
in the coming months 
will reveal the weakness 
in the data to have been a temporary aberration, and that momentum in underlying activity is 

undiminished.  It could also be that incoming data and economic developments abroad will show 
                  
     
                  
       
 foreign activity to be on more stable footing than now appears to be the case.  
If so and if price 
inflation 
and 
measures of in
flation expectation
s show further signs of firming, then liftoff could 
be appropriate.  On balance, my assessment is that
, although June should remain on the table, the 
probability of liftoff has shifted from June to later in the year.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLE
N.  Thank you.  
Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.
  I support a
lternative B.  Given the 
slowdown in growth, the weaker payroll trend, and a host of other weak economic data, I think 

it™s unlikely, speaking for myself, that I™m going to see su
fficient news in the next seven weeks 

that™
ll cause me to want to lift off at the June FOMC meeting.
  That said, I wouldn™t rule it out 
completely
, because, as 
Governor 
Fischer makes clear, it™s possible that we could see two strong 
employment reports and a big upturn in economic activity.  So we could get there.  I just don™t 

think that™s very likely at this point. 
I hope the economy is going to cooperate and is going to make a September liftoff 
feasible, but I 
don™t even 
really have that much confidence about that, 
either. 
The Tealbook 
forecast is actually interesting now in the sense of how flat the unemployment rate trajectory is. 

So modest shortfalls in growth could actually cause the unemployment rate trajectory to be 

completely flat or even tick up.  In that case, we might not find ourselves yet 
able to pass the 
ﬁfurther improvement in the labor market
ﬂ test. 
I think that 
ﬁfurther improvement in the labor marketﬂ and ﬁreasonably confident [about] 
inflation
ﬂ are really good tests, and I feel very comf
ortable using those 
when 
speaking about my 
own views in terms of the tim
ing 
of liftoff
.  We should talk about that in speeches and make 
those our criteria, and that will help the market participants think along with us. 
       
                                
   
     
             
In terms of language, I™m with every
one else. I would delete ﬁat least.ﬂ  I™m not that 
confident that it™s all due to transitory factors
, so 
I think ﬁat leastﬂ goes a little too far. 
With respect to President Mester™s suggestion to change the sentence about consumption, 
I believe 
the meanin
g is the same. 
MS. MESTER.  The meaning is the same. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Given 
that 
the meaning is the same, I guess I prefer to go 
with the more parsimonious number of wordsŠ
a more direct approach.  So I think 
I prefer what 
we have. 
MS. MESTER.  I 
think second derivatives are harder to understand. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo™s ﬁpartlyﬂ versus ﬁlargely,ﬂ 
I think you really could go either way.  You think about the gap between our target of 2 
percent 

for inflation and where we 
are. 
My judgment would be 
that
 about two-thirds of that gap is due to 
lower energy prices and the stronger dollar, so about one-third is due to other things.  You could 
call that ﬁlargelyﬂ if you wanted to
, or you could call that ﬁpartly.ﬂ 
It™s really wh
at the 
Committee wants to communicate in terms of how concerned they are about inflation being low 
that should drive whether you want to be ﬁ
largely
ﬂ or ﬁ
partly.
ﬂ  I would slightly favor ﬁ
partly
ﬂ because I™m not as concerned about inflation today as I was six weeks ago, but I™m happy to 

accept the judgment of the Committee. 
With respect to the statement, I™m really glad that we™
re now in a data-dependent place, 
and I don™t feel bad about that in the slightest.  The market should be able to think along with us 

as they see the data
, as long as they can interpret them through the prism of labor market 

improvement and 
whether we are
 becoming reasonably confident about the inflation outlook 

over the medium term.  
If the market starts to diverge from what our expe
ctations are, there 
are 
                    
     
                        
       
 plenty of forums in which to remind people of what the data mean to us in terms of those two 
criteria.  I think we can easily pull the market back. 
Lastly, Chair 
Yellen 
opened the meeting by recognizing Chris Cummings
, so I want to 
close my remarks similarly.  I want to acknowledge Chris™
s service to the New York Fed
, the 
Federal Reserve System
, and this Committee.  On several occasions during the crisis
, Chris was 
forced to sit in this chair and provide the New York Fed™s views on monetary policy, and she did 

that very ably.  We hope that will never have to happen again. 
In terms of Chris™
s contributions to the 
System, they™re very large.  She™s been a great 
colleague to me and to many others throughout the Federal Reserve System.  I™ve heard many 

people comment to me over the past few days and weeks about how much they™re going to miss 

her and how important she™s been in contributing to the Federal Reserve System writ 
large, as 
opposed to just the New York Fed.  She embodies, in my mind, the modern central banker 
in that 
she has a 
very deep and broad portfolio, ranging from 
serving as p
roduct d
irector for the 
Wholesale Product Office to chairing the Financial Stability Board™s Cross
-Border Crisis 
Management Group.  That™s a pretty wide span of responsibilities. 
I want to thank her personally for her wise counsel and support during my tenure.  And, 
of course, I wish you the best in all 
of your future endeavors.  [Applause] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thanks, everybody.  
First of all, 
let me acknowledge 
that I 
heard the support for 
a Committee discussion about 
r* and the factors influencing it, and I also 
think that™s a good idea
.  W
e™ll work with Thomas and others to see if we can put that together.  
It™s a great idea. 
I heard
, in gene
ral
, broad-based support for 
alternative 
B for today, and we have a few 
language issues to review.
  First, starting at the top of 
paragraph 1, we have the bracketed ﬁat 
         
       
               
   
               least,ﬂ and I actually heard a large number of people who suggested we not include the bracketed 
ﬁat least.ﬂ
  Let me give anybody who wants it in there an opportunity to say 
so.  President 
Lacker
, I heard you support putting it in there, but are there others?  [No response] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Then I will
Š MR. LACKER.  I c
ould support deleting 
it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great. 
So we will remove the bracketed ﬁat least.ﬂ
  The next 
change suggested was President Mester™s recommend
ed change in the language about household 
spending.  Just to remind you, she suggested changing the words ﬁGrowth in household spending 

decline
dﬂ to ﬁ
Household spending continued to grow
, although at a s
lower pace.ﬂ 
I heard a little 
bit of support, not a great deal, and a couple of people 
were opposed.  Let me just ask
ŠI think I 
heard two supporters in addition to 
President Mester.  Is there widespread support for that 

change?  If so, please indicate if you support that change. 
MR. FISCHER.  I do. 
PARTICIPANT.  I support the change. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I see 
three
 people who are supportive.  And how many are 
opposed?
  [Show of hands]  Okay.  I™m going toŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Chair™s prerogative. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Chair™s prerogative
.  I think leaving it as is
, rather than going with the 
suggestion, is, frankly, my own preference. 
Finally
, we have Governor Tarullo™s 
suggested change
.  That would be in the ﬁinflationﬂ 
sentence, the next
-to-last sentence in 
paragraph 1, and the suggestion is to change ﬁlargely 
reflectingﬂ to ﬁpartly reflecting.ﬂ 
I did hear quite a bit of support for that.  Personally
, I™m also 
               
  
   
      
                
   open to making that change, but let me see what people think who didn™t weigh in on that.  H
ow 
many people wouldŠ
President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  C
ould I ask a clarifying question? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sur
e. 
MR. EVANS. 
Vice Chair
man
 Dudley, you mentioned two-
thirds o
fŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  That would be my characterization. 

MR. EVANS. Was that 
of 
headline inflation or 
core? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Headline 
is zero
.  Core is running about 1.3-ish on a 
year
-over
-year basis
. MR. EVANS.  So you™re saying two-thirds of the low headline inflation. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Yes, exactly. 

MR. EVANS.  Ye
s.  That™s fair. I agree. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It refers to inflation.  It doesn™t refer to core inflation. I 
think you can argue it either way, frankly. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Inflation is running about ¼ 
percent.
  Core is running about 1.4 or 
something like that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.  So about two
-thirds of the gap is in these transitory 
factors
, and about one
-third is
Š MR. EVANS.  When I s
ay inflation
, I™m thinking underlying inflationŠ
something closer 
to coreŠso that™s why I 
believe 
ﬁpartlyﬂ is important
.  But you™re right.  If this was nailed down 
and 
it said headline inflation
, that would be okay.  At any rate, I support Governor Tarullo™s 
recommenda
tion. 
             
          
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
            CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. 
Let me see support for Governor Tarullo™s suggestion.  [Show 
of hands] 
I see broad
-based support.  Is there anyone who feels strongly opposed?  Okay.  So let 
us also make that change. We will change the word ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpart
ly.ﬂ
  And those are all 
of 
the suggestions that we need to review, s
o I think we™re ready, Matt
. MR. LU
ECKE.  The vote will be on a
lternative B 
as depicted 
on pages 7 and 8 of 
Thomas™
s handout, with the changes of taking out the words ﬁat leastﬂ in the fir
st sentence and 
replac
ing ﬁlargelyﬂ 
with 
ﬁpartlyﬂ in the penultimate sentence in 
paragraph 1
.  It will also cover 
the directive on page 12 of Thomas™s handout. 
Cha
ir Yellen 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
Governor Brainard 
Yes 
President Evans 
Yes 
Governor Fischer 
Yes 
President Lacker 
Yes 
President Lockhart 
Yes 
Governor Powell 
Yes 
Governor Tarullo 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You should have your gavel.  [Laughter] 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
Okay.  
We need 
to confirm the date of the next meeting, which is 
Tuesday and Wednesday, June 16 and 17.  Thanks, everybody, for your participation.  The 

meeting is adjourned. 
END OF MEETING 
      
                                                                
    
 ________________ Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
April 28
Œ29, 2015 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 28, 2015, at 

1:00 p.m. 
and continued on Wednesda
y, April 29, 2015, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the 
following: 
Janet L. Yellen, Chair 

William 
C. 
Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Lael Brainard 

Charles L. Evans 

Stanley Fischer 

Jeffrey M. Lacker 

Dennis P. Lockhart 

Jerome H. Powell 

Danie
l K. Tarullo 
John C. Williams 
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, and Eric 
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Helen E. Holcomb and Blake Prichard, First Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Dallas and Philadelphia, respectively 

Thomas Laubach, Secretary and Economist 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 

David 
W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle 
A. Smith, 
Assistant Secretary 
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Eric M. Engen, Michael P. Leahy, and William 
Wascher, Associate Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account 

Robert deV. Frierson,
1 Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market Committee and t
he Board of Governors. 
                             
                           
  
       
         
   
 ________________ Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of 

Governors 
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Governors 
James A. Clouse and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 
William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, 
Board of Governors 
Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider, and Stacey Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board, 
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Michael T. Kiley, Senior Adviser, 
Division of Research and Statistics, and Senior 
Associate Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 

Governors 
Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Joshua Gallin, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci,
2 Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 
of Governors; Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, 

Board of Governors 
Jane E. Ihrig
1 and David López
-Salido, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Edward Nelson, Assistant Director, Division
 of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Eric 
C. Engstrom, Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Penelope A. Beattie,
1 Assistant to the Secretary, Of
fice of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
2 Attended the portion of the meeting following the joint session of the Federal Open Market Committee 
and the Board of Governors. 
                                    Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Katie Ross,
1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
Jonathan E. Goldberg, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

James M. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

James J. McAndrews, Executive Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 
Troy Davig, Michael Dotsey, Evan F. Koenig, and Spencer Krane, Senior 
Vice 
Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Todd E. Clark, Sylvain Leduc, Giovanni Olivei, Douglas Tillett, and David C. Wheelock, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, San Francisco, Boston, Chicago, 

and St. Louis, respectively 
Kei
-Mu Yi, 
Special Policy Advisor to the President, Federal 
Reserve Ba
nk of 
Minneapolis 

Matthew D. Raskin, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Jame
s M. Egelhof,
1 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 
                   
             
  
      Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
April 28
Œ29, 2015 April 28 Session 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Good afternoon, everyone.  I™d like to welcome back First Vice 
President
s Holcomb and Prichard, who will again be representing Dallas and Philadelphia, 
respectively. 
On a sad note, my understanding is that this is the last FOMC meeting for New York 
First Vice President Chris Cumming.  Chris has attended 92 FOMC meetings, 70 of which she 
attended as an alternate voter
.  And, as all of you know, Chris has been involved in a wide array 
of 
System work over many years in all facets of what we do and has been a very wonderful 

colleague.  Chris, I really thank you for your service and want you to know that you will be very 

much missed.
  [Applause] 
Next, I™m pleased to let you know that Brian Madigan has agreed to return to the Board™s 
Division of Monetary Affairs as 
deputy d
irector
, reporting to Thomas, effective June 1.  I think 
all of
 you know that Brian served as d
irector 
of the 
division 
and as FOMC 
secretary
 from 2007 
to 2010.  
Since he retired from the Board, Brian has been a visiting professor in the Department 

of Economics at Georgetown 
University
. Now, as I think many of you know
, in recent years
, the job of 
director 
of 
the Division of 
Monetary Affairs has become increasingly burdensome.  It has entailed serving as the 

Committee™s chief monetary policy advisor, as s
ecretary of the FOMC, and as leader of a large 
organization with c
ritical responsibilities.
  As part of a strategy to create a more sustainable 
situation, Brian will have oversight responsibility for the FOMC Secretariat and will play a key 

role in the production of the minutes and transcripts of FOMC meetings.  Obviously, 
these are 
things he has done superbly well in the past and for which he is eminently well qualified. 
                           
                               
                                                           
  Accordingly, I intend to propose that Brian be appointed by the FOMC as its s
ecretary
.  Unless there are objections, I will 
ask the 
FOMC 
Secretariat to send out a request 
in early June 
for notation 
votes to select Brian 
as our 
secretary
.  Under this 
arrangement, Thomas will 
continue 
to serve as 
the 
Committee™s primary advisor on monetary policy and will also be able 
to 
dedicate more of his 
energy to ensuring that 
the Division of 
Monetary Affairs fulfills its critical 
role 
in supporting our monetary policy and other responsibilities. 
Okay.  Now, 
the first two items 
on our agenda 
today will be 
considered in a joint meeting 
of the FOMC and the Board of Governors, and, accordingly, I need a motion to close the Board 
meeting. 
MR. FISCHER.  So moved. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  O
ur first item is financial 
developments and open market operations, and let me call on Simon to delive
r the 
Desk report. 
MR. POTTER.
1  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Lorie and I will split the briefing into 
three parts. 
First, I will review financial market developments. Next, Lorie will 
review Desk operations.
 Finally, I will discuss staff work on enhancing 
the 
calculation methodology for the federal funds effective rate. 
Over the intermeeting period, domestic financial conditions eased following 
more
-accommodative-
than
-expected U.S. monetary policy communications and 
weaker
-than-
expected
 economic data, including the March employment report.  
On net, nominal Treasury rates declined by as many as 25 basis points, the S&P 500 
index gained 2 percent, and the DXY dollar index decreased nearly 3 percent. 
A substantial portion of these changes came around 
the time o
f the March FOMC 
events, which were characterized as 
being 
more
 accommodative than expected 
despite the removal of ﬁpatientﬂ language from the statement. 
Investors pointed, in 
particular, to the large downward shift in the target 
federal funds 
rate projections 
in 
the SEP 
and, to a lesser extent, the downward revisions to Committee participants
™ projections of inflation, GDP growth, and the longer-run unemployment rate.  
The 

left column of your top-
left panel shows 
that nominal and real interest 
rates declined 
in the one-hour window around the statement and SEP releases
, while measures of 
inflation compensation rose, equity prices increased, and the dollar weakened. 
As shown in the right column of the table, the absolute magnitudes of these moves 
were 
1 The materials used by Mr. Potter and Ms. Logan are appended to this tran
script (appendix 1). 
             
            
    
         
           
     
         
     very large relative to changes in one-hour windows around FOMC statement releases 

over the past decade. 
One hypothesis for seeing moves of this magnitude could be decreased market 
liquidity. Indeed
, late in the trading session outside the window use
d to measure 
these FOMC announcement effects, there was a very large move in the euro
dollar 
currency pair.  The move pushed the intraday trading range for the currency pair to 

over 4 percent, a 5 standard deviation move over the period since 2004, as shown in 

the top-right panel.  The size of the move is comparable to the 6 standard deviation 

range in the 10
-year Treasury yield on October 15, both of which took place amid 

very high volumes.  
The March FOMC events shifted out expectations for the timing of 
liftoff 
according to the Desk surveys, as shown in the middle-left panel.  
The ﬁflashﬂ survey, 

taken 
three 
business days after the March FOMC meeting
, suggests that most of the 
shift occurred in response to the meeting and the large price moves in the hou
r 
following the March FOMC 
statement release
, therefore likely reflect
ing shifting 
policy expectations as opposed to outsized liquidity 
effects
.  Since the flash survey, 

soft domestic economic data and speeches from Federal Reserve officials appear to 

have further solidified this shift in policy expectations. 
The April surveys also showed a notably slower expected pace of policy 
normalization after liftoff. 
The middle
-right panel shows that the probability 
distribution for the pace of tightening in the fir
st year after liftoff, assuming no return 
to the zero bound, shifted toward a slower pace over the period, the first notable shift 

in these views since 
the question was originally asked last September.  
A similar shift 
occurred in the distribution of the expected pace of tightening in the second year after 

liftoff. 
In considering when the Federal Reserve will begin to normalize monetary policy, 
market participants are particularly focused on the outlook for inflation and the 

Committee™s reasonable confidenc
e that inflation will move back to its 2 percent 

objective.  
We asked survey respondents to score the importance of various factors 
they believe the Committee will use in assessing whether reasonable confidence in 

the inflation outlook has been achieved.  As shown in the bottom-left panel, 

respondents assigned the most importance to a further improvement in the labor 

market and the absence of weakening in realized core inflation.  
Over the intermeeting period, market-
based measures of inflation compensation 
increased alongside higher energy prices and a weaker U.S. dollar, as shown in the 

bottom-right panel.  Forward measures of inflation compensation increased at both 

shorter-
and longer
-dated horizons but remain below levels at the end of 2013.  
The 
increa
ses over the period were attributed to the March FOMC communications, 
somewhat higher-
than
-expected 
realized inflation, the increase in oil prices, and 
positioning dynamics in the TIPS market.  Longer-
term inflation expectations from 
Desk surveys were little changed over the period.  Meanwhile, front-month Brent 

crude increased nearly 22 percent but remains more than 40 percent lower since the 
      
   
               
          
            
       
   
                        
  end of 2013.  
As I noted, the DXY dollar index declin
ed nearly 3 percent over the 
intermeeting 
period but is over 20 percent higher since the end of 2013. 
Despite the depreciation over the period, market participants expect the exchange 
value of the U.S. dollar to continue its broad appreciation amid ongoing monetary 

policy divergence across major economies.
 Desk dealer survey respondents reported 
that dollar appreciation seen since last summer has prompted them to revise lower 

their forecasts for 2015 growth and inflation, with the median markdowns to 2015 

GDP growth and core PCE inflation of roughly 40 basis points and 20 basis points, 

respectively. 
A key factor contributing to broad dollar strength has been widening global 
interest rate differentials, especially between the 
United States
 and the 
euro area. 
These interest rate differentials became more pronounced as 
euro-
area sovereign rates 
have traded increasingly negative and yield curves have flattened substantially. 
The 
top-left panel of your next exhibit shows the extent of 
negative rate trading
 by country and maturity. 
 Red indicates that 100 percent of the bonds in that category 
trade at a negative yield, while green indicates that none trade negative. 
Despite the continued decline in 
euro
-area rates and the increasing universe of 
securities trading at negative yields, there have been few market
-functioning issues, 
and the ECB has stated that it has had little trouble achieving its purchase targets thus 

far.
 Even so, it is possible that market functioning strains will emerge over time, and 
to help address such strains, the ECB unveiled details of an augmented 
securities
-lending program aimed at supporting bond and repo market liquidity. 
The declines in 
euro-area rates, coupled with the very large currency depreciation 
and increase in equities, have s
ubstantially eased European financial conditions since 

President Draghi™s remarks at 
the 
Jackson Hole symposium last August.  
It is interesting to compare the asset price reaction 
with
 recent LSAP programs.  Using the 
price changes from when asset purchase
 expectations began to form until three 

months after the purchase programs were announced, the 
ECB™s PSPP and B
OJ™s 
QQE, shown in the left and middle columns of the top-
right panel, 
respectively, 
contributed to significant currency depreciation and meaningful equity price 

increases. The ECB™s program resulted in large declines in German nominal forward 

rates, but 
it has not been accompanied by an increase in longer
-dated 
forward 
inflation measures
.  In comparison, Japanese policies supported a large rise in 
forward inflation compensation and a pronounced increase in equities, perhaps 

stemming from the focus on reaching the new higher inflation target.  By contrast, 

U.S. asset price reaction
s to 
LSAP3 
were
 more limited, as the right column showsŠ 
though it did have a large effect in the mortgage markets, which is not included in the 

panel. 
One potential flashpoint for 
financial markets is the highly fluid situation in 
Greece. While Greek asset prices
 have responded sharply to recent developments, the 

broader market reaction to perceived downside risks in Greece has been relatively 

muted and perhaps a bit complacent.  
Market participants attribute the lack of 
          
  
                  
               
    
     
                
       
  
             spillovers to institutional improvements in 
the euro area, reduced 
private
-sector 
exposure to Greece, and the effects of ECB asset purchases. 
Reflecting the mounting 
liquidity pressure from deposit flight and bank funding strains, Greek banks have also 

increased their borrowing via the emergency liquidity assistance program to 

•76 billion in April from •69 billion in March.  
As would be expected, Greece™s 

Target2 liability, which represents balances owed to others in the E
urosystem
, rose in 
March, shown in the middle-
left panel. This level is near Greece™s prior peak Target2 
liability in June 2012.  It is uncertain how long the Greek government will be able to 

meet its debt obligations. 
Some market participants still expect an agreement 
between Greece and its creditors to be reached but only after
 a high-
stakes game of 
brinkmanship.  
Steve will further discuss Greece in his briefing. 
Shifting to emerging markets, there has been a very sharp increase in Chinese 
equities over recent months, shown in the middle-
right panel. Over the intermeeting 
period, mainland Chinese and Hong Kong equities rose by 23 
percent 
and 16 percent, 
respectively, and, 
over the past year
, the Shanghai Composite has more than doubled.  
Mainland equity outperformance 
came despite a worsening domestic economic 
outlook and proba
bly involved some speculative dynamics, though it was supported 
by expected and actual monetary policy easing.  
During the intermeeting period
, the 
People™s Bank of China 
cut their reserve requirement ratio 
by a larger
-than
-expected 
100 basis points; most contacts expect additional cuts to reserve requirements or 

decreases in lending and deposit rates in the near 
term. 
Equity prices in other emerging markets also increased
, and, as shown in the 
bottom-
left panel, broader EM asset prices rose, partially retr
acing prior period 
declines.
 The moves were supported by the accommodative March FOMC 
communication as well as a moderate abatement of risks in a number of countries, 
including Brazil and Russia.  
This partial retracement of emerging market asset prices 
came despite continued markdowns of expected growth in several countries.  
These 

markdowns and recent U.S. dollar strength have contributed to a broader trend of 

emerging market currency depreciation since the May 2013 JEC testimony or 
so-called 
taper tantr
um. 
Some market participants are concerned that taper tantrum
Œlike volatility in 
emerging markets could materialize as the Federal Reserve approaches normalization. 

Recall that implied volatility in emerging market currencies rose sharply with U.S. 

interest rate implied volatility in spring 2013, shown in the bottom-
right panel, and 
has recently moved back to similar levels.  Decelerating emerging market growth and 

rising corporate leverage, as well as volatility in commodity prices may make 

emerging markets vulnerable as normalization nears. However, these risks are 

somewhat offset by lower emerging market asset valuations and reportedly more 

cautious positioning fro
m emerging market investors, as discussed in the special QS 
memo. 
Volatility in emerging markets is only one part of broader financial market 
volatility that some worry could ensue from expected Federal Reserve normalization.  

Indeed, a senior IMF official 
recently warned of a ﬁsuper taper tantrum,ﬂ 
in which 
              
     
                                        
     negative term premiums 
would be rapidly decompress
ed as domestic policy rates are 
increased; Thomas will comment more on this risk in his briefing.
 Given the 
punctuated bouts of recent realized volatility in the very deep and liquid markets I 

discussed earlier, financial market volatility during normalization could be even more 

challenging for relatively illiquid markets. 
I will now take questions before turning to 
Lorie. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  No questions? 
Lorie. 
MS. LOGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll start 
with
 exhibit 3 and provide an 
update on MBS reinvestments, discuss testing of normalization tools, and conclude 

with the staff recommendation to extend the existing central bank liquidity and swap 

arra
ngements. 
The Desk™s MBS reinvestment operations continue to go smoothly, 
and MBS 
market liquidity remains stable.  
The continued trend 
toward higher prepayment 
speeds in March was largely an ongoing result of the low mortgage rates witnessed 

earlier in th
e year and has pushed the current monthly reinvestment amount up to 
approximately $40 billion, as shown in the top-left panel of your third exhibit.  

Despite the increased size of reinvestments, we do not anticipate having any issues 

with the execution of MBS operations, but we have increased the frequency of our 

operations to accommodate their larger size. 
Testing of the Federal Reserve™s overnight and term RRP operations continued 
over the intermeeting period.  Patterns of total RRP demand remained broadly 

consistent with recent experience, as shown in the top
-right panel.  
The additional 
25 counterparties that began participating in operations on March 16 have only 

modestly 
affected
 overall RRP usage. 
For broader perspective on the Federal Reserve™s 
involvement in reverse repo 
activity, this panel also includes reverse repos conducted with foreign official 

institutions, known as the ﬁforeign RP pool,ﬂ shown in gray.  The size of the foreign 

RP pool is notably above its pre-
crisis levels, largely a ref
lection of central banks™ 
desire to hold greater dollar liquidity buffers, while at the same time they are 

tightening their counterparty 
risk
-management
 frameworks.  Increases in the foreign 
RP pool this period, and since the beginning of the year, have been primarily driven 

by a single customer who has sought to increase the liquidity profile of its FX 

reserves 
due to precautionary 
financial
-stability motivations, in part by raising its 
cash balance 
held 
at the Federal Reserve. 
The Desk conducted two term operations over March quarter-end, the first a 
$75 billion, 14
-day operation and the second a $125 billion, 7-day operation, 

summarized in your middle-left panel.  This $200 billion offering in term RRPs 

reduced the Federal Reserve™s overall RRP offered am
ount spanning quarter-
end to 
$500 billion, down from the $600 billion offered at year-end.  However, the reduction 

did not appear to have an adverse 
effect
 on markets or meaningfully change 
participation, likely because the amount offered was perceived to still provide ample 
           
      
   
    
                     
   
           
         headroom above expected demand.  The 14-day operation was modestly 

oversubscribed, with $81 billion in propositions and a stop-
out
 rate of 9 basis points, 
a slightly higher rate than was expected.  
The 7
-day operation conducted on March 30 
was undersubscribed
, with $101 billion in propositions submitted and a stop-
out rate 
at the max offering rate of 10 basis points, similar to the rates on the undersubscribed 

operations held closer to year
-end.  Substitution between overnight and term R
RPs 
and the breakdown of counterparty demand at the March term operations were 

broadly similar to behavior observed in December. 
As shown in your middle-right panel, the Desk™s RRP operations continued to 
provide a soft floor under short-
term interest rate
s, even around quarter-end.  
The 
federal funds effective rate averaged 12 basis points over the period and printed at 

6 basis points on quarter-end.  While rates and volumes in unsecured 
markets
 over 

quarter-end were broadly in line with expectations, temporary funding pressures in 

secured markets
 were much larger than expected, with the overnight GCF repo index 

for Treasury collateral, shown in the dark blue line, printing at 45 basis points. 
Further, the dispersion in repo rates increased notably.  For ex
ample, the spread 
between rates on overnight Treasury GCF repo and 
triparty 
repo widened 
considerably on quarter-end.  This spread, shown in your bottom-
left panel, reached 
30 basis points on quarter-end.  
While all the factors that drove the larger
-than
-expected widening between repo rates are not fully understood, institutions with 

stable access to triparty repo funding appeared to demand increased compensation to 

intermediate between triparty cash lenders, like money funds, and GCF borrowers, 

such as sma
ller or less creditworthy dealers. 
It should also be noted that the spread between GCF and triparty repo rates has 
been gradually widening over the past several months even outside quarter-end.  
This 
trend is likely partially driven by financial institutions modifying behavior in 
response to regulatory changes and associated higher costs to intermediate between 

triparty and GCF repo markets. 
Looking forward, pursuant to the resolution adopted at the March FOMC 
meeting, the staff proposes conductin
g term RRP tests over June quarter
-end. 
For the June quarter-end, we suggest a slightly different approach to 
the 
public 
communication about the term RRPs than was used in December and March.  As 

outlined in your bottom-right panel, the Desk proposes to re
lease a statement shortly 
after the April FOMC meeting minutes on May 20 that would note the tentative 

intention to offer at least $200 billion of term RRPs in addition to capacity 
of 
overnight 
RRPs for the June quarter-end.  Based on our experience with t
he March 
term operations, we believe that $200 billion in term RRP capacity over June quarter-

end, in combination with at least $300 billion capacity in overnight 
RRP, should 
provide sufficient headroom on total RRP availability, assuming no change in the 

target range.  Further, we would propose noting in the statement that the Desk would 

release the remaining details on Monday, June 22
Šthat is, after the June FOMC 
meeting. 
        
   
     
  
                   
   
  
       
       
     
       
            
        We would thus come back to the Committee with a recommendation of the exact 
size and
 maximum offering rate for each operation at or shortly after the June 
meeting.  This communication approach could be replicated in future quarter-ends 

and should provide the market 
with 
confidence in available supply around quarter-
ends, but, 
importantly
, retain some flexibility to adjust the specific parameters of the 
operations should the Committee decide to lift 
off. 
In order to maintain operational readiness with the TDF
Šboth within the Federal 
Reserve and 
among banksŠthe staff is developing plans to resume a routine, every-
other-month testing schedule that would be similar to that employed prior to the 

series of special larger test operations conducted over the 
past year. Offering rates, 
counterparty limits
, and other terms of these operations would b
e set so that the scale 
of such testing operations would be modest.  The tentative plan is to announce and 

resume the routine periodic testing beginning next month. 
Additionally, the work on implementing changes to the methodology for 
calculating interest 
payments is proceeding according to schedule.  Comments on the 
Federal Register 
notice 
are due by the middle of May.  
If there are no major issues 
raised by those comments, the staff should be in a position to implement the new 

methodology before the June 
FOMC meeting as planned. 
Your fourth exhibit begins with the focus of some market participants over the 
intermeeting period on the discussion of normalization tools 
that appeared 
in the 
March FOMC minutes.
 Contacts specifically highlighted the discussion concerning 
temporarily elevated capacity for the ON RRP facility. 
In the Desk™s April surveys, 
respondents were asked to provide their expectations for both the level of the daily 

aggregate cap and level of ON RRP demand around the time of liftoff. 
As sho
wn in the top-left panel of your final exhibit, 10 respondents expected there 
to be no cap on the ON RRP facility immediately following liftoff.  Among those 

respondents expecting a cap at liftoff, the median expectation was a cap of 

$500 billion, and all anticipated that ON RRP demand would be at or below the cap.  

Across all respondents, regardless of whether they expected a cap, the median 

expected level of ON RRP demand immediately after liftoff was $300 billion, 

unchanged from the March survey. 
However
, many respondents did update their expectations for ON RRP demand 
from the previous surveyŠ
both immediately after liftoff and 
one- and 
three
-years 
ahead.  Expectations shifted in both directions, with a number of participants moving 

their expectations by several hundred billion dollars, perhaps pointing to significant 

uncertainly about the likely level of 
take
-up. 
Respondents were also asked about 
their 
expectation
s for the variation in ON 
RRP demand over various time horizons.  They expected the variability of the ON 

RRP demand around the time of liftoff to be more elevated than recent experience, 

largely due to uncertainties over the mix of overnight and term RRPs 
as well as how 
      
    
   
    
    
    
                       
              
          
      
   
    regulatory reforms might 
affect money markets when rates rise from the zero lower 
bound. In terms of the expected levels of money market rates at liftoff, the median 
estimate across respondents for the level of the federal funds effective rate was 

35 basis pointsŠ
very close to the center of the expected target range. 
The April 
surveys also asked respondents for the probability 
they attach to the level of the 
effective rate averaging within certain ranges during the month following liftoff.  
As 
shown in the top-right panel, respondents assigned very high probabilities to the 

effective rate 
being within the target range and only a negligible probability to the 

effective 
rate 
being outside the range. 
Finally, as discussed in the memo sent to the
 Committee on April 15, we would 
like to ask the Committee to vote on the authorization to renew for another year the 

standing liquidity swap arrangements with foreign central banks and NAFA swap 

arrangements. 
While the liquidity arrangements were authori
zed for an indefinite 
period in October 2013, the FOMC has the ability to unilaterally terminate its 

participation with 
six months™ notice. 
This is similar to the NAFA swap 
arrangements with Mexico and Canada, which are renewable annually on or before 

Dec
ember 15 of each year and require 
six 
months™ notice to terminate. 
The use of liquidity swap lines recently has been sparse, as shown in the middle-
left panel, with demand limited to regularly scheduled 
seven
-day dollar auctions held 
by the 
Bank of Japan
 over year
-end and March quarter-end.  
While this is consistent 
with relatively calm conditions in 
dollar funding markets
, we believe the swap lines 
are an important liquidity backstop, helping to maintain stability and confidence in 

global funding markets.  Additionally, liquidity swap and NAFA swap arrangements 

are tangible and constructive signals of cooperation among central banks, and their 
attendant costs are minimal.
 Liquidity swap arrangements also support the approach 
that the Federal Reserve along 
with other major central banks have endorsed that 
there are ﬁno technical obstaclesﬂ to central banks™ capabilities to provide liquidity 
quickly to a systemically important financial market utility. 
Therefore, the staff 
recommends that the Committee vote to renew the liquidity swap lines and NAFA 

arrangements. 
I will now turn back to Simon to discuss the calculation methodology for the 
effective funds rate. 
MR. POTTER.  Thanks, Lorie.  As detailed in a memo circulated in advance of 
the meeting, the staff has assessed that there might be some merit in changing the 

calculation methodology underlying the federal funds effective rate concurrent with 

the change in data source to the 
FR 2420.  We are interested in the Committee™s 
initial feedback on this 
assessment. 
As you a
re aware, the federal funds effective rate is currently calculated as a 
volume-weighted mean.  That is, each observed transaction rate is weighted by the 

share of total volume transacted at this rate
, and the effective rate is the sum of these 
                         
    
             
                      
 weighted rates.
 The distribution of volume by rates for a particular day from the 
FR 2420 data is shown in the middle-
right panel. 
The 
staff
™s 
assessment is that it may be more appropriate to calculate the effective 
rate as the median (
that is
, the 50
th percentile) of the distribution rather than its mean. 
As shown in the bottom-left panel, the volume-
weighted median generates a statistic 
that is the same as
, or very close to, 
the mean at most times
 except for 
the crisis 
period.  However, on tho
se occasions 
when
 the mean and median do differ 
significantly, the 
staff
™s 
preliminary analysis shows that the median is typically a 
better measure of broad money market conditions across a wide range of situations.  

Moreover, the median is much more robus
t to invalid data.
 In general, for an invalid 
transaction to 
affect
 the median, it must have a large volume attached to it, while the 
mean can be moved by an invalid transaction that has a more typical volume and rate.  

The s
taff believes this characteris
tic of the median would enhance both the integrity 
of the effective federal funds rate as a reference rate as well its credibility as a 

monetary policy instrument. 
 We look forward to your views on this subject, and, 
based on your feedback, the 
staff may p
resent a plan to move forward at the June 
meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  T
hat concludes our remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Are there questions or comments
, particularly in 
response to Simon™s request for comments on the federal funds rate?  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I found 
that 
the staff memo and also the 
memo to Reserve Bank r
esearch 
directors
 made a pretty good case, 
to my min
d, for using the 
volume-weighted median.  I
t™s a better measure of financial conditions for all the reasons that 
you went through, Simon.  
In addition, it™s more difficult to manipulate. 
What 
I mean 
is, in 
theory, 
any trade moves a mean, whereas to move the median
, it either needs to be 
fu
rther 
away 
or bigger.  Anyway, I think it is a good case, and I guess I have two questions 
relating to 
when 
we do ﬁ
socialize
ﬂ this to the public, 
which we may not have the answers 
to today.  One is, 
will a 
median versus a mean have a differential effect on existing contracts
, of which there are many 
trillions?
  Two is, I™d be interested to hear how market participants react to this mean
Œmedian 
thing. 
I think that the potential cost that™s laid out in 
the memo is that of successfully 
communicating 
it to the public.  I don™t really see that as an insurmountable concern.  I mean, 
                       
       
   
  
    
    
                 
  
      very few people even know what the 
effective 
federal funds rate is in the first place, and the kind 
of people who know that ar
e probably able to tell the difference between a 
volume-weighted 
mean and a median if they want to and need to.  I don™t see that as a big thing, but I would 
certainly be sensitive to the views of market participants on that. 
MR. POTTER. 
In terms of the c
ontracts that are written on the 
effective 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate, if we were to pursue this, there would be a long lead time 
during which 
the market 

participants would know that the change is coming.  We would have to weigh the effect that that 

would have, an
d it would have some effect because the median is not always equal to the mean, 

but many of these contracts average over a long period of time.  
So occasions on particular days 
when 
we do see differences 
are
 probably not going to have a large 
effect
 on tho
se contracts. 
What they will be perhaps more interested in is the level of rates that you™ll be setting in 
the future.  If you think about a contract in 2016, that™s going to be very heavily influenced by 

where they think you™ll be setting the target rate. 
The
 kinds of issues to do with the gap between 
the mean and the median are very second-order, compared 
with
 that.  They also have to think of 
things 
like
, ﬁWhere would the 
effective 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate
 be trading in the range?,ﬂ and so on.  
I don™t believe this change is anything 
of 
first
-order importance for 
a contract, and it™s pretty 
typical for the uncertainty that market participants face overall in terms of trading in the fed
eral 
funds market
, which 
we know some large participants have 
left
 and s
ome other participants 
could leave in the future, 
affecting where the federal
 funds 
rate 
trades 
in the range. 
On the market participants™ knowledge of this, I agree that many people probably don™t 
know that much about the detailed calculation of 
the effective 
federal funds rate.  Those who do 
would find it pretty understandable, I believe, that we switch from a volume-weighted mean to a 

volume-weighted median, partly because one of the things that we do know is 
that 
the mean is 
       
                                    
        quite heavily influ
enced by a small transaction at a rate 
that 
is far away from where most of the 
volume is. 
MR. POWELL.  That™s helpful. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I
n the 
LIBOR 
case, the issue about really 
small changes in LIBOR from what was perceived to be a correct LIBOR pricing was considered 

a big issue. 
Here you™ve got a picture of 
a 20 or 40 basis point difference.  I
t gives me a little bit 
of pause that the people 
who
 are contracting on this might be upset by this change. 
MR. POTTER. 
In the crisis period, particularly as the balance sheet got larger, we didn™t 
have that much control over the fed
eral
 funds 
rate
, and that was an event that really was 
exogenous to the calculation method.  Whichever calculation method we would have used, there 

would have been more variance at that time.  If
, arbitrarily
, the Federal Reserve
 had turned up on 
one day and sa
id, ﬁWe are going to change that calculation method,ﬂ without any kind 
of 
forewarning, that would make payments flow differentially to what people expected.  The plan 

here is
, if there is support f
or moving forward 
with
 this, 
it will be clearly communicated well in 
advance, and it will be the type of consideration that all market participants should have to take 

into account when pricing contracts. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments?  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL. 
Well,
 I have a question now.  This 
refers 
to the expectations about the 
size of the 
ON RRP facility 
post-
liftoff. 
This is anecdotal, but it sounds like there™s a systematic 
difference between 
buy-side 
participants
, who tend to be predicting a larger facility, and primary 
                      
        
      
    
     
   dealers
, who are predicting something more in line with what the Committee has been thinking 
of saying.  
Is that accurate? 
MS. LOGAN. We do see some distinction between the two.  The median for the dealers 
is 
$190 billion at liftoff for demand.  For the buy side, 
it is 
$350 billion.  T
here is some variation, 
but there is variation within the dealer estimates as well.
  But I think you are correct that the buy 
side is skewed a bit higher. 
MR. POTTER. 
There is variation within the same 
firm
. MR. POWELL.  Are we incl
ined to attribute more or less weight to the buy side? 
MS. LOGAN.  I don™t think there™s anything in the commentary that would suggest the 
buy side has some better analytics of understanding that from what we™re reading in the 

commentary.  As Simon said, even within firms, we™re hearing the numbers to be quite different.  

In the survey, we did find that some firms had produced written reports that had different 

expectations than 
those 
who
 filled out the survey, 
so I don™t think there™s any additional 
knowledge or analytics that the buy side is drawing upon. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions or comments?  [No response]  Okay.  Then let™s turn 
to swap arrangements.  We have a proposal to renew both the NAFA swap arrangement with 

Canada and Mexico and a proposal to renew the liquidity swap arrangements.  L
et me first ask 
whether there are any questions or comments on these proposals.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d like to respectfully dissent again 
on the 
foreign swap arrangements.  
The 
Richmond 
Reserve Bank has dissented on these swap lines 
going back 20 years on the grounds that they facilitate inappropriate actions by 
the Fed
eral 
Reserve
.  One is sterilized foreign exchange operations, which are inappropriate for reasons I 
       
   
                
                     
   
    
                                                              spoke about in January.  The other is channeling intergovernmental assistance to our 
NAFA 
partners, among others, who may be well deserving of such assistance, but that constitutes fiscal 
policy that™s best left to fiscal authorities
, in our view.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments or questions?  [No response]  Okay.  Hearing 
none, seeing none, we need two separate votes
.  I™d like to first ask
Šand this is an FOMC 
voteŠon the renewal of the NAFA swap arrangements with Canada and Mexico.  All in favor? 

[Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed? 
MR. LACKER.  Opposed. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker is opposed. 
Okay.  I think that passes, and, second, 
I™d like to ask for a vote on the liquidity swap arrangements.  All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes] 

Any opposed? 
MR. LACKER.  Opposed. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Okay.  We need one more vote to ratify 
domestic open 
market operations
. Is there a motion? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Any opposed?
  [No response] 
Okay. 
We will consider those 
approved 
as well
.  Next, I think we™re going to move to our second topic, which is normalization 
procedures, and I™m going to call on Ellen Meade to provide 
a briefing. 
MS. MEADE.
2  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  I will be referring to the handout 
labeled ﬁMaterials for Briefing on Governance Issues Associated with Liftoff.ﬂ  
When you commence the normalization process, the Committee will set the 
stance of policy by announcing the new target range for the federal funds rate.  In 
addition, as you™ve discussed previously, the Committee and Board will set the 

administered rates
Šthe IOER rate will be set to the top of the new target range and 
the ON RRP rate will be set to the bottom of the new target range.  The Federal 

Reserve will also announce the details associated with the capacity of the ON RRP 
2 The 
materials 
used by 
Ms. Meade 
are 
appended 
to this 
transcript 
(appendix 2). 
            
                                      
    
          facility and the discount rate, which will be set at a spread above the top of the federal 

funds rate target range. 
Earlier this month, you received a memo outlining possible arrangements fo
r enhanced reporting of market developments and the governance of decisions on 

operational adjustments to the administered rates around the time of liftoff.  In the 

early days after the liftoff announcement, it may be somewhat difficult to get a clear 

pict
ure of how normalization is proceeding because it may take several days for some 
participants in money markets to adapt to the new market environment.  For example, 

money market participants may need to revise investment guidelines, counterparty 

limits, or other restrictions on their allocation of 
funds 
so that they are able to engage 
in the arbitrage opportun
ities available after liftoff. 
Even if the federal funds rate initially lies below the Committee™s new target 
range, you may judge that the prudent course is to monitor developments while giving 

money markets some time to adjust.  During these early days, you may find it useful 

to 
prearrange
 briefings during which the staff could provide updates on market 
developments and assess the effectiveness of pol
icy implementation, and you could 
ask questions.  For example, you could schedule daily briefings for perhaps the first 

two weeks following the liftoff announcement; such briefings could be held via audio 

or videoconference.  These briefings would not be F
OMC meetings
, so no transcripts 
or minutes would be prepared.  Should you wish to express your views about market 

developments or discuss whether to adjust the target range or the administered rates, 

the briefings could be readily converted into joint meetings of the Committee and 

Board.  If the liftoff process does not proceed as planned and the funds rate is 

persistently outside its new target range, then you would presumably wish to discuss 

the timing and course of possible policy actions, and the scheduled briefings would be 

replaced by joint videoconference meetings. 
As discussed in the memo we sent you, the FOMC and Board may also 
wish
 to 
establish decisionmaking procedures that would govern small operational adjustments 

to the administered rates after the first tw
o weeks or so following the liftoff 
announcement.  Adjustments to these administered rates could be helpful if the 

effective federal funds rate were persistently outside its new target range. The memo 

did not discuss the advantages or disadvantages associ
ated with adjusting the IOER 
and ON RRP rates, either separately or together, relative to the new target range for 

the federal funds rate.  The memo focused on the governance of any such 

adjustments, and we provided two approaches for you to consider. 
Under the first approach, each adjustment would be approved by a vote of the 
Committee or Board.  The Chair could convene a joint FOMC and Board meeting via 

videoconference at which you could discuss potential changes to the administered 

rates; all policymaker
s would be involved in the discussion of changes to the IOER 

and ON RRP rates.  Following that discussion, the FOMC would vote on any change 

to the ON RRP rate, while the Board would approve any change to the IOER rate.  A 

variation on this approach would involve policymakers using SDS to submit 

comments on proposed adjustments to one or both of the administered rates, with 
       
           
      
  
        
   
                      
   
    
          
           
 approvals for changes to the ON RRP rate and/or IOER rate recorded via notation 

votes by the FOMC and Board, respectively.  While this would be operationally less 

burdensome than holding a meeting, and would not require the preparation of 

transcripts and minutes, it would not allow for an interactive discussion and, as a 

result, might be most appropriate for relatively straightforward adj
ustments that the 
Committee had previously discussed. 
Under the second approach, you would delegate to the Chair authority to adjust 
the ON RRP and IOER rates, subject to limitations established by the FOMC and 

Board.  If the first couple of weeks of the normalization process had proceeded 

smoothly and you felt comfortable with the delegation approach, one of the staff 

briefings could be converted to a meeting at which you would formally take the 

decision to delegate authority.  You might prefer this approach to ensure that the 

Federal Reserve is able to respond quickly should market conditions warrant.  This 

delegation would allow the Chair to make small adjustments to the administered rates 

if deemed necessary to keep the federal funds rate trading in its 
new target range.  As 

an example, the memo suggested that the Chair could be authorized to make 

adjustments of perhaps 5 or 10 basis points in the administered rates and 
also 

indicated that policymakers could determine in advance whether they preferred to 

address such a situation by adjusting the IOER rate, the ON RRP rate, or both rates in 

parallel in order to maintain a constant spread between them. There may be some 

communications advantages associated with the delegation scenario in that it would 

clearly separate your decisions on the stance of policy
Šthe target range for the 
federal funds rate established by the FOMC
Šfrom small technical adjustments to the 
administered rates necessary to achieve that policy stance. 
The final page of your handout lists the questions that were distributed with the 
memo for today™s go-round on governance issues.  Another memo that was 

distributed at the same time concerned the setting of the primary credit rate.  The 

lending rate for primary credit was originally set in 20
03 at 100 basis points above the 
Committee™s target for the federal funds rate.  The spread was reduced twice during 

the financial crisis, and has stood 50 basis points above the top of the federal funds 

rate target range since February 2010.  The memo discussed two options for the 

setting of the 
primary credit rate spread:  maintaining that spread at 50 basis points 
above the top of the Committee™s new funds rate target range at the time of liftoff and 

for some period thereafter, or raising the spread to 1
00 basis points at the time of 
liftoff.  During the go-round, you may also wish to share any views you might have 

on that issue.  Thank you; this concludes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Before we turn to questions for Ellen and our go-round, I 
would like to just make a few remarks of my own.  
At the outset, I want to emphasize that 
although our policy tools, by law, have different governance structures, the overall conduct of 

monetary policy is obviously the purview of the FOMC.  The gov
ernance issues before us this 
                           
                   
       morning really don™t concern the determination of our intended stance of monetary policy.  
Rather, this discussion pertains to the narrow issue of how to make tactical adjustments to our 

policy tools to deliver the intended st
ance of policy. 
We have spent a great deal of time and effort in devising our framework for 
normalization, and I am highly confident that it will work. But it is clear that when the time 

comes to raise the federal funds rate, we will face unprecedented un
certainties, and we need to 
stand ready to make adjustments, if needed.  It is important that we agree on an approach for 

managing both the initial phase of liftoff and the process for subsequent adjustments that may 

conceivably be needed once that initial 
phase is complete. 
The staff memo proposed that, 
for the first two weeks or so after liftoff
, we set aside time 
on our calendars to receive frequent market updates and, if necessary, hold meetings to make 

adjustments to our tools through the Committee and Board votes.  During this time, the FOMC 

may need to reconsider the setting of our tools, including the administered rates, parameters of 
the overnight RRP facility, and the use of term tools.  I just want to make clear that
, in my own 
view, decisions during this initial period should not be delegated to me. 
The FOMC and Board should vote on adjustments that are deemed necessary after 
debating the relevant policy considerations and alternative approaches.  For example, if the funds 

rate is trading soft relative to the target range, the Committee should decide whether to raise both 

rates, keeping 
the 
IOER

 RRP 
spread
 constant, or to instead adjust only one of the rates.  
These decisions are not entirely tactical or routine.  My expectation, however, is tha
t after some 
initial period, which the memo is guessing might be two weeks, we will have a reasonably good 

sense 
regarding
 how our approach is working, and only minor adjustments, if any, might be 
subsequently needed to keep the federal funds rate in the t
arget range. 
              
   
         
  
    
         
   
Assuming that our approach works roughly as expected, such intensive monitoring on the 
part of the Committee shouldn™t be necessary beyond this initial phase.  We ought to be able to 
settle into an arrangement in which
, at most
, modest adjustm
ent to our tools, especially to the 
administered rates, will be called for to keep the federal funds rate in the target range.
  I hope 
that such adjustments, if they prove necessary at all, can be made in a simple and efficient 

manner.  From a practical pe
rspective, I tend to favor an approach in which authority is delegated 

to me as 
Chair to make modest adjustments, perhaps up to 5 or 10 basis points, to the IOER and 

overnight RRP rates to help maintain the federal funds rate 
in the Committee™s target range. 
These adjustments would be in accordance with a strategy pertaining, for example, to the spread 

that had been decided by the Committee.  In such circumstances, I would, of course, keep the 

Committee fully apprised of ongoing developments.  If any problems in implementing policy 

emerge
d, clearly we would need to convene a meeting. 
I would expect the Committee to decide on any such delegation only at a time when we 
feel we have a good sense for how our approach is working and n
ot at the time of liftoff. Of 

course, if many of you are not comfortable with such an arrangement, we will have to, as Ellen 

indicated, work out a method for holding Committee and Board votes, likely by notation voting, 

and possibly on short notice, to ma
ke these potential modest adjustments once the first couple of 
weeks after liftoff have passed.
  Regardless of the approach we agree on, it 
will be important that 
it serve
s to reinforce rather than undermine market confidence and our normalization approach.  
Let me stop there.  I very much look forward to hearing your views.  W
e have now scheduled a 
full go-round, soŠ
Vice Chairman
 Dudley. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
So I am going to make a forecast that we are all going to 
agree that
, at least for the first few 
weeks
, we are going to want to have some sort of 
a discussion 
            
        
             
  
        
       if the funds rate is trading outside the target range.
  If we are going to do that, I have a couple of 
questions of the staff.  
At w
hat time of day would it be most appropriate to have those meetings? 
How would it work in terms of having the meeting, making the decision, notifying the marketsŠ 

what would the timeline look like as you are carrying that forward?  Because the memo didn™t 

really get into the mechanics of how you would actually implem
ent this.  I was just curious if 
there is any thought given to that at this point. 
MS. MEADE.  I think that we were trying to be optimistic when writing the memo
.  So we were thinking about the first couple of weeks or so as being briefings and not being about 

decisionmaking. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let™s say they were 
about decisionmaking.  When will 
you know enough in the day to have a meeting, to have decided?  When would you have to 

announce it to the market? 
MR. POTTER. We are still looking at when some of the volume is transacted and also 
scheduling, because not everyone is in the same time zone.  I think 
we believe that 
later in the 
afternoon 
will work
.  And that will give us enough time to then announce to the market that 
evening what the changes would be. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay. 

MR. POTTER.  The other choice is to announce very early in the morning. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I guess I would say that
, if we agree on this, we should 
nail that down pretty soon, because, in principle, this could happen as early as June, and it would 

be helpful if people actually had the time blocked out on their calendar.  I think we need to figure 

out the time slot. 
MR. POTTER.  We are working on it. 
                             
       
               
    
  
      CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions before we begin the round?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Just to clarify your proposed approach, 
any adjustment in the first two weeks of the overnight reverse repo rate would be an FOMC 

meeting. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  I know the memo used two weeks.  I am thinking there is an 
initial period. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Until things settle down, basically. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. When we are figuring things out, and if we have to make 
adjustments, we need to meet, we need to discuss it, and during that phase, until 
we decide 
further things are
Šlet me just call them ﬁroutineﬂ
Šthere would be FOMC votes.  We would 
probably be having videoconference briefings that would be converted to meetings, and both 

groups would be voting. O
nly after whatever that initial period is 
when
 things have settled down 
would we agree 
that 
now we have fallen into a rhythm, and any adjustments, if they are needed 
at all
ŠI mean, I think 
in 
the most likely case, we are not going to need any further 
adjustmentsŠbut if we do, those things 
will be 
routine, and then we are talking about delegating. 
Let™s see.  First, President Lacker, then President Rosengren. 
MR. LACKER. 
In this initial period, would you envision all meetings, or a mix of 
briefings and meetings? 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
My understanding is 
the idea 
is that 
we are going to preschedule 
these times. 
When we start the video meeting, we will have some sense of whether things are 
going smoothly, and we really don™t have decisions to make, in which case the staff could be 

relieved of the burden of doing transcripts and so forth.  I would call that a briefing.  
But clearly, 
if things are not going very smoothly and we need to deliberate, we would convene that as a 
         
           
      
  
                  meeting 
right from the outset
.  And, I suppose, even in the middle, if something bega
n as a 
briefing, and we decided in the middle of that briefing, ﬁLook, we need to discuss something.ﬂ 
Is that fair 
to say? 
MS. MEADE.  Yes. 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
We could then say, ﬁLook, let™s convert this now to a joint Board and 
FOMC meeting.ﬂ 
MR. LACKER. 
Okay.  I ask because it has been a while since this group gathered in a 
briefing format.  I think we did it back during the crisis.  There are some rules about not saying 

something that matters, or has substance, orŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN. Well, we can™t deliberat
e. 
MR. LACKER.  That™s not quiteŠ 

CHAIR YELLEN. We can™t deliberate. 

MS. MEADE.  It is really a distinction, I believe, between asking questions and 
discussing among yourselves. 
MR. LACKER. 
If we have something to say
, like ﬁI think this means we should do 
X,ﬂ then we have to convert it to a meeting to say that? 
MR. 
POTTER
.  Well, you could pose it as a question. 
MR. ROSENGREN
.  Like in 
Jeopardy!
  You have to ask a question.  [Laughter] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I see Scott 
Alvarez is 
fretting
 back there. 
MR. 
ALVAR
EZ.  A briefing is an interaction with the staff, and you can ask questions, 
and it is for the purpose of disseminating information.  If the Committee wanted to have a 

discussion in which they are deliberating about a decision, that would be a meeting itse
lf. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 
      
          
          
                MR. ALVAREZ
.  We could set it up so that it could start as a briefing and be converted 
into a meeting, if that seemed to be the direction the Committee wanted to go in.  We can, 
as the 
Chair says
ŠI think the thought process is 
that 
we will have a pretty good idea before we set it up 
whether there is going to be a discussion, and we will just start from scratch as a meeting if that
™s the case. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Just a 
follow-
up to 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley™s question.  For how 
many of the short-term credit markets is it important to know about the closing in Europe?  A
s we think about the timing of the meetings, are there a bunch of short-
term instruments 
that
 would 
make it 
relevant to 
act
 in the morning, 
because of when Europe closes? 
MS. LOGAN. 
For the repo markets, most of that is going to be U.S. activity, and that is 
going to be early in the morning.  For unsecured fed
eral
 funds and E
urodollars
, there is going to 
be some very active trading in the ea
rly morning hours from Europe.  We saw this during the 
crisis when there was a lot of volume done early, and then there is some late-
day volume as well 
in the 
United States
.  It is going to be a mix.  We are going to do more analysis on the full pattern 
of volume data in the unsecured markets before we recommend a time of 3:30 or 4:00 or 4:30 in 

the late afternoon.  But you can think of the unsecured markets as having two trading periods, 

and the repo as being mostly very early in the morning. 
MR. ROSENGREN
.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  I was looking for a clarification.  In the context, the memo offers that 
both the 
IOER or ON RRP 
rates might be subject to these technical adjustments if we delegate 
them.  When I go back and look 
at the normalization principles, as they are described, they talk 
        
     
                 
              
          about IOER as being the primary mechanism by which we will move the funds rate into the 
target range. 
Let™s say we delegate on a technical adjustment basis 
the 
ON RRP rate
.  That 
seems to 
take care of itself.  But by delegating some adjustment to 
the 
IOER 
rate
, does that 
signal a change in policy stance in any way?  Or will it be understood that you are trying to move 

the spread in lockstep? 
MR. POTTER.  I have gotten this question quite a few times in public.  I use an idea that 
Jamie came up with, which is 
that 
everything we are doing in terms of the mechanics of lifting 

rates comes from interest on excess reserves.  We are trying to keep the overnight RRP as small 

as possible, and that me
ans it is just trying to get better trading in the arbitrage relationship 
in 
which 
you are getting interest on excess reserves. 
I view it as the primary way we are lifting 
rates.  But it is not really a measure of the stance of policy.  The stance of policy is the federal 

funds target range. 
MS. GEORGE.  Okay.  In the context of these basis points we have talked about, it 
would be understood these are technical moves, and thatŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN.  The Committee has set the target range and decided to make small 
adjustments to keep the funds rate there. 
MS. GEORGE.  All right.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Yes.  This is just a logistical question, Madam Chair.  Do I understand 
correctly that what you anticipate doing is, if we agree with the concept of having these 

prearranged 
briefings, that all of our calendars will need to be kept open for two weeks following 
each of the next I-don™t-know-how-
many FOMC meetings? 
       
     
         
                    
 MS. MEADE.  I think we were thinking initially about the liftoff 
meeting.  Oh, well, yes, 
of course. 
MR. TARULLO.  Unless you know something I don™t know.  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You™d have to prepare for the earliest meeting you might 
liftoff for, right? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I suppose
ŠI mean, people will have some conflicts,
 right? 
MR. TARULLO.  They have major ones. 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
We can™t for the next whatever meetings
ŠI mean, we can try to 
block out 
those times.  But
 some people will have trips presumably that they can™tŠI suppose if 
somebody can™t participateŠ 
MR. TARULL
O.  There are already a number of international meetings that several of us 
on the Board, 
I think
, are going to haveŠand 
Vice Chairman Dudley will have conflicts with as 
well. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s my point.  I™d prefer to get this nailed down 
sooner rather than later, so we can block out the time as efficiently as possible.  That would be 

my preference. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Maybe we can call in
ŠI mean, we normally have videoconferences, 
but conceivably we can 
call. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In the old days, 
we had telephone calls, right? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. 
Maybe we could have some telephone calls that people could 
take fromŠ 
MR. POTTER.  As long as they were secure.  That would be the 
issue. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Well, we need to work this out for sure.  Governor Brainard. 
             
               
             
      
  
  MS. BRAINARD. 
This is just 
from a communications point of view.  Would we 
communicate at the outset that the FOMC is going into the mode of daily briefings with the 
possibility that they could take intermeeting action?  Or would we simpl
y be silent on that until 
such time as we found it necessary to take an action? 
MS. MEADE.  The minutes of this discussion will reflect that you have discussed some 
of these issues. 
MR. POTTER.  I take your question as, 
ﬁLet™s be very careful,
ﬂ and I agree
 we should be 
very, very careful.  Maybe we want to think hard about how this is described, because we don™t 

want everyone thinking every day the FOMC is meeting at 4:00 p.m., and we are waiting for this 

thing to come over the wires 
about what the rates ar
e going to be the next day.  That is probably 
notŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  This is contingen
cy planning. 
MR. POTTER.  Yes.  This is a contingency plan. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
This is contingency planning for something that doesn™t 
work as well as we think i
t is going to work.  I think we want to present it in that manner. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. 
My question 
is in terms of contingenciesŠdo you anticipate that we could 
do this by notation vote?  Possibly, 
if there was a conflict
 and you 
were
 traveling, you missed the 
videoconference and 
maybe a staff member was sitting in
Šthey could give you a quick 
executive summary and then the notation vote could be done by a BlackBerry anywhere, right? 
MR. POTTER. 
Again, we would have to look at the timing exactly and tell you what that 
window is, because the meeting could go quite long.  Then we would still have to put out the 

announcement or switch to 7:00 a.m. in the morning or something. 
         
             
      
  
  
                  
     
  MR. EVANS. 
You anticipate making an adjustment in the middle of the dayŠI mean, 
for the market. 
MR. POTTER.  No, no.  After the meeting, it is probably pretty good practice to 
announce the decision.  I would feel more comfortable announcing quite soon after the 
conclusion of the meeting, rather than waiting, 
but
Š MR. EVANS.  That does put a premium on the turnaround. 

MR. POTTER. 
Šyou could have some time gap there and 
instead 
do it earl
y in the 
morning.  To 
Governor Brainard™s question, there 
are 
a lot of complications
Šif this is the way 
you want to goŠ
that w
e would need to describe to you, so you understood exactly which way 
you wanted to go. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Presumably, Simon, you would want to announce this 
the day before, because the money market trading starts very early they need to have this 

information, so they can digest it. 
MR. POTTER.  We are actively checking so you have the full information to 
make 
that 
choice. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let™s begin the go-
round.  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the first question, m
y answer 
is ﬁY
es.ﬂ It™s as simple as that. 
On the second question, regarding approaches, I actually think you laid 
out 
the approach we should take really well in your comments just a moment ago.  W
e hope we 
won™t need to do any of this, but having a 
serious meeting 
to 
discuss what is causing the 
funds 
rate to 
trad
e outside 
the target range, understanding what the effects of moving the two different 
administered rates would be, and having 
FOMC
/Board of Governors 
decisions seems like the 
right 
approach.  But once things haveŠ
I think ﬁsettled downﬂ is the phrase 
you usedŠ
I think it 
                
          
                  
      
       would be completely appropriate to delegate to you any further tweaks, plus or minus 10 basis 
points, say, to the two administered rates.  I fully support the approach that you laid out today.  
I do view this as representing prudent contingency planning more than something that I would 

expect to happen.  I am still pretty confident that we won™t have problems keeping the fed
eral 

funds rate within the range, but I think it is goo
d planning. 
I do think that one of the issues that came up 
in the questions 
asked 
in the 
past minute or 
two is really important, and that is about the communication
s in connection with 
this.  
One of the 
Committee™s long
-standing principles is that, to th
e extent possible, policy decisions regarding 
monetary policy really should be separated from technical issues associated with the 

implementation of policy.  
I™m thinking back to the good old days when the Desk had wide 
latitude to adjust the amount of 
reserves in the 
System
 in order to achieve the 
target fed
eral
 funds 
rate.  I think it would be very useful, if we canŠand this is going to be 
the 
challengeŠ
frame 
the 
communications regarding 
these adjustments t
o the administered rates so 
that 
we indicate t
hat 
these are just mostly technical decisions reflecting, of course, the decisions of the FOMC and the 

Board of Governors on the policy decisions, but really communicated as technical means to 

achieve the policy goals that we have agreed on.  
We really wan
t to avoid this perception that 
moving around these administered rates reflects some kind of shift in the stance of policy or 

creating some noise 
in connection with
 that.  I think we are doing prudent planning.  It is April 

now.  Thinking through these iss
ues now 
makes a lot of sense. 
Again, I support the approach 
that you laid out.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am in favor of delegating to the C
hair 
certain tactical decisions that en
sure that we attain the policy goals voted on by the FOMC.  This 
             
        
  
      
   
   
  
        
          is consistent with the FOMC setting strategy 
but delegating tactical implementation of monetary 
policy.  However, determining the scope and timing of that delegation should wait until we have 
a better understanding of how the constellation of short-
term interest rates will respond to our 
setting of IOER and overnight RRP 
rates 
at, and immediately following, liftoff.  I am still 
somewhat uncertain about how successfully we will be able to targe
t the federal funds rate and 
other short-
term rates at liftoff.  As a result, I could imagine a wide variety of adjustments that 
may be necessary following liftoff. 
While the federal funds rate and other short-term rates may be comfortably bounded by 
the IOER and overnight RRP 
rates
, I can easily imagine situations 
in which 
that is not the case. I 
can also imagine circumstances in which some market rates do not adjust as expected to changes 

in our policy rates. In addition, it is difficult to predict how variable policy or market rates will 

be at liftoff. 
My preferred approach, 
in light of
 my concerns, would be to have frequent briefings, 
initially following liftoff, 
along 
with the flexibility to turn those 
into 
joint FOMC
Board 
meetings, if necessary.  Once the relationship of the funds rate and other market rates to our 

tools, as well as the variability of those rates, 
is better understood, we could agree on the 
appropriate delegation of tactical decisions to the 
Chair.  
Predetermining 
our arrangements for 
delegation at this time serves little purpose
, if they are quite likely to change after liftoff. I 
recommend being humble about how much we know now about liftoff and plan appropriately to 

have significant consultation and adjustments as we develop a more practical understanding of 

the challenges of lifting interest rates from the zero lower bound. 
Similarly, it is probably premature to determine the normal relationship we expect for the 
primary credit rate.  The current spread of 50 b
asis points above the IOER rate seems an 
           
   
                  
             
  
    
    
     
appropriate spread at liftoff. We can decide to alter the spread once it is clear where the federal 

funds rate and other short-
term rates are likely to trade relative to our policy tools. 
In summary, I suggest a highly flexible policy that is highly consultative.  Once 
relationships are better understood after liftoff, we can discuss delegation of tactical decisions for 

achieving our goals.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank 
you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable with a governance 
approach that involves prescheduled staff briefings for a period 
of time after liftoff and then
, after the initial period when things appear to have settled down, delegating authority to the C
hair 
to ma
ke small technical adjustments to the ON RRP and IOER rates between FOMC meetings. 
These technical adjustments would be for the purpose of keeping the funds rate from moving 

persistently outside the FOMC™s target range.  If the Committee agrees on the del
egation 
governance structure, then this delegation of authority should be communicated at the time of 
liftoff. 
It is important that the Committee be aware of the developments in financial markets and 
the effectiveness of policy implementation after the li
ftoff announcement, and the briefings 
would be very useful in that regard.  Whether two weeks is the appropriate time for the initial 

period isn™t clear to me at this point.  If we opt to prearrange daily briefings for two weeks, we 

might also prearrange a weekly briefing for the remainder of the intermeeting period.  Of course, 

the briefings could be converted to meetings, if necessary. 
I do believe it is important that we demonstrate after liftoff that we have the tools to bring 
the fed
eral 
funds rate int
o our target range.  That may necessitate making modest changes in the 
ON RRP rate or IOER rate in a nimble way.  Delegating the decisions for these technical 

changes to the 
Chair seems appropriate. I believe we should treat the IOER rate and the ON 
      
        
   
    
   
     
         
   
   
                  
RRP r
ate symmetrically with respect to delegation.  That is, if we delegate to the 
Chair, we 
should delegate the authority to make technical changes in both rates. 
Changes that are strategic policy decisions should remain under the purview of the full 
Committee
.  These would include decisions to deploy the auxiliary policy tools, like term 
deposits and term RRPs, as well as making larger changes in the IOER and RRP rates and, of 
course, changes in the federal
 funds rate target.  
Particularly if liftoff doesn™t g
o as planned and 
the funds rate is trading persistently outside its target range, the full Committee needs to be 

responsible for making those hard choices and helping to communicate them to the public.  The 

Chair shouldn™t have to go it alone. 
The Committe
e hasn™t had a full discussion of what constitutes successful liftoff.  This 
will help inform whether a technical adjustment is needed.  Let me offer 
the view 
that liftoff will 
be successful if the federal 
funds rate is within the target range
 on most, but not necessarily all, 
days.  In my view, successful liftoff does not require that the funds rate be at the midpoint of the 
range.  
We plan to operate with a target range of 25 basis points because we don™t expect to have 
precise control over the funds rate.  Under those conditions, I don™t think we should require the 

funds rate to be close to the midpoint of the range. 
Communication of any technical adjustments is an issue.  We have indicated to the public 
that at liftoff we will continue to target a range 
for the funds rate that is 25 basis points wide and 
set the IOER and ON RRP rates at the upper and lower bounds of the funds rate target range, 

respectively. 
If we find that adjustments are necessary to keep the funds rate in the target range, 
we must 
depart from these plans in one way or another.  Presumably, this can better be handled 
if, at the time of liftoff
, we acknowledge to the public that technical adjustments to the two rates 
might be necessary and that
, as we proceed with liftoff and normaliz
ation
, the Board of 
             
       
    
                
     
 Governors and FOMC have delegated authority to the Chair to make those adjustments, and 
also 
that any technical adjustments would not constitute a change in policy.  Thank you, Madam 

Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE
 CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable 
prescheduling the staff briefings during the first few weeks following liftoff.  They can be 

canceled if they are not needed
Šall is working smoothly, for example, and the federal funds rate 
is tr
ading within 
its
 target rangeŠor they could be converted to 
joint 
FOMC
Board 
meetings 
if 
adjustments to the overnight RRP and IOER rates are needed to keep the federal funds rate in its 

target range.  Obviously, we have to retain some flexibility about how 
long this period lasts
, depending on what our experience is. 
Turning to the governance approach beyond this initial period, I very much favor 
distinguishing between changes that are tactical, such as small shifts in the overnight RRP rate 
and the IOER rat
e to achieve the federal funds rate target selected by the Committee 
and changes 
in policy, which 
are 
shifts in the target federal funds rate
Šthis 
goes to President George™s 
question. 
I think there is a long history that tactical changes needed to implement the monetary 
policy stance that has been selected by the Committee can and should be delegated either to the 
Chair or to the Desk.  If you consider how policy was implemented prior to the crisis, the Desk, 

in close consultation with Board staff, decided 
how much 
in reserves to add or drain each day in 
order to keep the federal funds rate close to its target.  For many years, presumably as a 

governance measure, there was also one FOMC member on the call
, essentially to keep an eye 
on the proceedings. 
             
               
  
        
         
          
     The d
ecision on the amount of intervention and the means of intervention was left during 
normal times to the staff, the New York Desk, and the Division of 
Monetary Affairs at the 
Board.  In unusual circumstancesŠfor example, August 2007Š
the staff consulted clos
ely with 
the Chair in making those reserve adjustment decisions.  The issue in my mind is whether 

changes in the overnight RRP and the IOER rates that are small and designed to keep the federal 

funds rate in its target range meet this tactical criteria, an
d I think they do. 
The changes contemplated would be to implement the monetary policy stance that had 
already been mandated by the Committee.  
So t
his argues for delegation.  One could even argue 
for delegation to the Desk and the Division of Monetary Affairs staff, but I don™t see any reason 

to go this far.  I would favor delegating it to the C
hair to make clear that it is receiving the 
attention it deserves by senior policymakers.
  Also, delegation to the Chair might be more 
appropriate in this particular 
case
, because such 
decisions are about the level of interest rates 
offered 
on our facilities rather than
 as in the past, on the amount of reserves we might add or 
drain. 
To implement this after the initial period, I would give the C
hair the discretion to 
move 
the overnight RRP rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points, so a range of 20 basis points, 

and the IOER rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points 
as needed to keep the funds rate 
within its target range.  The adjustments could either be in tandem to maintain a constant spread, 

or the spread could be widened or narrowed subject to those criteria. 
In contrast to the delegation of modest IOER and overnight RRP rate changes to the 
Chair, I think any other changesŠ
such as implementing 
the time depo
sit facilit
y and things like 
that or changing the size of the cap on 
the overnight RRP facility
Šshould be left to the full 
Committee. With respect to the overnight RRP 
cap, this is pretty consequential because it will 
                 
      
     
                 
         
affect
 the composition of money market flows, and also it is unlikely that changes in the 
overnight RRP cap are going to be needed on a day-by-
day basis. 
So having the Committee 
make
 these changes is not going to be particularly arduous
; they
 will probably be made on a 
much more irregular ba
sis, if at all.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Yes, I™m comfortable scheduling a bunch of 
briefings that can be converted at short notice to meetings.  I think that adjustment of the IOER 

or the overnight RRP rates 
in the first few weeks following liftoff should clearly require an 
FOMC meeting. 
I would point out that it took us almost a year to figure out how we wanted to set the 
IOER and the overnight RRP rates relative to the funds rate.  Committee members brought 

different considerations to the tradeoffs involved, and the initial settings involve a co
mpromise 
among different views about those tradeoffs.  New information about performance of thos
e settings after liftoff is likely to inform Committee members™ views about those tradeoffs and 

likely require recalibration of that compromise. 
For me
, it™s hard to imagine a routine adjustment. 
The analogy has been drawn to the 
Desk™s draining and adding reserves through open market operations
. I™d point out that it has 
taken decades for those to become as routine as they 
did.  A
nd at times 
when 
the FOMC has 
changed its operational regime, those things have been tricky at first, 
and the Committee has 

likely
, in many of those instances, been very involved.  I™m thinking about the early 1980s and 
times in the 
1970s, 
when
 the instructions to the D
esk were very different.  
It™s going to take a 
while for changes to the IOER or overnight RRP rates to be seen as routine or technical rather 

than something 
like: 
ﬁAll right, we™ve set up a new regime, w
e™re trying to calibrate the settings 
          
       
  
     
  
                        
   of these things,
ﬂ and
 the Committee needs to be involved.  W
hat I™d advocate is that we 
plan to 
make all the decisions at meetings until the first meeting at which a decision 
that is made 
appears
, in hindsight, 
to have been 
clearly 
routine; from then on we 
can delegate th
e routine of 
changing 
it. I don™t think routine changes are likely
, to my mind.  If you think about it, what™s at stake 
here is the spread
: the 
arbitra
ge margin between the funds market and 
the 
IOER 
rate
.  It seems 
like 20 basis points, 15 basis points, somewhere in there.  That doesn™t seem like something 
that™s likely to fluctuate the way the need for adding or draining reserves fluctuated on a daily 

basis.
  If it fluctuates, that™s big news if it goes to 30 or 40 basis points.  I™d be kind of surprised 
about that, and I think we™d want to get to the bottom of it.  I don™t think we have an 

understanding of those markets in which it looks like, 
yes
, they should routinely fluctuate by 10 
or 20 basis points.  I™d urge us just to plan on making these decisions at meetings.  I™m happy to 

delegate if it comes to pass that these turn out to be routine decisions that the Committee feels 
like 
delegating.  Let™s go and make one of those decisions at a time like that and then delegate 
thereafter. 
I also wanted to talk about the discount rate spread.  The discount rate spread is 50 basis 
points, and it™s irrelevant to monetary policy right now in the sense that it doesn™t limit spikes in 
the federal funds rate when reserve supply is unexpectedly shortened.  It™s not going to be 

relevant to monetary policy implementation in that sense until
Š2020, I think
, is the latest staff 
projection.  I
ts relevance now is basically for small banks that come 
up short on reserves due to 
poor planning or some unforeseeable contingency t
hat they could claim is outside their control 
but probably isn™t.  Now, large banks have 
a ton 
of reserves 
that i
nsulate them against shocks, 
and they don™t come to the window.  Right now, in our current situation of 
large reserve 
             
             
      
     
         
  
     balances, this is basical
ly about giving the incentive to small banks to manage their accounts 
sensibly. 
I think our old normal spread of 100 basis points would provide a more appropriate 
incentive, given the amounts of money involved if you actually do the overnight calculation.  
I think we should move back to 100 when we lift off.  I would favor that.  It was there.  We set 

that in 2002. We did some analysis.  There was some thought given to the tradeoff involved.  I 

think it makes sense. 
It would also signal normalization in a 
way that would be useful.   
When you talk about discount window borrowing, the word ﬁstigmaﬂ inevitably comes 
up, and the idea is advanced that, well, keeping 
the primary credit rate 
low helps reduce stigma.  
That is certainly true in the only model we have of stigma and discount window lending, but the 

survey research we™ve done as part of the a group looking at discount window issuesŠthey did 

some survey work on stigma, and what they found is that it is not a relevant consideration for 

small banks. Small banks don™t feel stigmatized. Maybe they feel stigmatized already, but they 
don™t feel as if stigma inhibits their borrowing from the window.  It™s just a big bank or 
a too-
big-
to-fail 
bank 
kind of issue, and large banks don™t borrow now.  In the 
last 
crisis
, we lowered 
the primary credit rate
 when it looked as if there was a rationale for big banks borrowing at the 
window.  It turned out they were getting all of the money they needed from 
Federal Home Loan 
Banks anyway, s
o it didn™t seem to be particularly relevant to large banks either. I don™t think 
stigma is a reason to keep the discount rate spread at 50 basis point rather than 100.  That™s the 

import of that.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank
 you.  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My reaction to the questions posed is that 
they™re really matters of pragmatism.  I agree that planning for daily briefings with the option of 
                  
          
            
         
  
         
   invoking an FOMC meeting is sensible and 
worka
ble.  I™m certainly fine with that. 
I™m a
lso 
comfortable with the approach that you laid out
, with
 the Committee and Board making the 
decisions 
the first two weeks
, and then after that
, the delegation of small adjustments. 
So I™m comfortable in both 
cases
.  There are some details yet to be worked out, and under certain 
scenarios
, we may have time to work them out.  We could hear a second version of this possibly 
down the road. 
I haven™t given a lot of thought to the discount rate question, but I™m gla
d that President 
Lacker raised it and talked about it a little bit. 
With regard to
 trying to figure out what that 
spread should be, I want to throw out one thought, 
and that is a recollection that during the crisis, 

the Federal Home Loan Banks became a so
rt of surrogate discount window.  And the 
relationship of our setting of the rates to their operations and their settings may be relevant for us 

to consider. Those are my thoughts.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
First Vice President P
richard
. MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m entirely comfortable with the 
approach described by 
the
 staff and yourself to be used for informing the FOMC on the 
effectiveness of policy implementation during the initial period after liftoff.  
I™m al
so entirely 
comfortable with the approach 
described as that
 to be used for delegating authority to the C
hair 
on tactical matters once we have declared victory on a successful liftoff. 
As it concerns the spread between 
the 
IOER 
rate 
and the discount rate, I think it™s 
actually probably best to 
quiesce 
and minimize the variability at
, and immediately after
, liftoff. 
My preference would be to stay with the 50 basis point spread until we have some separation of 

these events.
  I think the number of moving parts 
at the 
time of liftoff could work against us, 
            
   
      
           
          
       
        especially as we try to understand all of the different things that could be happening, and one 
more change, I think, that isn™t 
necessary might best be saved for later. 
I will add to the earlier discussion on 
the median and midpointŠ
a behavioral issue that I 
would just like 
the staff to consider to the extent that we talk about changing the definition of the 
fed
eral
 funds rate.  I don™t know what the behavioral reaction to that would be
.  It seems like 
when we 
whisper
, people think we shout.  I just don™t know whether people would make more of 
that than is needed, again, at the time of liftoff.  I understand we™re not contemplating the 

definitional change then, but even announcing the plan of a change could have a behavioral 

effect.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  F
irst
, with respect to the meetings and 
briefings, I guess I™m having trouble seeing what the utility of daily briefings for a couple of 

weeks would be in the circumstance 
that 
we think is likely to obtain, which is that 
there™s a 
reasonably successful liftoff. 
It seems to me more likely that 
we would want a briefing or a 
meeting on the Friday following liftoff.  T
hereafter
, I™m just not sure how much there will be to 
say unless things are going wrong, in which case, as everybody says, we™re going to actually 

need meetings and not just briefings.  
But I just note that in passing.  I know this Committee can 

fill up virtually any
 meeting that is set with questions and conversation, but I™m just not sure how 
much there will be to say other than getting emails from Simon and Lorie telling us what has 

happened on day three. 
With respect to governance, like everybody, I think, who™s spoken on this point, I favor 
giving discretion to the Chair, but actually I think I would go further than the staff though.  

Indeed, I™m going to disagree with the Chair in the interest of giving her more discretion than she 
         
   
     
                     
      
     
          
  asked for.  I guess I don™t quite understand why we wouldn™t give her discretion for this kind of 
modest change in the IOER 
rate 
or the 
ON RRP 
rate
 or both, even in the immediate post-
liftoff 
period.  It is new, but we have spent most of the p
ast year talking about how important it is to 
have a smooth and credible liftoff.  And, notwithstanding my substantial uneasiness with the 

potential medium-
term effects of a large ON
 RRP facility, I™ve joined the consensus that our 
dominant goal should be that smooth and credible liftoff, and presumably that smoothness and 

credibility are going to be most importa
nt in the immediate post
-liftoff period, which is to say the 
first couple of days.  I
t seems to me that if we regard the adjustments as 
fine
-tuning 
in pursuit of 
a particular federal funds target rate range, it would be useful to give her the discretion in that 

first couple of days to make such adjustments in an effort to get, as Loretta says, to at least the 

bottom of that range. 
If there™s a major pro
blem with liftoff, we™re going to need another full FOMC meeting.  
But suppose, for example, there™s a little bit of softness in the floor on the first day or two after 
the announced liftoff, and that softness might be firmed by a modest adjustment in the 
IOER 
rate. 
A quick action of that sort might actually buttress the credibility of our tools and intentions 
right from the outset and thereby make the whole process smoother.  
I don™t think
, in any case, 
it represents a policy change, 
because we can talk a
bout it beforehand.  Now, it™s possible that 
markets might read such a quick adjustment as indicating that we lack confidence in the efficacy 
of the decision we had just made a day or two before.  But that™s a judgment that the Chair could 

make in consultation with those best able to discern what market sentiment and intentions may 

be. 
Just by indicating that nimbleness is a 
desideratum
, I think I™ve already explained 
why an 
FOMC decisionmaking process 
won™t 
do the trick.  I just think the logic of what we™re talking 
            
    
    
                 
           
              
     
     about here argues for giving the C
hair this kind of very limited discretion to adjust those two 
rates that we™ve been talking about and 
we will set at the time of liftoff in the period 
in which 
they might be most efficacious in changing or shaping perceptions of how this whole process is 
going to go. 
As to communication, it does seem to me proper to indicate in advance that small, 
operational adjustments might be made in the IOER and ON 
RRP rates between meetings. 
Characterizing those as op
erational adjustments beforehand and contemplating them
, I think
, helps reinforce the sense 
that 
these are technical changes rather than policy changes. 
The 
suggestion that any actual changes be noted by the D
esk, as opposed to 
the Chair or 
the 
Committee 
as a whole, also seems to me a good idea since it would reinforce the fact that these 
rates are more or less operational changes rather than policy changes. 
On the primary credit rate spread, I thought 
President Lacker
™s comments were very 
interesting.  No
twithstanding the fact that they are interesting and we should think about them, 
particularly this difference between 
small
 and large bank stigma when we do discuss this, I 
personally would prefer to wait until the staff thinking about stigma effects and perhaps other 
elements of the discount window are done and maybe a more fulsome memo 
has been 
produced 
and circulated so 
that 
we can have a discussion of that.  It seems to me we™ve got plenty on our 

plate right now, and we might usefully put that conversation off just a bit. 
I want to end by saying I hadn™t thought about it this way, but I fully endorse what 
Loretta said about the criteria for success in how we regard the meeting of the target range post
-liftoff, and I think if we all subscribe to that, it 
would be useful for us, through appropriate 

mechanisms
, to get that expectation out as well so that we™re being evaluated by commentators 
and markets in a manner consistent with what our actual intentions and aims are.
  Like 
President 
      
                    
       
  
      
          
       
    Mester
, again, this is another reason why I think 
these little adjustments even right after liftoff 
are fine for the 
Chair to make
.  And, 
like 
President Mester
, I think using any of the other tools is 
something that should involve the entire Committee.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Did I see a two
-hander?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Like Governor Tarullo, I came to the 
meeting prepared to support delegation in the first two weeks.  I interpreted your earlier 
suggestion as, 
one, respect for governance in a critical period and, 
two
, maybe a desire to have 
more of a group decision than an individual decision.  Could you maybe speak more for another 

moment or two on what your thinking is regarding that? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I feel 
that 
in the days after liftoff, if things are not going exactly as 
we intend, and the funds rate is drifting outside the range, I do really think it™s appropriate for the 

entire Committee to meet, discuss what is happening, try to get 
to the bottom of what the 
problem is, and decide on what the approach is. 
Now, we 
could make the decision 
that
 this is no big deal, the funds rate 
is just fluctuating 
around relative to the target range 
by 
more than we had anticipated and this is the ﬁnew normal.ﬂ 
If we 
want
ed 
to address it 
not by moving the band or changing the spread, but by moving one or 
more rates around to deal with this when we see persistent movements outside the range, and 

early on the Committee says, ﬁLet™s just do this. It™s not that big 
of 
a deal
.  That™s the way to 
address this
ﬂŠand at that point you regard those adjustments as essentially routine, and 
it™s early
, and then you want to delegate it along the lines of what Governor Tarullo said, 
I am 
perfectly comfortable with that, and
, of course, 
that makes life easier.  But I think the Committee 
needs to feel comfortable that we have established procedures that have been determined by the 

Committee that we think are workable and appropriate. First Vice President Holcomb. 
             
        
       
                
MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the staff briefings issue, I say by all 
means they should be useful and perhaps important.  If it should turn out that between the 
regularly scheduled FOMC meetings the funds rate begins to trade frequently below the 

overnight reverse repo r
ate for a reasonably sized ON RRP facility, I support the 
Chair having 
limited discretionary authority to restore 
funds rate control by raising both the IOER and the ON 
RRP rates while maintaining the spread between the two rates.  I agree with Governor Ta
rullo 
that this could be within the first days as well. 
That these rate changes are not to be subject to a 
vote would signal that they are technical adjustments designed simply to implement previously-

agreed
-upon policy.  The main focus would stay on the 
target band for the federal funds rate set 
by the FOMC. 
The simplicity of a system in which the IOER and the ON RRP rates are set equal to the 
top and bottom of the target funds rate band, respectively, is appealing and easily communicated.  

Deviations from that simple system should be temporary with 
reserve
-draining tools
, like term 
deposits and term RRPs, being brought to bear 
whe
n systematically greater interest rate control 
is required. 
I understand that we are entering uncharted territory and may need to act nimbly.  
Therefore, a good solution is for the FOMC and the Board to give the C
hair discretionary 
authority to adjust the IOER
ŒON RRP band relative to the funds rate target range between 
meetings while maintaining the width of the band at 25 basis points.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The staff has laid out a perfectly reasonable 
plan for prescheduled briefings during 
the first two weeks after liftoff.  I expect the process will 

go smoothly and these will end up like routine morning calls.  
If problems arise, I am 
                             
      
          
   
              comfortable with turning the briefings into formal teleconference meetings to handle any policy 
decisions we may have to make. 
After the initial burn
-in period
Šperhaps two weeksŠI also favor the Board and the 
Committee delegating a
uthority to the 
Chair to adjust the IOER and ON RRP rates by up to 5 to 
10 basis points, if necessary, to keep the funds rate within the target range.  I am comfortable 

delegating this authority as early as you™d like.  Even at the outset would be all righ
t with me. 
Basically, these are efficient ways to tweak the dials as necessary, and I see a communications 
advantage to this approach, 
as it reduces the odds of small technical adjustments to 
the 
IOER or 
the ON RRP 
rates being misread as changes in the st
ance of policy.  I completely trust that if any 
major issues arise
, the Chair will not hesitate to bring us in on the decisionmaking process. 
I did have a question.  I can™t remember if this was in the documents or other people have 
mentioned this, but at the time of the first liftoff, would we be comfortable preannouncing that 

we have no intention of adjusting the stance of monetary policy before the next policy meeting 
so that any intermeeting adjustments would be seen as nimble adjustments, just technica
lly to get 
the funds rate in the range? I mean, I can™t imagine that we would really think that we are going 
to have to have a policy tightening in between the first and the second meeting.  But it would be 

unusual, I understand that. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Certainly
, we should make clear that we have an intended target 
range that reflects policy and stand prepared to make adjustments in the administered rates
, and 

that we 
may need to do that. 
MR. EVANS. 
You can say that in your press conference rather than 
it finding its way 
into the statement. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
           
   
              
    
                   
     
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m not entirely comfortable 
with the 
pre
-commitment
 approach that President Evans outlined.  As the Vice Ch
air
man
 talked 
about in some of the remarks he made 
publicly in the intermeeting period, we don™t know 
exactly what is going to happen to financial market conditions necessarily at the time of liftoff.  

If we saw a 
very abrupt tightening in broader financial market conditions, there might be a 
reason for the Committee to think about retracing the steps they have taken, even 
within
 the 
intermeeting period.
  I thought it was an interesting idea, but I, myself, wouldn™t be comfortable 
with that.
  Thanks. 
CHAIR 
YELLEN.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would be happy to set my calendar for 
prescheduled staff briefings during the first two weeks to offer some insight, and I would be 

equally happy to remove them [laughter] 
if the staff judg
es that everything is going smoothly and 
there is nothing to report.  I am also comfortable delegating to the Chair a degree of authority to 
make technical adjustments, and I think we will know whether those are technical or more 
substantive as we go along
. On the issue of the 
discount rate spread, my comments here really are along the lines of 
President Lacker™s
ŠI think this issue doesn™t have much effect right now on overall financial 

market conditions.  But we did make changes to the discount rate during 
the crisis to narrow the 
spread and then widened it to its current 50 basis points.  
Smaller banks do regularly use this 

facility, and Boards of D
irectors 
of the 
Federal 
Reserve 
Banks 
are required to make 
recommendations about the rate. 
It seems worthwhi
le to me to clarify how this rate is going to 
work as we contemplate normalization so that we minimize confusion and perhaps even mixed 

signals at the time of liftoff. 
Thank you. 
              
           
       
       
    
       CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank 
you, Madam Chair.  I appreciate the thoughtful 
analysis and the memos that discuss the intermeeting governance of the IOER 
rate
, ON RRP 
rate, and other policy tools during the early weeks of liftoff.  I thought that the approach 

described of scheduling dai
ly staff 
briefings during those first few weeks is prudent and should 
meet our needs initially, given that we could convert them to official meetings as needed. 
One thing I would note is that it might not always be clear what it would mean to ﬁ
settle 
down,ﬂ so if liftoff takes place, say, in mid-
June or mid
-September, things might settle down 
after the passage of 
quarter-end and then you might have this issue of whether that is really 
settling down from the point of view of being able to deal with quarter-e
nd.
  You might want to 
have staff briefings, again, scheduled for the end of the following quarter, which I guess, 
if we 

raised in September, would be at the end of December.  
I think just the passage of time is not 

necessarily going to tell you 
that this 
is going to be working and working fine.  I think that is 
something to keep in mind as we go forward. 
The staff memo noted that there are quorum rules for the Committee.  Those might be 
useful in the context of these staff briefings.  Not everyone needs to be here for every meeting, 

and the Committee still can operate. 
That might come up in this situation.  I didn™t say this at the 
very beginning, but I should say that I am very confident that this is all about contingency 

planning.  
I am confident the too
ls are going to work.  I think these 
meetings 
are going to 
become
 boring very quickly.  It is going to be like the call.  Not to say that™s boring, butŠ 
[laughter]Š
I misspoke.  But it will become routine
, at least
.  T
hat™s our base
line 
scenario, but I 
do think it™s useful to engage in this contingency planning. 
      
                 
   
      
            
              
   
  I think I am going to be in the minority on my next point, which is, can we trans
ition 
to a 
situation 
in which 
we simply delegate so
-called technical decisions to the 
Chair? 
Here I am not 
supportive of that delegation, and my answer there is shaped by three considerations. First, when 
my staff and I thought about the context in which increases in the ON RRP rate would be 

considered, we weren™t sure that those situations would be that technical 
per se 
or tactical.  It 
seemed like those would be situations 
in which the effective fed
eral
 funds rate would be below 
the bottom of the target range, and that seemed likely to occur in conjunction with the cap on the 

ON RRP volume being binding.  Then there would be some interaction, 
at least
, in your 
discussion about raising the ON RRP rate, and also discussion about raising the cap.  Now, the 

cap is a big deal.  We have talked about that at length.  The Committee certainly has strong 

views about that.  I
t just 
immediately seemed to bring substantive issues into play. 
The second con
sideration is that, a
s I listen to people talk about analogies with the past, if 
we were talking about delegating to the staff, I would almost be more comfortable 
with that 
than 
delegating to the C
hair.  
[Laughter] 
I say that because 
I think 
if 
it is routine enough to be 
delegated to staff, we can delegate it to the staff.  This is clearly not routine enough to delegate to 

the 
staff.
  This is about the Committee deciding tha
t a decision
, which is not sufficiently routine 
to delegate to the staff
, is being delegated to the Chair instead.  T
hat is not something I feel as 
comfortable with. 
Third, basically, there is an issue here of precedent.  This is not about this C
hair.  I f
eel 
perfectly comfortable with you, Madam Chair, and your 
discretion in this matter.  But future 
Committees may not have that level of comfort with future 
Chair
s in related situations.
  Getting 
together for meetings is hard and challenging.  It is always easy to delegate, and I think we want 
             
    
    
                      to fight that tendency, especially in view of how easy modern technology makes it to pull 
together a quorum of the Committee for substantive discussion and deliberations. 
For these reasons, Madam Chair, I recommend that 
the Committee not delegate authority 
for intermeeting adjustments to the 
Chair.  Again, this is all about contingency planning, but I 
think the Committee could make contingency plans to vote, as needed, between scheduled 

meetings, be it by telephone, vide
oconference, telepresence, secure lines
Šall of the other 
suggestions that are out there. 
A quick comment on the primary credit spread.  I thought the idea of doing more research 
and work on this was a very interesting one.  At liftoff, especially if we are going to be doing 

liftoff in the near term, 
the JuneŒ
September 
time frame
, I would favor keeping the 50 basis point 
primary credit spread at that time, then continuing 
to do work on the issue before we decide.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President 
Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I just want to mention 
that 
there has been some loose talk about 
comparing the timing of th
ese briefings
 to the morning call, and I am not in favor of tying them 

to the morning call.  Let me be clear on that. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Notice 
when I was faced with that
, I devised a way to end the 
requirement thatŠ 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I call that leadership by
Š CHAIR YELLEN. 
Thank you.  [Laughter] 
MR. EVANS.  So it can be done?  That™s what you™re saying? 

CHAIR YELLEN.  It can be done.  It only took 50 years, butŠ 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It can be done. 
       
    
                
          
  
  
        CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Generally speaking, I™m comfortable with 
the 
prescheduled
 staff meetings.  Based on the discussion here, I™m wondering whether we need 
one every day.  Maybe twice a week
ŠI™m picking up on some of the comments of Governor 
Tarullo.  I™m not sure how much information you™re going to get from Tuesday to Wednesday.  

You could probably review this a couple of times a week. 
Also, picking up a little bit on themes 
Vice Chairman 
Dudley was talking about, could 
you do this with a subcommittee of the FOMC? Do you really have to have the entire 

Committee reviewing what is s
upposed to be a technical issue?  You could bring the whole 
Committee in
, if necessary, but if everything™s going okay, 
it seems that it
 could be done by 
subcommittee.  That™s something to think about. 
On the governance approach, the 
first part 
was
, should 
we have a vote of the FOMC to 
adjust ranges
? I view this as pretty cumbersome for something that™s supposed to be a technical 
issue.  It sounds nontechnical
. It makes it sound like it™s a policy change regardless of what we 
say, and so I see that
 as a difficult way to go. 
Now, for the C
hair™s authority o
f 5 
or 10 basis points, first of all, I think that moving 
these ranges should be subject to a high bar.  That™s one of my main comments.  
You 
really don™t 
want to do this unless you really have to 
because of
 the communications issues that we™re going 
to encounter.  The payoff to doing this is ultimately pretty low.  
For instance
, maybe the 
fed
eral 
funds 
rate is trading a few basis points below the range
, and now you make this move.  Now the 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate 
moves into the bottom part of the range.  So you™ve 
gained a few basis points, 
but at the expense of markets asking, ﬁWhat are you guys doing?  Are you changing policy?ﬂ 
      
             
  
    
         
     
      
  
   
   
                
 Another question I have that has not come up yet is the authority to go 5 to 10 
basis 
points over what time horizon.  Would you be able to go 5 basis points and then the next week 
another 5 
basis points
, and the next week another 5 basis points? 
I don™t think that™s the intent, 
but that™s something you™ve got to think about here.  And if you went the full 10 basis points and 

it didn™t work
, then I guess the whole Committee would have to come in at that point. 
I see a core problem here
, which we™ve talked about before in our discussions.  The 
Committee insists o
n saying that the f
ederal funds rate is the policy rate, but relatively few trades 
are occurring at that particular rate. 
According to the Committee, 
the IOER rate 
is not the policy 
rate, but, on the other hand
, that is the rate that affects the largest banks in the country
, and it 
affects their funding costs.  And, in other contexts, we have said IOER is our workhorse rate. 
And then you™ve got overnight RRP, which we™re also saying is not a policy rate, but 
which 
is for a market that 
has many traders and 
that 
is potentially 
large at the time of liftoff.  So 
we might say that the 
policy rate is the federal funds rate, but what does 
that 
mean to markets? 
It™s really the markets that are saying what the policy rate is, and if they think moving these other 

rates is more importa
nt than where the fed
eral 
fund
s rate is trading, then we
™ve changed 
policy in 
a macroeconomic sense. 
So, I think this is a conflict, but that is part of the situation we™re in
, given the way we™ve 
decided to do this.  I think it does have potential to sound like a policy move to people inside 

financial markets even though we™re saying, well, the federal funds rate range has not changed 

and so we haven™t done anything different.  The bottom line is 
that I am worried about 
communications issues. Because of t
hat, I don™t think you want to do this unless it™s absolutely 
necessary.  You know, overall I would say 5 to 10 basis points 
per inter
meeting period is okay 
             
             
                           
  
 with me.
  I would agree with President Rosengren that 
it might be premature to decide on this 
today.  You could make the delegation decision later around the time of liftoff, 
if necessary. 
Let me finish with one story that 
old-
timers
 here around the Fed
eral Reserve 
will 
remember from the early 1990s.  I am going to mention ﬁHe-Who-Must-Not-Be-N
amed
,ﬂ who 
is 
former Chairman Alan Greenspan.  At the time, 
it was considered that the 
Chair
man
 had 25 basis 
points on the federal funds rate target and that the 
Chair
man
 could make that adjustment during 
an inter
meeting period without consulting the Committee.  And the Chair
man 
at that time made a 
bunch of those moves and then came into the meeting and said, ﬁNow that I™ve made the move, 
now we don™t have to move at the meeting.ﬂ  This was extremely hot and divisive on the 

Committee in the early 1990s.  We don™t want to get into any kind of situation like that, and I 

know that™s not your intention, but it is a bit of a slippery slope:  What™s going to be delegated? 

Who™s agreed to it?  How much have you agreed to?  Under what circumstances? 
It is a very 
tricky issue
, and it has been a situation in the past on this Committee that has been problematic 
from a collegiality perspective. 
I know we™re not really thinking about anything like that, but I think 
it is a bit of a 
slippery slope.  You™ve got this issu
e about what rates really matter versus what rates 
we are 
calling the policy rate, and you™ve got this precedent in the past 
whe
n it didn™t go so well.
  Thank 
you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 
MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Cha
ir.  I™m comfortable with the governance 
approach in the first two weeks of scheduling daily staff briefings, but I assume that we™ll 

quickly work out whether we need them every day and we can probably unschedule a few of 

them within a day or two.  S
o I th
ink there™s some flexibility the
re.                 
          
           
    
   
  With regard to the governance approach for technical adjustments in the IOER or ON 
RRP rate
s, I don™t know about previous Chair
men
.  I™ve only had one Chair in my life on the 
Board, and my experience with th
at Chair is t
hat if there is going to be any question about a need 
for discussion, she will call for it.  I haven™t detected her trying to get around the FOMC or the 
Board, and I think we can rely on that.  So I™d be perfectly willing to give the C
hair 
an 
adjustment up to 10 basis points.  I agree that 
we need to specify that 
the discretion would be 
granted 
between meetings. 
I™m not sure about the wisdom of constraining the gap between the 
ON RRP and IOER 
rates to 25 basis points. We may find reasons 
why
 we need to move one without moving the 
other, and my general approach is, don™t constrain yourself if there™s no need to constrain 

yourself, because the law of unintended consequences is very powerful. 
On the primary credit rate, I agree with those who think we should t
ry to minimize the 
number of adjustments we make at the time of liftoff, and that this issue is sufficiently important 
for banks to which we give a lot more 
attention than their size would imply.  I™m not sure why 
we would want to start by raising the cost of borrowing by 50 basis points for the smaller banks 
who do borrow at that rate, and we™d need to look at what would happen when we raise the rate.  

And so, for both reasons, 
I favor examining that after liftoff. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  T
hank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m very well aligned with the 
Chair™s 
original comments and additional comments and response to Governor Tarullo™s and 
President 
Lockhart™s points, and with many others around the table as 
well. 
As for the briefings, I think it is fine to schedule them, and if we have them I™ll attend 
them, but I think the only case in which we would actually want to have them is if things are 
         
    
      
              
                 
    
    really not going well.  A
nd I don™t expect that that is likely at
 all in a world in which 
we have 
taken the cap off the overnight RRP or, for that matter, put a very high cap on. 
As far as delegation is concerned, if 
the test is adjustments that are 
routine or 
technical 
in nature
, I completely trust the 
Chair™s instincts on that. I will say that 
if what we™re dealing with 
is a very difficult and failed liftoff situation, I don™t think
, in real time
, that™s going to feel either 
routine or technical.  I think it™s going to feel like something that all of us ought to be involved in 
and accountable for.  I also would not constrain ourselves by holding this space between the 

IOER and 
the 
ON RRP rates
 at 25 basis points.  It might make sense to do something different, 
again, in real time. 
So, for all of that
, I think it™s essentially impossible to anticipate all of these 
things, and I would just say 
that 
I will do what is reasonable at the time. 
In terms of the primary credit facility, it is 
an interesting subject on which 
we can have a 
lot of debate.  I would
n™t touch it until well after liftoff. 
In my view, it™s just not a complication 
that we
, in my view
, need to be taking on right now.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 

MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
the proposal. I think it™s very 
important for us as Committee members to take responsibility for actively being engaged in 

assessing the effectiveness of monetary control and the relative roles of the IOER and the ON 

RRP rates 
in maintaining the federal 
funds rate in the target range for some initial period.  The 
length of that period, I think, should be determined by events.  My guess is 
that 
if the decision to 
lift off is made coincident with a meeting with 
a press conference, as seems very likely, I wo
uld 
expect that period of active involvement to span that quarter-end, but beyond that, 
I think it 
would be unwise to be too prescriptive at this point. 
         
   
  
             
                 
  
    
   
  
  
       
                                                         
  
 When market functioning has settled down, it will be appropriate to delegate to the C
hair 
the authority 
to make the necessary changes to the levels of the IOER and the ON 
RRP 
rates
, or possibly to the spread between them, 
in order to maintain effective monetary control.  I think the 
Committee can make that decision once it judges that the frequent briefings
 and meetings no 

long serve 
the
ir purpose, along with the parameters of the delegation.  
It™s very important that we 
carefully manage communications 
regarding the heightened vigilance and possible activity of the 

Committee and the Board during those initial weeks so that 
our 
communications bolster 
confidence in the normalization process and contribute to smooth market functioning. 
With regard to the appropriate level of the primary credit spread, I would be open to a 
recommendation from the 
staff as to retu
rning it to 
pre-
crisis levels
.  But like many others around 
the table, I would want to put some distance between the timing of liftoff and the 
timing of 
possibly changing that spread so as not to further complicate our 
already challenging 
communications around the time of liftoff.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
I think this has been a very useful discussion.  Let me 
say the Board meeting is now adjourned.  We™re ready to go on to item 3, and I suggest 
we have 
the economic briefings and then 
we™ll 
take a coffee break before going into our round.  L
et me 
turn things over to Bill Wascher
. MR. WASCHER.
3  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll be referring to the top exhibit 
on your pile, which is labeled ﬁMaterial for the U.S. Outlook.ﬂ  The data on spending, 
production, and hiring that we received since the March Tealbook were all weaker 

than we expected.  On the spending side, the February PCE data and March retail 

sales report led us to make a sizable reduction in our estimate of first
-quarter real 
PCE growth.  This downward revision to consumer spending accounts for much of 

the downward revision to first-quarter real GDP growth shown in panel 1 of your 

forecast summary exhibit.  In addition, a number of other categories of spendingŠ 

particularly business investment and residential construction
Šhave also surprised us 
to the downside in recent months, as have the incoming data on factory output.  I 

would note that after the April Tealbook was closed, 
we received the advance report 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
         
        
     
     
   
              
   
  
                
          on capital goods orders and shipments for March, which was also weak but broadly in 

line with our expectations. 
One of the crucial questions that we faced
Šand that you face as well
Šwas how 
to interpret this batch of disappointing news, and wheth
er, in particular, it is best seen 

as just another 
hicc
up in a recovery that fundamentally remains on track toward 
achievement of your policy objectives, or the leading edge of a more serious 

slackening in the pace of recovery.  For the most part, we have 
leaned toward the 
former interpretation.  Accordingly, our projection calls for near-
term real GDP 
growth to return to a pace that is not too different from our March forecast.  In 

particular, although it is difficult to quantify their influence precisely, 
we believe that 
several transitory special factors
Šincluding unusually severe winter weather and 

production disruptions related to labor disputes at West Coast portsŠ
were a small 

drag on first-quarter real activity.  In addition, we think that measured fi
rst
-quarter 
GDP growth will be held down a bit by seasonal adjustment issues that affected 

estimates of state and local construction spending and by a distortion in the BEA™s 

translation of retail sales to PCE associated with the steep decline in gasoline prices 

and the increased share of gasoline sales at large retail establishments such as Wal
-Mart.  We do not judge any of these factors to be exerting a large influence on their 

own, but as a group, our 
back
-of-the-envelope calculations 
put the effect at a
bout ¾ percentage point. 
That said, we have not completely discounted the weaker-
than
-expected incoming 
data.  Specifically, we trimmed our estimate of consumption growth in the second 

quarter a bit as a result of the weaker
-than-
expected March retail sale
s report, and we 
made a noticeable downward revision to our projection 
of 
near
-term residential 
construction activity in response to the lack of a significant pickup in starts and 
permits in March.  We also lowered our forecast for nonresidential structures 
spending, as the latest data on drilling activity suggest that the recent drop in oil 

prices is having a larger effect on drilling and mining investment than we had 

previously anticipated.  Because we believe that the fundamentals underpinning 

household spending remain solid, we continue to expect that real GDP will rise at a 

pace that exceeds our estimate of potential output growth over the remainder of the 

year.  Even so, the 
level 
of real output at the end of this year is almost ½ 
percent 
lower than in our March forecast. 
As a way of providing another perspective on the near-term outlook, panel 2 
presents the results from the Board staff™s dynamic factor model.  This model uses the 

information from a large number of activity and price indi
cators to generate forecasts 

of near-term real GDP growth, and it was among the specifications we showed you in 

the April Tealbook box on nowcasting models.  As you can see, using the data that 

we had available when the April Tealbook was closed, the model 
also predicts a very 
low GDP growth figure for the first quarter followed by a modest pickup in the 

current quarter.  Of course, the model does not know about any of the special factors 

that we think will unwind and provide an additional boost to growth this quarter.  And 

I would note that the range of predictions for first-quarter growth coming from the 
                  
      
              
              
           
         various nowcasting efforts across the System is quite wide, underscoring the 

uncertainty surrounding the interpretation of the pace of activity last quart
er. 
To wrap up the discussion of the near-term spending data, I would remind you 
that we will receive the BEA™s advance estimate of first
-quarter real GDP tomorrow 
morning.  Given how low our current point estimate isŠ
and in light of the relatively 

large degree of uncertainty that surrounds these estimates
, even on the eve of a 

release
Šit would not be especially surprising from a statistical point of view if we 

were to see either a small decline tomorrow or a noticeably stronger increase than we 

have pencil
ed in.  And, of course, the BEA™s initial estimate is itself subject to 
substantial revision over time. 
Moving to the middle panels, the labor market has continued to improve, but here, 
too, the data point to somewhat less momentum than we had anticipated in our 

previous forecast.  In the establishment survey, March total nonfarm payroll 

employment growth was considerably weaker than the very strong pace that we had 

expected
.  I
ncorporating revisions to previous months, the average monthly change in 
payroll employment over the first quarter now stands at about 200,000, which is 

70,000 less than we had written down in the March Tealbook.  The news from the 

household survey also came in a little weaker than we had anticipated:  The 

unemployment rate held steady at 5.5 
percent in March
Šwe had expected it to tick 
down one-
tenth
Šwhile the participation rate, which we had expected to hold steady, 
edged lower. 
To summarize the information from the various pieces of labor market data that 
we have received, panel 3 shows our labor market conditions index, or LMCI.  As 

you can see from the inset box, the LMCI was basically flat last month
.  For the first 
quarter as a wholeŠthe rightmost 
bar in the main chart
Šthe index did increase, but 
at a slower pace than what we have seen in recent quarters.  Just as we did with the 

spending data, we took a modest signal from the incoming labor market news and 

reduced our projected pace of monthly payroll job growth by about 40,000 over the 

current quarter.  We also nudged up our forecast for the unemployment rate in 

coming months. 
Over the remainder of the medium term, our projection 
of 
real GDP growth is 
little revised 
from
 March.  The main conditioning factors that we built into the 
baseline forecast this round
Šparticularly
, the low
er projected path for the exchange 
value of the dollarŠare, on net, expected to be slightly more supportive of real 

activity.  By the end of the medium term, the effects of these changes offset roughly 

half of the downward revisions we put through to the near term, leaving the level of 

real GDP just a little lower relative to our March projection. 
Although it had only a small effect on our projection regarding 
real activity, I 
would point out that we now assume that the federal funds rate will lift off from 
its effective lower bound in September, one quarter later than in our previous forecast.  

Our revised liftoff assumption is broadly consistent with both the ﬁflashﬂ primary 

dealer survey that was taken after the March FOMC meeting and the latest dealer 
        
   
    
  
     
                     
                                      
                                                           
 survey, and 
it is more consistent with the timing suggested by financial markets. In 
addition, as best we can tell, a September liftoff date does not appear to be sharply at 

odds with FOMC participants™ March SEP submissions, in which the median 

participant 
pointed to the third quarter as the most likely quarter for liftoff.  After 
liftoff
Šand consistent with our usual practiceŠthe projected path for the funds rate 
is set by mechanically applying an inertial version of the Taylor (1999) 
policy rule. 
Panel
 4 gives our projected path for the unemployment rate.  With the level of real 
GDP at the end of the medium term only a little lower relative to March
Šand with no 
change to our supply-side assumptions this roundŠthe unemployment rate is 

expected to be 5.1
 percent at the end of 2017.  T
his is 
one-
tenth 
higher than its level 
in the March Tealbook and one-
tenth 
below our estimate of its natural rate.  The slow 
pace of decline in the unemployment rate reflects both the modest pace of GDP 

growth projected over the medium term and our assumption that the strengthening 

labor market will draw more individuals back into the labor force. 
Panels
 5 and 6 summarize the inflation outlook.  The incoming data on price 
inflation have been a touch above our expectations and supp
ort our projection that 
both total and core inflation will step up in the second quarter.  Further out, the 

inflation projection is little revised
.  A
s in previous Tealbooks, we expect 
that 
inflation 
will 
gradually move higher as resource slack diminishes, 
energy prices rise, 
and prices for imported goods turn up again. 
Finally, I wanted to call 
your attention to a change we 
made this round to how we 
characterize forecast uncertainty 
in the Tealbook.
 Specifically, we have revamped 
the methodology that we use to compute confidence intervals 
based on our historical 
projection errors and have also reworked our presentation of these intervals to include 

a comparison with the historical 
range of key forecast variables.  The new intervals 
are typically a little w
ider than the ones we reported previously, and they tend to 
show 
more asymmetry, which is most notice
able in the prediction 
interval 
surrounding the unemployment forecast.  When we 
miss big on unemployment, it 
tends to be because unemployment turns out to have been much higher 
than expected, 
not much lower.  Additional details 
on this new 
methodology were presented in a box 
and associated technical 
appendix in 
the Risks and Uncertainty section of the 
Tealbook and in Jeremy Nalewaik™s pre
-FOMC briefing.  The
se new intervals 
complement our other methodology of using stochastic simulations from the FRB/US 

model to produce confidence intervals around our projection, and we intend to show 

both sets of 
uncertainty measures in future Tealbooks.  I would note 
that 
the 
confidence 
bands shown in my exhibit today continue 
to use the FRB/US 
measures, 
but our intention is 
to eventually extend the new 
methodology to compute confidence 
intervals 
around our quarterly forecasts as well.  Steve will continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.
4  Thank you, Bill.  The harsh weather we endured last winter left 
many potholes in U.S. roads and, as Bill 
Wascher has described, helped create one 
large pothole in U.S. GDP growth.  Interestingly, as shown in panel 1 
of my 
4 The materials used by Mr. Kamin are appended to this transcript (append
ix 4). 
                
    
        
         
          
  
    
                      
    presentation on the international outlook, a pothole also appears in the path of foreign 

growth in the first quarter.  Incoming data have been surprisingly weak in countries as 

diverse as Canada, which shared our harsh winter
; China, which was 
actually 
warmer 
than usual
; and Malaysia, which arguably has no winter at all.  As shown in panel 2, 
the downturn was also evident in global trade, suggesting some underlying malaise 

that was sweeping the globe. 
As indicated by the yellow bars in panels 1 and 2, we faced a very similar p
icture 
exactly a year ago, with U.S. growth, foreign growth, and global trade all turning 

down in the first quarter of 2014.  Accordingly, I went back and looked at my 

remarks for the April 2014 FOMC meeting for lessons that we might apply here.  

First, I 
found that I used the same tired pothole metaphor a year ago.  [Laughter] 
Second, at that time, I also predicted that foreign economic activity would clamber 

out of its pothole and resume moving along the path to recovery, just as Bill 
Wascher 
did for the United States.  Unusually enough, we both turned out to be right, and we 

are making the same call today. 
Certainly, the fundamentals favor a return to solid growth abroad:  Monetary 
policy is generally very accommodative, oil prices remain low, and most c
urrencies 
have weakened considerably against the dollar since last summer.  Moreover, many 

of the factors that pushed down global growth in the first quarter appear to be 

transitory.  Canada™s economy is estimated to have flatlined on account of unusually 

harsh winter weather and a step
-down in oil investment, but with oil prices bottoming 
out, growth should bounce back in the coming quarters.  Mexican output is estimated 

to have decelerated sharply in the first quarter along with U.S. manufacturing, and we 

anticipate that the projected rebound in U.S. activity will boost growth in Mexico as 

well. 
China also accounts for some of the pothole in foreign growth, but its situation is 
more complicated.  As shown in panel 3, GDP growth fell from 7 percent in the 

fourth quarter to only 5.3 percent in the first, well below expectations, as exports and 

industrial production dropped sharply.  It is difficult to parse out how much of the 

first
-quarter shortfall reflects reduced external demand, how much reflects the 
ongoing correction in the property sector, and how much reflects longer-
term 
developments such as the rebalancing of the economy and decline in potential output 

growth.  In any event, the authorities had been easing monetary policy even before 

the weak GDP 
reading
, and they
 have now stepped up this stimulus, including 
reducing the required reserve ratio 100 basis points.  In our projection, the 

combination of heightened policy stimulus and rising external demand pushes growth 

back up to over 7 percent later th
is year before it edges down thereafter. Like the 

booming Chinese stock market, however, this forecast is somewhat speculative, and 

we have revised down our projection a bit in response to the recent weakness. 
Ironically, nearly the only bright spot in the global economy has been the euro 
area, 
for which strengthening industrial production, retail sales, and PMIs point to a 
rise in first
-quarter GDP growth to 1¾ percent (panel 4).  Notably, financial 

conditions are becoming more of a positive for the econo
my, in part reflecting the 
                        
                          
  
  
     
                     ECB™s asset purchase program.  Bank lending standards are loosening, credit to 

nonfinancial corporations is finally picking up 
a bit
, interest rates are extremely low, 
and the real trade
-weighted euro is at its weakest level sinc
e 2001.  Accordingly, we 
see euro
-area growth firming to 2¼ percent in the next few years, provided that 
spillovers from Greece™s crisis remain contained, as we assume in our baseline. 
That, however, is a big ﬁ
if.
ﬂ  The Greek government is struggling in it
s efforts to 
negotiate additional financial assistance from European authorities and the IMF, even 

as it is running arrears to suppliers and raiding the accounts of local governments in 

order to stay afloat.  More than •10 billion in payments on its medium- and long-
term 
debt are coming due in the next four months.  Although the Greeks have reshuffled 

their negotiating team in an apparent effort to ease tensions with their creditors and 

strike a deal, there is still a good chance that the government could miss one or more 

of these payments.  Such an event could trigger a run on Greek banks, and unless the 

ECB stepped up its liquidity support by a substantial margin, the government would 

have to declare a bank holiday and impose capital controls, with a much-heightened 

chance of Greece eventually exiting the euro area altogether. Had such developments 

occurred at the height of the euro crisis in 2012, spillovers to the rest of the euro area 

would have been very destructive.  However, as Simon noted, the regio
n™s financial, 

institutional, and policy framework has strengthened in recent years.  Accordingly, 

we are building into our euro-
area forecast only a small drag 
due to 
spillovers from 
Greece™s intensifying crisis.  Nevertheless, we recognize that, as descr
ibed in the 
Tealbook, far more dire scenarios are possible, not just for the euro area but for the 

global economy more generally. 
While the pace of economic activity abroad remains quite unsettled, two key 
external drivers of U.S. economic prospects have been a bit more quiescent of late. 
First, oil markets have not yielded any big surprises.  To be sure, spot prices, shown 
in panel 5, are up more than $8 per barrel since the time of the March Tealbook, as 

falling rig counts and other signs of declining in
vestment have led markets to expect 
lower U.S. oil production.  However, prices for futures contracts further out on the 

curve are up by less, so that our projected path for Brent prices has been raised just a 

bit and remains well below 
levels prevailing l
ast summer. 
Second, for the first time since last July, the dollar has come down over the 
intermeeting period, as shown in panel 6.  This depreciation likely reflected weak 

data and the fall in expected policy rates here in the United States.  However, I would 

like to remind you that, starting with the March Tealbook, we decided to deviate from 

our standard random-
walk
-oriented model and project
ed a further rise in the dollar
.  That also must have contributed to the dollar™s subsequent decline.  [Laughter] 
In the 
event, from its lower starting point, we assume the broad real dollar will still move up 

some 2
¼ percent between now and the end of the year as the U.S. economy bounces 
back and markets refocus on the policy divergen
ces among major central banks. 
Your next exhibit puts movements in the dollar and their implications for 
economic growth into broader perspective.  As shown by the black solid line in 

panel 1, even at its projected peak early next year, the broad real dollar would be well 
                           
     
                                                                                                
 below its previous two peaks.  The black solid line in panel 2 shows the contribution 

of net exports to real U.S. 
GDP growth
.  We project it at negative ¾ percentage point 
this year and next.  This is the largest drag on growth since the early 2000s, and it 

almost entirely reflects the appreciation of the dollar.  It may seem strange that the 

dollar should depress the net export contribution to such an extent when it remains so 

far below its previous peaks.  However, what matters for the contribution of net 

exports to GDP
 growth is not the level of the dollar but how much it moves, and the 
dollar has appreciated sharply since last summer.  Additionally, the share of trade in 

the U.S. economy has grown over time, amplifying the effects of dollar movements 

on net exports and growth. 
Were the dollar to rise further than we are currently projecting, it would exert 
even stronger effects on the economy.  Returning to panel 1, the dashed line shows 

the 10 percent rise in the dollar described in the ﬁStronger D
ollar
ﬂ scenario in the 
Tealbook.  As shown below, the contribution of net exports to GDP would fall to its 

lowest level since the early 1980s.  Additionally, as indicated in panel 3, core 

inflation would fall below 1 percent on a four-quarter basis before rebounding.  Josh 

wil
l now continue our presentation. 
MR. GALLIN.
5  Thank you.  My material 
is titled ﬁFinancial Stability 
Developments.ﬂ 
My remarks draw on the recent QS financial stability report.  In sum, valuation 
pressures in asset markets have increased since the January assessment and remain 

notable.  In addition, vulnerabilities related to maturity and liquidity transformation 

remain moderate, but leverage in both the financial and the nonfinancial sectors, 

overall, remains relatively low.  Taken together, we think that 
conditions in the 
financial sector are moder
ately prone to amplify shocks. 
I begin with valuations in fixed-income markets.  The yield on the 10-
year 
Treasury noteŠ
the blue line 
in the upper-
left panel
Šand 
term premium measures
Š the red and black lines
Šhav
e remained quite low since the January 
financial 
stability 
briefing.  The possibility that term premiums will move up sharply remains a focus of 

staff analysis
.  I will return to this issue
 near the end of the briefing. 
In corporate bond markets, yield spr
eads to comparable Treasury securities have 
moved down a bit in recent months.  As shown by the red line in the panel to the 

right, the far
-term forward spread for high-yield corporate bondsŠone measure of 
risk premiumsŠ
remains near the middle of its histo
rical range, which suggests that 
valuations are reasonableŠ
relative, that is, to seemingly richly valued Treasury 

securities.  In addition, as shown by the light blue bars in the middle-left panel, 

issuance of high
-yield bonds, a nonprice measure of hot ma
rkets and thus valuation 
pressures, remained robust through the first quarter of the year.  Somewhat in 

contrast, issuance of leveraged loans
Šthe dark blue portion of the barsŠ
has 
declined
, on net, in recent quarters.  Although supervisory analysis of completed 
5 The materials used by Mr. Gallin are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
              
    
       
               
          
      
   
      
   
 deals suggests a modest improvement in underwriting quality, fairly lax nonprice 

terms were reportedly still prevalent in recent deals. 
Moving to the stock market, the expected real return on 
corporate equities
Šthe 
black line in the middle-right panelŠ
has fallen significantly since the 
previous 
stability briefing, as stock prices have advanced and expectations of corporate 

earnings have been revised down
.  The low expected return suggests that valuations 
are quite high.  The equity risk premium, which is the difference between the 

expected return on stocks and the expected real yield on the 10
-year Treasury note, 
shown in teal, has also moved down sharply, though it remains closer to the middle 
of 
its 30
-year range.  Our overall assessment is that equity valuations are somewhat 
more stretched now than they were just a few months ago. 
A variety of changes in the structure of fixed-income markets may add to the 
volatility of interest rates, and, perhaps, to the volatility of volatility.  FirstŠand I™m 

not referring to any panel quite yetŠ
increased electronification of the Treasury 
market could contribute to occasional and surprising spikes in volatility, such as that 

which occurred on October 15 of last year.  In addition, the continued decline in 

intermediation by dealersŠas illustrated by gross and net dealer borrowing, shown in 

the lower-left panelŠis consistent with anecdotes that new regulations have made 

dealers less willing to provide market
making liquidity, even in normal times.  A bond 

market selloff could also be temporarily amplified if investors in bond mutual funds 

rush for the exits, forcing funds to sell into an illiquid market.  The rapid growth in 

assets under management at such fun
dsŠshown in the lower-right panelŠincluding 
funds that hold less-
liquid assets, suggests that the scope for such an amplification has 
increased in recent years. 
The first panel of the next exhibit shows an estimate of the level of ﬁrunnableﬂ 
private money-
like instruments.  This measure of maturity and liquidity 
transformation includes cross
-holdings of money 
market instruments, such as when a 
money fund holds repo.  It is therefore an indicator of the vulnerability of the 

financial system through intermedi
ation chains that rely
Šat one link or more
Šon short-term funding.  The level of these runnables has been fairly stable at a relatively 

high level during the past two years, as growth in uninsured depositsŠ
the light blue 
regionŠ
has offset a decline in repo
Šin red
Šwhich suggests that the financial 
system remains moderately vulnerable to runs. 
A fairly bright
Šor should I say, 
green
Šspot on the financial-
stability map is 
leverage in the banking system.  As can be seen in the upper-
right panel, capital 
cushions at bank holding companies, as measured by both the Tier 1 common equity 

ratio
Šin blackŠ
and the leverage ratio
Šin red
Šhave increased notably.  This 
reflects both Basel III requirements and the resilience required in annual stress tests. 

As you know, no CCA
R bank fell below the stress test™s quantitative benchmarks in 
the most recent round, although three firms had to adjust their 
planned capital 
distributions. 
                  
    
    
      
        
    
                        
    As far as we can tell
Šwhich
, admittedly
, is not very farŠ
leverage in the 
nonbank financial sector continues to be a vulnerability.  As summarized in the 

middle-left panel, overall margin credit has moved down in recent months but 

remains quite elevated, and hedge funds appear to be using a fairly large amount of 

portfolio margining from prime brokerages to lever up in equity markets.  In addition, 

responses to the March SCOOS provided some evidence that counterparties have 

been demanding more leverage to fund non-agency RMBS, high-yield corporate 

bonds, and securitized CRE loans.  Unfortunately, leverage embedded in derivatives 

is hard to measure, so it remains difficult to assess the overall leverage of hedge 

funds, mutual funds, and other investment vehicles. 
Moving to the private nonfinancial sector, the middle
-right panel provides the big 
picture for
 households: Modest increases in household debt continue to be driven 

mostly by prime borrowersŠ
the orange line
Šthough debt of subprime borrowersŠ 
the black line
Šticked up in the fourth quarter.  Student loans and subprime auto 
lending have remained rapid 
even as 
delinquencies on these kinds of debt have 

moved up.  Although we do not currently consider student and subprime auto debt to 

be direct vulnerabilities for the financial system, we are alert for potential spillovers 

to other debt markets. 
As can be seen in the lower
-left panel, the debt
-to-assets ratio for all nonfinancial 
corporate businesses
Šthe black line
Šand for high-yield and unrated firmsŠthe red 
line
Šmoved up further in the fourth quarter, which suggests a continued buildup of 
the vu
lnerability of this sector. 
The lower-right panel provides a very brief roundup of the potential shocks to the 
financial system
 that appear most proximate.  A sharp rise in term premiums could 
precipitate a sudden drop in a variety of asset prices, especia
lly for those with 
stretched valuations.  Moreover, for reasons mentioned 
previously
, these shocks 
could be temporarily amplified if liquidity were to deteriorate just when it is needed 

most or if bond mutual funds were to experience large and disruptive outflows.  That 

said, the risk of a sustained amplification is mitigated by the apparently modest 

amount of leverage in the financial system.  We are also attuned to the possibility of 

damaging spillovers from a rate spike here to emerging market economies. 
As we 
concluded in a special memo, although blowback to the U
nited States 
through 
financial connections would likely be limited, a significant EME recession and a 

presumed increase in risk aversion would damage the U.S. 
economy as well. It is 

worth noting also that term premiums could, instead, stay low for longer than 

anticipated.  Such an outcome would be a shock to investors who have positioned 

themselves for rising yields and could also lead to a further buildup of vulnerabilities 

if investors are dr
iven to 
ﬁreach for yield
.ﬂ  Other potential shocks of note that have 
been around for 
a while
 include a disorderly Greek exit from the euro zone, 
significant geopolitical disruptions, or distress 
at a large global financial firm brought 
about by, say, 
legal penalties. 
I will conclude my prepared remarks by noting a few policy initiatives that the 
staff are pursuing related to specific financial vulnerabilities
, which appear at the top 
         
           
                       
      
       
     
    
    
       of the final exhibit.  
With regard to interest 
rate risk, 
the 
staff 
are in
dependently 
measuring the risks at banks and working with those banks to manage their 

exposures.  On market liquidity, the 
staff are undertaking a variety of projects to 
better understand changes in the structure of bond markets, including increased 

electr
onification, and are working with other agencies to prepare a public report on 
the Treasury market.
  Regarding 
asset managers, 
the staff have begun evaluating the 
potential for 
the growth of 
managers™ activities, perhaps through the use of leverage 
and 
liquidity transformation, to contribute meaningfully to systemic risk and 
whether 
reforms are needed. 
Finally, on leveraged loans, supervisors continue their 
monitoring efforts and will begin a more comprehensive Shared National Credit 

review in May.  
Tha
nks.  That concludes my remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.
  Questions for any of our presenters? 
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m look
ing 
at 
exhibit 2, 
ﬁAlternative 
Scenario
:  Stronger D
ollar.
ﬂ  What are the confidence bounds around these dotted lines? 
MR. KAMIN. Well, the simulations come from a DSGE model, but it™s not an estimated 
model.  So we don™t compute those, although I assure you that an estimated version of 
SIGMA 
that would allow us to compute those is on our long-
ter
m work agenda. 
The most tenuous thing is whether or not you will actually get a 10 percent additional rise 
in the dollar
.  As you can tell from the chart, that™s not a common occurrence.  That™s something 
that, broadly speaking, we think 
there 
might be a 1 in 10 chance of for a couple of years.  So that, 
in some sense
, is the most tenuous. 
In terms of thinking about the 
effects
 on net exports and then on U.S. 
real 
GDP, that™s 
actually a little bit more straightforward in the 
sense that the results from SIGM
AŠ
particularly 
for what I™m showing here, which is the 
net export 
contribution
Šare broadly consistent with our 
estimated trade models, and those don™t give you very different results.  So the 
effect 
of a higher 
dollar on exports and on imports is relatively straightforward, and obviously there are errors, but 
they™re probably not subject to huge errors. 
A larger area of uncertainty comes in 
when 
translating the effect of the change in net 
exports into GDP
, because there is some uncertainty there about the m
ultipliers
.  And there™s 
           
                       
   
          also some uncertainty about to what extent you want to build in a monetary policy response and 
what 
impact
 that has.  
So, for
 the net export contribution itself, I would guess that, 
relatively 
speaking, 
is 
not a huge confidence error.  The confidence errors would rise as you then translate 
that through 
to 
real 
GDP growth. 
MR. BULLARD.   Let me follow up with a 
slightly
 different question.  Over the p
ast 
25 years
, firms have become more globalized and 
have learned how to handle 
global currency 
fluctuations.  They adopt hedging strategies, and they put production in various countries and 

switch production in response to currency movements.  In light of those changes, should we be 

estimating effects of real exchange rate movements 
using 
data 
for the 1980s and 1990s? 
MR. KAMIN. Well, that™s an excellent question.  Let™s just say we periodically do revise 
our import equations, and we do look for signs of parameter instability.  So we™re alert to that 

issue, and we haven™t found any s
trong evidence of these changes in coefficients. There are 
other 
factor
s that, of course, are naturally parsed in.  They kind of correlate with what you 
mentioned, which is that, over time, 
the share of trad
e in the U.S. economy has grown, and that is 
ful
ly taken into account in our estimations because our models do incorporate the fact that, 
as the 
dollar changes exports and imports, those have a larger 
effect 
on GDP. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.
  Any other questions?  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you.  I have a question for Bill 
Wascher 
related to the Tealbook 
inflation outlook.  I think in your presentation you mentioned that the inflation outlook is 

trending up 
because
ŠI think you saidŠenergy prices are going to be going up, res
ource slack 
will be diminishing, and maybe imported goods pricesŠ
I can™t recall the entire list. 
Could you 
                
   
   
                       
      refresh my memory on the contribution of changes in longer-
term inflation expectations for 
delivering that increase in inflation? 
MR. WASCHER.  So
, over the medium-
term forecast
, our view is that the underlying 
rate of inflation is 1.8 percent, and that 
serves as an attractor for the inflation rate. 
MR. EVANS.  Inflation expectations, is thatŠ 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  We call it underlying inflation, but in some sense you may think 
of it as inflation expectations over the medium term. 
Over the longer run, 
that drifts up to 
2 percent because the FOMC says the target is 
2 percent, and 
because 
tightness in the labor 
market 
is pushing inflation up.  
So it doe
s serve as an attractor
, as one reason inflation moves 
back up toward 1.8 percent in the medium term and toward 2 percent in the longer run.  
But
, in 
addition, these other factors are important in getting there over the medium term. 
MR. EVANS.  All right. That™s helpful.  That is different 
from 
the way I was 
remembering it.  I thought that underlying inflation was pegged to your assessment of longer-
term inflation expectations
, and that they were still about 
1¾ percent
, but you™ve got aŠ 
MR. WASCHER.  That
™s right. I think that™s right.
  But maybe I™m not quite getting 
your question.  Over the longer run, we have those inflation expectations 
drifting
 up from 1¾ 
percent 
to 2 
percent. 
MR. EVANS.
    Right.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Yes, I want to compliment the staff on the new charts on uncertainty.  I 
think they are very helpful in thinking about the uncertainty 
associated with the forecast. 
Now, 
going on from what President Evans 
was asking
, maybe, the PCE inflation in Tealbook A, page 
69Šif I look at that, it looks, 
from
 the way the errors look on that forecast, 
like 
the staff has been 
                        
             
      
      underestimating PCE inflation.  Should I interpret this as being that we have upside risk to the 
staff™s inflation forecast? 
MR. WASC
HER. 
Which chart are you looking at?  The top one? 
MS. MESTER.  I™m looking at PCE inflation. 

MR. WASCHER.  That™s largely because of the energy price run-up in the mid-2000s.  I 
think we didn™t 
projec
t that, and I think that™s why the solid line, 
the median
, is above the data 
there. 
MS. MESTER.  But even the distribution looks likeŠ 

MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  Again, I think that™s because of the energy price shock.  
This is a 
relatively short sample with which 
we calculate standard errors around for PCE inflatio
n, for two 
reasons.  One is
, we don™t have data going back a long way, and two is, 
we think that this is 
a period over which inflation had different propertiesŠ
it was more stable recently 
than in previous 
periods.  
So, because of that, I think the influence of energy prices is more prominent here than 
it might be in the longer run. 
MR. ENGEN.  If I could add just one thing that amplifies that point, if you look in the 
middle right at core PCE, the median and the 
projected
 paths are virtually on top of each other, 
which is another way of showing that the total is being influenced by the run-up in energy prices 

and how it feeds into total inflation. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERL
AKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to follow up on 
President Evans™
s line of questioning.  During the 
intermeeting
 period, President Rosengren 
suggested the possibility 
of rais
ing 
the inflation target. 
If the FOMC were to introduce a new 
                 
           
       
              
     
  
        infla
tion target that was higher, would that have a higher gravitational pull 
in the staff™s model 
that we™d 
be pull
ed back to that higher target? 
MR. WASCHER.  In terms of modeling and the way we do it in 
the 
FRB
/US model, 
I think the answer 
is 
ﬁyes,ﬂ 
because we do have a small term that reflects the FOMC
™s stated target 
relative to current underlying inflation.  I think it would be gradual, but I think in 
the FRB
/US model, it would be a stronger attractor than a 
2 percent target. 
Also, i
f I used the Taylor ru
le, 
I think it would imply a much easier 
policy as well. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That™s true, 
a different
 reaction function.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Okay.  I suggest we take a break 
for 
15 minutes 
to get some 
coffee. 
When we return, we have a few 
people who would like to comment on financial 
stability
, and 
then we™ll go to the economic round. 
[Coffee break
] CHAIR YELLEN.  We now have an opportunity for people to comment on financial 
stability, and 
three
 people have indicated they would like to.  
President Rosengren, do you want 
to start 
us off? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank yo
u, Madam Chair. When I talk to asset managers in 
Boston, the biggest concern raised is the problem of liquidity in the secondary market 
for 
corporate bonds.  They worry that when we b
egin to raise rates
, a rush to sell positions in 
corporate bonds will occur, and a crowded exit with few buyers could lead to a rapid increase in 

the yield on corporate bonds.  At least some elements of this concern probably deserve greater 

attention. 
Firs
t, the average size of trades in corporate bonds has fallen significantly relative to the 
average size of trades prior to the financial crisis.  This may reflect an actual or perceived 
          
                            
   difficulty in transacting large trades 
due to
 weakened liquidity in the 
market.  This raises the 
concern that if a significant portfolio rebalancing were to occur, it may be difficult to sell large 
positions in a timely manner. 
Second, there has been a significant decline in the corporate bond holdings of broker-
dealers.  Acc
ording to the 
SEC™s FOCUS reports
, while J.P. Morgan held $29.5 billion in 
corporate securities in 2007, those holdings had plummeted to only $11.3 billion by the end of 

2014. Similarly, Credit Suisse held 
$30 billion in corporate securities in 2007, and their holdings 
collapsed to only 
$4.4 billion by the end of 2014.  
Such sizable declines in corporate securities 
holdings among these key liquidity providers lends some credence to the concern about potential 

liquidity problems in this market. 
Third, 
bond mutual funds
Šwhich were shown in the earlier charts on financial 
stability
Šand bond exchange-traded funds have grown significantly since the financial crisis.  
The exchange-traded funds pose a particular problem if investors view them as highly liquid.  
At the end of 2008, assets under management at exchange-traded bond funds totaled $57 billion.  
By the end of February this year, 
assets under management at 
exchange-traded bond funds had 
soared to $320 billion.  I
f investors assume that the corporate b
ond market is liquid and, more 
specifically, that their exchange
-traded fund shares will always be liquid
, and if they choose to 
sell as we tighten
, they may be surprised at the price at which they transact. 
In summary, the concerns with corporate bond market liquidity as we approach liftoff 
bear
 watching.  The degree of movement out of bonds is likely to be highly sensitive to the 
projected pace of tightening as well as 
to the timing of tightening.  An oversized reaction in this 
market could result in a bumpy exit from the zero lower bound.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you
.                   
  
        
     
           
   
          MR. TARULLO.  May I ask Eric a question? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sure. 

MR. TARULLO.  Eric, can you take it a step further and 
say what the implications of 
your concerns 
are 
for policy? Is it for monetary policy?  Are you advocating a relaxation of 
capital requirements? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  No, I am not advocating a relaxation of capital requirements.   

MR. TARULLO.  I didn™t think so. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I think it highlights that how we communicate around the time of 
liftoff actually is critically important for whether people decide that this is something they need 

to doŠ
to rebalance their 
portfolios quite quickly.  
I think the way that fi
nancial stability interacts 
with monetary policy is, 
it highlights 
that the communication issues become pretty important. 
MR. TARULLO.  That™s helpful.  Thanks. 

MR. LACKER.  Also, 
if it happens, we can say we talked about it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  All right.  Pre
sident Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to thank the staff for the 
excellent assessment of financial stability.  It™s my reading 
that 
the assessment again indicates 
that current policy has not produced any material signs 
of 
financial instability.
  Indeed, it appears 
that the main 
financial
-instability consideration for monetary policy at the moment is 
that a 
near
-term increase in the target range for the fed
eral
 funds rate could lead to financial instability.  
As the report says, 
ﬁTerm premiums
 in benchmark U.S. and other advanced economy bond yields 
are again near historical lows reached 
before the taper tantrum, raising the risk of similarly 
outsized market reactions at liftoff.
ﬂ             
                  
                        The s
taff also identified 
a vulnerability that could propagate this shock from the increase 
in rates.  Specifically
, page 4 of the assessment notes that changes in the structure of the 
Treasury market could amplify the effects of an initial rate move and lead to sudden swings in 
prices 
and liquidity. 
Now, how can we best mitigate this risk?  President Rosengren, I think, highlight
ed one way to think about this
, which
 is through communication, but I have a slightly different 
perspective on the answer to this question.  To answer this question, I think we have to 

understand why long
-term rates might rise dramatically in response to a small increase in short
-term rates. And here I believe that a key consideration is the policy signal associated with such a 

move in the near term.  Raising t
he fed
eral 
funds rate in the near term would mean 
they™re 
initiating liftoff when inflation is far below target and the growth outlook has been weakening.  

Liftoff in such an environment would indicate 
that the FOMC is considerably less willing to 
provide accommodation to respond to adverse shocks than financial market participants currently 
anticipate. 
As a result, they would expect less accommodation in general but especially so in bad 
times, and this expectation of higher interest rates and lower bond p
rices in bad times translates 
directly into higher term 
premiums
. Now, 
it™s tempting 
to conclude that we can somehow mitigate this potential financial 
instability only through 
reassuring verbal communication at the time of liftoff, but I think it™s 
difficu
lt for words to trump the communication content of our actions.  
So, in my view, 
we can 
best mitigate this financial stability risk by ensuring that our actions are always clearly connected 

to our pursued, 
declared objectives. 
In the current context, that
 would mean deferring liftoff 
until the economic data clearly indicate that raising interest rates is necessary for the FOMC to 

achieve its declared objectives of 
2 percent inflation and maximum employment over the 
       
  
                
    
       
               
  medium 
term. I™ll sa
y more about what this conclusion means for our policy deliberations 
tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I™m going to pick up on the same topic that President Rosengren 
introduced and President Kocherlakota discussed.  However, I will not be expressing my views 

on monetary policy at this time.  [Laughter] 
I think Governor Tarullo asked a great question:  
What do you do with this information? I™m going to go a slightly different direction based on 

something Josh said, which I found very interesting. 
I was struck by two sentences on page 17 of the QS report.  
The
y are 
right 
after each 
other.  O
ne is
 that large banks™ liquidity ratios continue to improve.  The next sentence is 
basically that there is less liqui
dity in markets.
  These two sentences are 
right next to each other, 
and immediately
, when I read this
, I said, ﬁWhat™s the connection here?  To what extent is the 
liquidity requirements or the capital requirements, for that matter, affecting the willingnes
s of 
broker-
dealers to basically make markets and provide market liquidity, especially in 
a stressed 
environment?ﬂ  But it also led me to what Josh pointed out, which 
is that this 
is apparently a 
longer-
term research project 
about market liquidity and understanding what™s happening there, 
and how much amplification we may see
, whether it™s in corporate bond or Treasury bond 

markets
, in response to shocks. 
My comment is that I think this is a really important subject not just for thinking about 
our policy decisions or policy communication, but more generally, to understand what™s 

happening in those markets and understand to what extent it is changes in regulation, changes in 

technology, 
or other things.
  Really
, my comment is wanting to see more on that sooner, 
because 
I think this is a key issue, 
as others have mentioned.
  Thank you. 
                   
         
                    CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Does anyone else want to comment?
  [No response]  Seeing 
no hands, let us begin the economic go-round 
with 
President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Fourth District economy continues to 
expand.  In April, the diffusion index of business contacts reporting better versus worse 
conditions was 23 percent, up from 18 percent in March.  Retail freight and both residential and 

commercial construct
ion firms reported improved conditions.  All manufacturers and energy 
firms reported worse conditions. 
Anecdotal reports suggest some slowing in the pace of growth in the first quarter.  
Factors cited by contacts reporting slower growth earlier this year i
nclude the harsh winter 
weather, spillovers from the 
West Coast port strikes, declining energy prices, and the 
appreciation of the dollar. 
The effects of weather and the strike are transitory.  Almost all of our contacts reported 
that the 
effects
 of the wi
nter weather 
have now passed, although I should note that it snowed in 
Cleveland last week
.  The effects of the port strike are expected to dissipate by the fourth quarter. 
The fall in oil prices continues to challenge firms engaged in energy development or 
extraction as well as their suppliers, like steel producers.  Suppliers of raw materials that use 

petroleum
-based products report a 
falloff
 in orders as customers run down 
their inventories in 
anticipation of further price reductions.  
My business contacts believe that oil prices have likely 

bottomed out, and that the effects of lower oil prices are likely to be temporary for most exposed 

sectors.  Of course
, that remains t
o be seen. 
Conditions in 
District 
labor markets continue 
to follow national trends.  The D
istrict™s 
unemployment rate, at 5.2 percent, 
is below the national rate 
of 5
½ percent and below the 
5.7 percent 
District average over 
the 2001Œ07 expansion.  Contacts 
in all 
sectors except energy 
                    
          
     
   
  
       reported increasing staffing in the previous six to eight weeks, although, except for construction, 
the additions were somewhat smaller than previously reported.  So far, 
wage pressures remain 

limited to occupations such as tr
ucking, skilled construction trades, and quantitative white collar 
jobs.  Prices of finished goods continue to be stable despite more businesses reporting declining 

costs for 
nonlabor inputs. 
Turning to the national economy, we have received a number of disappointing data 
reports since our previous 
meeting across several sectors, including manufacturing, business 
fixed investment, and consumer spending, and including the employment report for March.  
As 
was the case last year, there was very harsh winter we
ather, but this year we also had the port 

strike, the sharp drop in oil prices, and the sharp appreciation of the dollar.  Similar to last year, 

we have seen a growth slowdown in the first quarter, and we are trying to extract the signal about 

future growt
h from the incoming data.  This is difficult to do in real time. 
A good case can be made that this is a temporary setback
, just as it was last year
, and 
that 
is forecast in the Tealbook.  The effects of bad weather and the 
West Coast port strike are 
transi
tory.  Using a Bayesian VAR model augmented to include weather indicators, my staff 

estimates that the unusually cold weather reduced GDP growth by 0.9 percentage point, and 

there will be some rebound in the next couple of quarters. 
We have seen the negative effects of lower oil prices on energy
-related firms but not 
much positive effect on consumer spending, although that is likely to come, and oil prices appear 

to be stabilizing.  Dollar appreciation has been a drag on exports and the profitability of fir
ms with multinational operations.  But as the rate of appreciation slows, the drag can be expected to 

diminish as well.
  The slower growth seen in our trading partners might be a reflection of the 
slower growth in the United States
.  If our growth picks up
, it could be that theirs will as well. 
                     
             
            
      
    In addition, not all of the incoming data were negative.  The rate of job openings reached 
another cyclical high, and initial claims are very low, just below the trough reached in the last 
economic expansion.  
These 
indicators suggest that the weakness in payroll jobs in March could 

be temporary.  Although the Conference Board™s 
consumer confidence measure was down in 
April, consumer sentiment came in high, and underlying fundamentals for consumer spending, 

including improved balance sheets, remain quite good. 
The news on inflation was also a bit better over the intermeeting period. Core inflation is 
modestly firming.  Both headline CPI and core CPI increased 0.2 percent in March for the 

second month in a row, and core CPI inflation edged up to 1.8 percent on a year-
over
-year basis. 
The Cleveland Fed™s median CPI measure, which helps predict headline inflation over the 

medium term, has remained near 2
¼ percent since April of last year.  The Federal Reserve Bank 
ofCleveland™s measure of the 
10-year expected inflation rate was essentially unchanged in April. 
So t
his is the positive view of things.  Of course, there is also the possibility that the 
slower growth will be more persistent and inflation developments will 
worsen.  I don™t believe 

we have enough information right now to reach a firm conclusion today, and we don™t have to.  

We can remain agnostic until we see more data over the next couple of months.  Incoming data 

will help us determine whether the slowdown 
in the first quarter is proving to be temporary, like 

it was last year, or whether it is pointing to something more fundamental. In particular, we are 

going to get two employment reports before our June meeting.  These are going to be quite 

important in m
y own thinking about the economic outlook.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Recent economic data have had a 
distinctly weaker tone since our 
previous 
meeting.  The March emplo
yment report indicated little 
              
       
                      overall improvement in labor markets, the unemployment rate was unchanged, and payroll 
employment growth was surprisingly weak.  Similarly, wage and price data have yet to show a 

clear trend toward our 2 percent inflation goal
. While some of the weakness can be attributed to 
the severe weather in some parts of the country, many of the higher-frequency data before and 

after the harsh winter weather have also been on the soft side. 
As a result, in my view, neither of the conditi
ons for liftoff articulated in the March 
FOMC statement 
has 
been sufficiently met at this time.  The March 
Summary of 
Economic 
Projections reflected some significant changes in longer-
run variables.  The central tendency of 
the longer-run unemployment rate has slipped from a range of 5.2 to 6 percent in June 2012 

down to 5 to 5.2 percent in March.  
Similarly, participant estimates of the long
-run equilibrium 
federal funds rate have declined.  The central tendency in June 2012 ranged from 4 to 

4½ percent, bu
t now it is down to only 3½ to 3¾ 
percent.  Our assessment of these key variables 

has changed significantly, which, 
in retrospect
, is not surprising, 
considering changes in 
demographics and productivity since the financial crisis. 
While I and many other participants have lowered our estimates of one of our dual 
mandate goalsŠthe natural rate of unemploymentŠwe have not engaged in any comprehensive 
discussion of our other goal, the inflation target.  That target has remained unchanged at 

2 percent since it w
as adopted in 2012. 
We have learned a great deal about conducting monetary policy in a low-
inflation 
environment since 2012.  I am fully aware that we should have a high threshold for changing our 

inflation target, 
as frequent changes would undermine its usefulness.  But the accumulated 
weight of economic experience suggests, in my view, that a reexamination of our inflation target 

is warranted for several reasons. 
                          
     
                
         First, the choice of an inflation target was largely b
ased on research both here and abroad, 
indicating that the likelihood of reaching the zero lower bound and the cost of being at the zero 
lower bound was small.  This research suggested a relatively low probability of reaching the zero 

lower bound, typically below 5 percent, and relatively brief spells at the lower bound once 

reached, usually a couple of quarters. 
In part, this optimistic read could have been based on faith 
in the efficiency of alternative monetary policy tools.  However, the experience of 
the past 
decade has been less favorable.  Today most major developed countries are at the zero lower 

bound, and, despite employing alternative policy tools, none has yet exited, even though we are 

now more than six years past the financial crisis. 
In shor
t, the research on the expected cost of 
hitting the zero lower bound has not been consistent with the economic outcomes we have 

observed. 
Second, we have revised our assessment of variables that should affect 
the probability of 
hitting the zero lower bound.  The most obvious example is the lowering of the equilibrium 
federal funds rate.  With the same inflation target, a decline in the equilibrium federal funds rate 
should 
increase
 the probability of hitting the zero lower bound.  
The most recent SEP 
submissions, for example, report a decline in the equilibrium real rate of more than 50 basis 

points, a
nd this assessment is echoed among private forecasters and market participants.  If one 
of the rationales for setting a positive inflation target is to reduce 
the frequency of hitting the 
zero lower bound, a lower equilibrium real rate implies the need for a higher inflation target to 

reduce this probability. 
On a practical note, the fact that Japan, the 
United Kingdom, Europe, 
and the United States have each h
it the zero lower bound and have remained there for a very long 
time should make us wonder whether the global convergence to a value of 2 percent for the 

inflation target was misguided. 
       
  
              
                
      Third, we have learned more about the cost of being at the zero lower bound.  After more 
than six years, we have still not returned to the 5 to 5.2 percent unemployment rate range that the 
SEP central tendency currently indicates is consistent with longer
-run unemployment rates.  
While the new tools of quantitative easingŠpurchasing mortgage-
backed securities and 
lengthening the maturity of our holdingsŠhave resulted in growth faster than we otherwise 

would have experienced, we have missed both elements of our mandate for more than 
six years 

now. 
This is not an acceptable outcome.  The consequences of not being able to exit the zero 
lower bound more quickly have been a long period of underutilized resources and 
below
-target 
inflation that risks eroding the credibility of the central bank.  A higher inflation target would 

surel
y have given us more room to lower real interest rates 
using
 our conventional policy tools, 
likely saving hundreds of thousands of jobs. 
Despite our willingness to alter other variables, we have not recently had a 
comprehensive review of our choice for the 
inflation target.  In light of the accumulating 
evidence that inflation targets globally may have been set too low, this choice may have resulted 

in a great cost to the global economy in terms of lost economic output and employment.  Thus, 

we should have a fuller discussion of our choice for the inflation target before we set our longer-

run strategies at the beginning of next year. 
In addition to the longer-run implications of the inflation goal for monetary policy, a 
higher inflation goal would have more 
immediate policy implications.  Entertaining a higher 
inflation target would imply an even larger inflation shortfall, compelling us to wait even longer 

before lifting off. 
A weaker version of this proposition suggests both that we should delay liftoff 
until we see clear evidence that inflation is increasing, and that we should be willing to entertain 
      
          
      
       
             
      an inflation rate that exceeds our current target. This strategy would
, of course
, be akin to price-
level targeting, a notion that President Evans and other
s have previously discussed. 
In summary, we should recognize that the economy™s performance over the previous six 
years has a bearing not only on our estimates of full employment and the equilibrium federal 
funds rate, which many of us have adjusted in the SEP, but also on the inflation target.  I 

understand the concern with shifting an inflation target that we set after years of deliberation and 

following years of success in bringing inflation down.  
But our failure to hit either of our 

mandated goals for six years and running demonstrates the potential cost of an inflation target 

that is too low.  Recognizing the many complications that a change in the target would entail, I 

believe we should have a more fulsome discussion about what the 
previous 
decade of
 economic 
history has taught us about the optimal inflation rate.  Should we be willing to entertain an 

increase in the inflation goal, this would, of course, 
have implications for the timing of liftoff, 

which we will be discussing tomorrow.  Thank you, Ma
dam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would 
like
 to ask President Rosengren a question.  You 
are implying that the only margin for adjustment is on the inflation target rate.  Presumably there 

is another margin for adjustment, t
aking a lot of steps to make a future financial crisis of the type 
that we experienced in 2007, 2008, and 2009 less likely, right?  Because you could argue that 

one reason why we are in this position is because we had a really, really bad financial crisis.
  So, 
in principle, one could take steps to make the probability of a financial crisis l
ower
, and that 
would presumably lessen the need to change the inflation target.  How do you think about that? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If you think you can significantly change 
the probability or 
amplitude of those shocks, then you are right.  But the equilibrium federal funds rate has come 
              
            
    
   
      
         
         
   down quite a bit.  Our own internal estimates of what that implies for how frequently we will hit 
the zero lower bound are that it is substantially higher given that most of the time the equilibrium 

federal funds rate that many of those models were estimated on was 4
½ percent.  We are now at 
3½ percent
ŠI actually think you could make an argument that it is lower than 3½ percent.  
So if 
you have 
an equilibrium federal funds rate that is lower, the implication is that 
you hit the zero 
lower bound more frequently unless you think you can dramatically alter either the frequency or 

severity of having the kind of shocks that we experienced. 
CHAIR YELL
EN.  Isn™t it the case that some of the steps we would take to reduce the 
odds of a financial crisisŠ
strengthening capital and liquidity
Šmay actually
, by raising the cost 
of intermediation
, lower 
the 
equilibrium real rate? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, I 
think that™s right.  But my point is just that the 
room you need depends on the size of the shocks that you are dealing with.  And if you do other 

things and reduce the size of shocks, that also should be a factor.  
I don™t really disagree with 
a lot of th
e points that you made, but it seems to me that that™s not the only potential marginŠ 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I™d just raise one other countervailing argument 
that
, certainly
, the experience around October 15 of the very sharp movement in financial markets a
t a 
time when no real economic news was 
occurring makes me wonder
ŠI am not convinced yet that 
all of the actions we have taken have necessarily
, dramatically changed the probability or likely 
severity of shocks 
in the future from 
what we experienced before
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
In that shock, though, implications for the real economy 
were 
trivial. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  In that case. 

MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair? 
              
    
                
       
      
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  I appreciate you
r bringing this up, President Rosengren.  Just one 
comment
 about your rhetoric on this.  Missing the inflation target over six yearsŠif you look at 
headline inflation year over year, it was above target in 2011 and 2012, and it came back down.  

I know you like to think in terms of core inflation, but I think this is an issue for that piece of the 

puzzle.  When you 
evaluat
e the Committee over that kind of a 
time 
frame
, I think you have got 
to look at headline. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I would say 
that 
hitting an inflation target temporarily 
because 
of an oil price shock is a P
yrrhic victory.  You care more about the underlying rate of 
inflation. 
MR. BULLARD.  These are the prices people pay. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  No doubt we will return to this.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART. 
Moving right along.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the 
intermeeting
 cycle, my staff conducted 56 interviews separate from our board 
meetings. We 
focused the interviews on any indications in their businesses that would confirm the weakness 

indicated by first
-quarter data and, more to the point, suggest 
that 
first
-quarter weakness might 
persist. 
We found that overall business sentiment remains quite positive, somewhat at odds with 
our reading of the incoming data.  On balance, our contacts and directors portrayed demand a
s continuing to improve at a steady pace.  We noted, however, that compared 
with
 the previous 
cycle, their optimism is accompanied by a hint of caution.  We heard more reports of negative 

effects of the dollar.  Exporters, port operators, and firms with significant foreign operations all 

noted market or other challenges that they attributed to the 
dollar. 
         
  
            
           
           
        
   As expected, we heard reports 
of investment 
pullback and layoffs in oil and gas 
exploration and production firms as well as in 
oil services companies.  That drag is being 
partially offset by greater investment activity in business sectors benefiti
ng from low energy 

prices. 
We also continued to hear reports that firms are trying to hold on 
to margin improvement 
coming from fuel and other commodity cost declines. 
Declines in gasoline prices have yet to translate into a meaningful boost in consumer 
spending.  A director with knowledge of consumer markets commented that product categories 

that historically have been leading indicators of stronger consumer activity
Što wit, apparel, 
eating outside the home, and moviesŠhave not yet signaled an upturn. 
We received positive reports on real estate investment activity, both commercial and 
residential. Architects and contractors indicated improved pipelines.
  Our banking contacts 
report that new mortgage and investment activity is strong. 
Regarding employment, we heard continued concern about turnover and retention.  At the 
same time, we detected little change in reports this round regard
ing wage inflation.  On that 
subject, although most data indicate that the trend in nominal 
wage growth remains flat, a 
measu
re constructed by my staff from the C
urrent 
Population Survey 
does show an acceleration 
in 
year
-over-
year
 wage growth in the first quarter.  Wage growth increased to a 3 
percent pace in 
the first quarter, up from 2.8 percent in the fourth quarter and up fr
om 2.4 percent a year earlier. 
Continuing on employment, I™ll mention something we heard for the first time from three 
large employers in quite different businesses.  All said they have begun shifting their work forces 

away from part time toward full time.
  They all cited the high managerial and logistical cost and 
quality challenges of a large, part-
time workforce. 
              
               
                
             
  We™ve been struggling to reconcile these generally positive anecdotal reports with the 
hard data on the first quarter and early indications of 
second
-quarter performance.  Our tracking 
estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth is just marginally above zero, at the low end of the 
spectrum presented in the Tealbook. 
Our tracking model is a straight statistical model with no 
judgmental overrides.  We wo
uld not claim it™s the most accurate read of the first quarter, but it™s 
what the raw data are telling us, and we™ll have an official reading soon enoughŠtomorrow 

morning.  
At this point
, I™m holding to the view that weather and other factors played a 

sign
ificant role in first
-quarter weakness, and that significant payback can be anticipated in the 
current quarter. 
We also observed
Šand this is nothing more than an observationŠthat weak 
first
-quarter growth has been a pattern during the recovery, normally giving way to a stronger 

rest of the year. 
We™ve made a small adjustment to our full
-year GDP growth forecast to reflect a weaker 
first quarter, but otherwise 
we have kept our forecast for growth and inflation unchanged from 
the March meeting.  We made no m
aterial change to our outlook.  We have growth resuming a 
run rate between 
2½ and 3 
percent
, with second-quarter growth above 3 
percent. 
A strengthening of consumer activity from the first quarter is a key factor in our outlook.   
We currently judge the risk to our growth and inflation outlooks as tilted to the downside.  
With the greater uncertainty I perceive at this juncture, the Tealbook alternative scenario titled 

ﬁPersistent 
Slowdown in 
Economic A
ctivityﬂ captures my concern that my outlook may be 
overly optimistic.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As many have already noted, the recent 
data have been disappointing, but it is worth noting, 
as Preside
nt Lockhart just did, that over the 
                      
               
   
      
past four years, 
first
-quarter GDP growth has averaged more than 2 percentage points lower than 
growth during the rest of the year, and there is no single smoking gun that can explain this string 

of seasonal aberrations
. E
ach year
, the winter slowdowns have proved to be temporary. 
So, if past is prologue, I expect the same pattern will occur this year
, with an anemic Q1 
followed by above-trend growth for the rest of 2015.  
I™m confident that the underlying 

momentum in th
e economy once again will be more apparent as the first quarter fades in our 
rearview mirror. 
This is consistent with what I™ve been hearing from my business contacts.  In particular, 
the fundamentals of the economy remain quite positive.  Solid job growth should lift income and 

consumer confidence further, helping to pave the way for continued consumption growth.  In 

addition, highly accommodative monetary policy will continue to boost spending, and these 

factors are very evident in my 
District.  In fact, 
some sectors of the economy, 
the 12
th District 
economy, are red hot.  An executive in the tech sector recently mentioned that to retain talent, 
some tech firms are now offering 20 percent or more pay raises. 
And if that wasn™t enough, 
they™re also throwin
g in housing for good measure, and in the Bay Area, housing is something 
that is very hard to come by and obviously very dear.  The other thing that we heard was that you 

can be vested
 in stock options 
after 
one month.  So this is an amazing time in the Silicon Valley 
economy, and about half of my staff ran off to apply for jobs. 
In addition, I will mention that some of my contacts in different sectors, including 
commercial real estate
, have emphasized the abundance of financing that can be obtained at very 

generous terms.  It™s an issue that I noticed
 was highlighted in both the S
LOOS
 and the QS 
reports, and we™re hearing about that in our D
istrict, too.
  Of course, continued low inflation 
remains a key issue.  I view the recent low inflation readings as being consistent with an 
                                 
              economy still operating below potential and facing temporary disinflationary factors.  Important 
questions remain.
  In the remainder of my remarks, I™ll focus on two of these issues.  
The first 
is, what signal should we be taking from the market-
implied measures of inflation compensation
?  And, second, what™s the empirical relationship between wage growth and inflation? 
The softness 
in inflation of late would be a lot more troublesome to me if it was also 
accompanied by a clear decline in inflation expectations.  This kind of scenario is discussed in 

the Tealbook alternative scenario simulation.  But so far, the weight of evidence sug
gests that 
this isn™t happening.  Long-run survey expectations from households and professional forecasters 

remain well anchored. 
In addition, as I pointed out in the past, long-run inflation expectations 
implied by a Phillips curve model estimated over the past 15 years, a period during which our 

credibility was firmly established, were also 
well anchored 
at 2 percent. 
Now, of course, the one discordant note comes from the market
-implied measures of 
inflation compensation.  Inflation compensation has fall
en significantly since the middle of last 
year, and while much of the focus has been on longer-
horizon measures
, there™s also a question 
about what signal we should take about the nearer-term inflation outlook. 
My staff looked at this question, and they conducted a forecasting comparison between 
measures of inflation compensation and five other competing forecasts, among them a random 

walk forecast and also the survey from the Survey of Professional Forecasters.
  We wanted to 
avoid liquidity issues that are 
associated with shorter
-term TIPS
, so they looked at inflation 
compensation derived from inflation swap rates
.  T
hese typically move very closely together 
with inflation compensation derived from the 
Treasur
y market, but 
are 
based o
n trading in a 
deeper market.
  Here we™re looking at one- and 
two
-year
-ahead inflation forecasts 
for 
headline 
CPI inflation. 
             
       
  
  
               
    
  
      
         
The striking result, which is very robust in all of their experiments
, is that forecasts based 
on inflation compensation were the worst performers of all 
the measures.  Basically
, inflation 
compensation did not give useful information about where inflation was going relative to survey 
forecasts. 
So, 
really
, looking at inflation compensation for insights into the future path of 
inflation 
is not supported by 
the data. 
One problem with our analysis is 
that 
data limitations preclude doing a similar exercise 
for long-term inflation expectations.  I™m going to go out on a limb here 
and say 
that the results 
we have for one- and two-year inflation compensation not being a useful predictor for future 

inflation will apply 
also to
 longer-term inflation. We don™t have that much data right now, but in 
five years when the transcript come
s out, we™ll see whether I was right or wrong. We™ll wait for 
that. 
Again
, President Kocherlakota has highlighted the factŠin a memo that he co
-authoredŠ
that 
inflation compensation 
is not a 
reliable forecast for inflation because it reflects 
other aspects of risk associated with different inflation outcomes. 
But I want to mention another 
interesting 
finding in our work 
about inflation compensation, and that is that these one
- and two-
year
-ahead inflation compensation measures are 
very highly correlated with recent past inflation, 
especially with pa
st inflation associated with movements in oil prices.
  That 
puts into 
question 
how to interpret this. It is a very similar result that we™ve found in the past when we looked at 

household surveys.  Household surveys of inflation expectations tend to be ver
y sensitive to 
lagged inflation, especially with regard to oil price movements, and for this reason we have 

tended to discount movements in household inflation expectations when the movements are 

driven by energy prices.  M
y staff suggests using a similar 
caution when trying to interpret 
inflation compensation measures as an indicator of people™s views on future inflation. 
      
    
                     
          
       The second issue I™ll discuss briefly is that of 
nominal wage growth.  A
s has already been 
mentioned, wage growth has been stuck around 2 percent for most of the recovery.  And, 
as economic theory would tell us, employee compensation makes up a huge fraction of a firm™s 

cost
s.  Y
ou would expect 
there
 to be a pretty tight relationship between nominal 
wage 
growth 
and price inflation, b
ut thi
s connection has been remarkably hard to find.  Many papers and 

research projects have looked at this, and
, basically, if you look back at the history of the 
literature, in every business cycle there™s a whole bunch of papers written about the relationship 

of nominal 
wage 
growth and price inflation.  T
he consistent finding through this literature is that 
it™s really hard to find any relationship between nominal 
wage 
growth and future price inflation.  

Recent research by Jim Stock and Mark Watson, and also some really nice work done at the 

Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland and elsewhere
, has shown that the additional information on 
wages or labor compensation has 
done little to improve the accuracy of standard inflation 

forecast models.
  My understandin
g is that 
the 
staff™s inflation forecasting models tend to be 
these 

price Phillips curve 
model
s or models that don™t really emphasize 
nominal 
wage 
growth. 
The lack of a close empirical link between 
nominal wage growth and future inflation 
likely refl
ects several factors that have affected labor markets in recent decades
Šsome of which 

I™ve talked about in the past.  
One is that 
nominal 
wage 
growth is probably being held down by 
rigidities in wage setting
 that kept wages from falling during the downturn and have 
been 
restraining wage growth as the economy improvesŠ
that is, there is 
downward nominal wage 
rigidity. 
The second is 
that 
globalization
, changes 
in unionization, and 
changes in technology 
have affected the share of productivity gains that are go
ing to workers, and 
that distorts the 
            
      
   
      
      
      
     
  
      
       relationship between wage growth and price inflation.  Put another way, the labor share 
of 
income 
has fallen dramatically since the 1980s. 
To summarize, based on the evidence accumulated over the past several decades
 of extensive research on this topic, there™s little or no information 
to suggest that 
aggregate wage 
data should inform our medium-term inflation outlook.  Now I™m going to break my rule that I 
stated earlier
ŠI do not view a 
rise in 
nominal wage growth as a necessary condition to be 
confident in the return of inflation to 2 
percent. 
All told, our current low inflation rates, I think, 
are pretty easy to understand in the context of transitory factorsŠ
import prices, energy prices
Š and the fact that there is st
ill some considerabl
e slack in the labor market.  As the labor market 
moves back to maximum employment, and 
as these transitory factors dissipate, I expect inflation 

to move back to 2 
percent. 
President Bullard mentioned 2011.  I think we should learn a lesson from that.  We did 
see inflation rise quite a bit 
as a result of a rise in some special factors.  We were experiencing 
high inflationary pressures due to 
large increases 
in the price of oil and other import prices, and 
what we did then, 
I think
, is the right thing.  We looked past the transitory effects of those and 
looked more broadly 
at the long-term inflation outlook, and that is how I am viewing it, too.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank
 you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask an information question? 
The 
research 
that 
you mention
ed is 
very interesting, but 
I am not sure I followed the details.
  The inflation compensation measures 
were one-
to two
-year horizon expectation
sŠa
nd you also 
had survey measures of inflation 
expectations. 
       
    
  
        
                          
             
          MR. WILLIAMS.  The horse race 
was 
basically 
this:  W
e aligned the inflation swap rate 
one year ahead with 
the swaps of month
s 13 to 24 aheadŠo
ne year ahead
 with one year ahead.  
And then we looked at the 
Survey of Professional Forecasters 
and Blue Chip 
for each year. 
MR. EVANS.  At the same horizons? 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Same horizons. 

MR. EVANS.  I see, and those were helpful? Because
, if I understand some of the Board 
work, they use 
these 
long
-term inflation
 expectations for their modeling because, 
as attractive as 
it is theoretically to use a short
-term expectation, nobody can find a good measure of short-
term 
inflation expectation
s.  
Isn™t that right, Bill? 
MR. WASCHER. 
We use the longer
-term inflation exp
ectations in our models.  That™s 
right. 
MR. WILLIAMS. 
Yes
, but the question I™m asking is:  What do you think inflation is 
going to be over the next four quarters? 
The 
SPF is actually a very good forecast.  This is 
roughly as good as the Tealbook.  I
t™s
 asking what 
inflation 
is going to be over the nextŠ 
MR. EVANS.  Well, but the Tealbook won™t use any short-
term inflation 
measures, 
that™s 
my understanding. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  No, no, no.  I™m just looking at the forecast itself. 

MR. EVANS.  Oh, yes, but thos
e forecasts are lousy.  They might be better than the other 
ones, but they™re all lousy.  
MR. WILLIAMS. Well, I think the research says that the Tealbook is maybe a little bit 
better than the SPF and Blue Chip over the next year or twoŠ 
MR. WASCHER. 
Just 
in terms of forecasting? 
There™s probably not much difference. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  So it™s basically the same. 
                           
   
   
       
           MR. EVANS.  The
 Tealbook does something which is not in line with theory, to use 
long-term inflation expectations for a one-
year
-ahead inflation because, well, it kind of works, 
right? 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes
, we view the anchoring of inflation expectations as best 
approximat
ed by long-
term survey measures of inflation
 expectations. 
MR. 
EVANS
.  Yes
, that™s why I was asking the 
question about 
whether I understood you 
right, you™ve currently got it anchored at 1¾ percent and are hoping to goes up to 2 percent. 
MR. WASCHER.  Right. 
MR. 
EVANS
.  But at any rate, I™m done.  
Well, I mean, it™s interesting. I appreciate that. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Please proceed. 

MR. EVA
NS.  Okay.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  For the most part, my directors and 
business contacts expect that the recent spate of soft economic readings will be short
-lived.  The 
one report that seems to sum it up the best came from the 
chairman of Manpower who, when 
talking about soft first
-quarter numbers, said none of his clients are getting depressed about it.  
The view seems to be that there is enough momentum from last year that growth should pick up 
soon. 
Separately, I didn™t hear of any meaningful reports 
of wage or price pressures from my 
contacts.  My own outlook for the real economy continues to be for 
real 
GDP growth to run 
between 2
½ and 3 percent over the remainder of this year and next.  Our assumptions for 
potential output growth are somewhat strong
er than 
in the Tealbook, so our GDP path translates 
into a very similar reduction in resource gaps as the Tealbook™s.  By the end of 2016, we have 

the unemployment rate down to around 5 percent, which is my current assessment of the natural 

rate. 
           
      
               
                  
 My inflation forecast has not changed.  Like the Tealbook, I do not see inflation reaching 
target until sometime in 2018 or 2019.  I should again point out that my assessment of 
appropriate monetary policy underlying this forecast has lower rates than most people around the 

table. 
Now, I want to spend some time today talking about why this outlook leads me to favor a 
whites
-of-
their
-eyes approach for our policy response to rising inflation.  I have talked about risk 
management many times before.  Today I want to art
iculate three additional reasons the data lead 
me to prefer a cautious approach to raising rates. 
First, forecasting inflation is inherently 
difficult, and that™s the discussion that we were just having.  This implies a high burden of proof 

to say we are 
sufficiently confident that our currently low core inflation will move back to 

2 percent in a reasonable period of time. 
Second, despite near-
zero nominal rates and a large 
balance sheet, I am not convinced our current policy stance is all that accommodat
ive to begin 
with.  And, third, I actually see benefits to risking a modest overshooting of our 2 percent 
inflation target. 
Let me start with why it should take strong evidence to have confidence in an outlook of 
low inflation rising back to 2 percent.  Anyone who has looked at the forecasting performance of 
statistical inflation models knows that everyone™s abilities in this area are limited.  Indeed, there 

is a body of research that shows it is not that easy to be a random walk forecast
.  Even the best-
performing models seldom forecast a rapid change in inflation, and they always imply substantial 

forecast uncertainty.  That said, we do have many analytical reasons to think our current low 

inflation will rise at some point. 
Most of the commentary I hear at this table centers 
on the 
economy regaining traction, resource gaps closing, and the upward gravitational pull of high and 

stable inflation expectations, like in the Tealbook forecast. I also suspect that simple mean 
            
      
                 
  
       
   
          
         reversion probably plays a role in 
these forecasts as well. I agree that these forces will 
eventually deliver.  The question is, when?  Taking until 2019 to reach our target is not 

acceptable to me. 
Given all of these difficulties in forecasting inflation, my own preferred dashboard of 
indicators is mostly a list of factors coincident with rising inflation
.  While measures of labor 
market slack are important, I would not rely on them alone, 
as it is possible something has 

changed in the structure of the economy that makes those historical benchmarks less trustworthy.  

In addition, I will continue to look for increasing core inflation, faster wage growth, and firmer 

market
-based measures of inflation compensation to provide corroborating evidence of stronger 
inflationary pressures. 
As I sai
d, the absence of statistically strong leading indicators 
suggests 
that 
these observations are likely to be more coincident than predictive. But at least once we see 
them, we can have more confidence that inflation is moving up persistently.  Until then, 
I remain 

wary. 
Now, my second pointŠthat current policy is not as accommodative as we might thinkŠ 
comes out of the model analysis.  
A fundamental benchmark for thinking about the level of 
monetary accommodation and inflation pressures is the difference bet
ween the actual real rate of 
interest and the equilibrium
, or Wicks
ellian
, real rate of interest.
  As Milton Friedman said, low 
interest rates alone do not mean monetary policy is accommodat
ive.  The relevant question is 
whether, after adjusting for inflation, our current real federal funds rate is far enough below the 

equilibrium real rate to achieve our policy objectives in a reasonable amount of timeŠ
that is, for 

inflation to actually get up to 2 percent, 
as the forecasts embody. 
I think the answer to th
at question is ﬁno.ﬂ  There are a number of simple observations 
that suggest that the current equilibrium rate is quite low.  Namely, even with our interest rate 
         
        
       
     
  
    
    
       
      
         
and balance sheet policies in place, we still see the continued existence of resource gaps, a lack 
of any meaningful upward movement in inflation, and relatively low levels of capital spending 

despite piles of cash on corporate balance sheets. These cash stockpiles are an indication that 

expected real returns on physical investment are not very hi
gh. 
To put a number out, the Tealbook-
consistent equilibrium real rate shown in 
Book 
B, as 
circulated over the weekend, 
is negative 0.1 percent.  Some might look at the current real funds 
rate of minus 1.18 percent, as reported in the Tealbook, Book B, and 
say we have adequate 

accommodation in place.  I don™t agree.  
Recall that the Tealbook™s equilibrium real rate is 

calibrated to close the output gap in 12 quarters.  It says nothing about inflation.  In the Tealbook 

baseline, the inflation gap is still wi
th us until 2019.  That would mean that inflation would have 

to run below target for more than a decade 
and, t
o me
, that is simply too long to be considered 
the result of appropriate policy. 
I want to mention that President Bullard 
referred to the fact 
tha
t PCE 
inflation rose to 
2 percent in 2011 and 2012 on the strength of commodity price increases.  I think the reason we 

focus on core 
inflation is
 that 
core is a better indicator of what inflation is likely to be next year, 
because th
e shocks in headline PCE often are transitory.  T
he real test
, I would say
, is, when did 
the Tealbook ever forecast inflation two years out as being at 2 percent or above?  I think that 

has 
not been the case for quite some time. 
While we can 
all 
lament the 
fact that there are large uncertainties regarding the value of 
the equilibrium real rate of interest, uncertainty over inflation forecasting and the stance of 

monetary policy accommodation go hand in hand.  Logically, because the equilibrium rate has a 

str
ong bearing on the inflation outlook, uncertainty over it ought to translate into comparable 
uncertainty over inflation itself.
  In other words, how can we declare we are confident that 
         
      
    
   
                   current low inflation is headed back up to 2 percent unless we are also confident that our policy 
setting relative to 
the 
equilibrium real rate is able to return inflation to target
? This brings me to the third reason my outlook is premised on a whites-of-
their
-eyes 
policy approach.  I recognize that the usual policy lags mi
ght mean that a delay in tightening 
could cause inflation to modestly overshoot 2 percent sometime down the road.  But so what?  Is 

that such a big cost?
  No.  On the contrary, it could be a benefit.  Considering how long inflation 

has been below target, adopting a policy that allows the possibility of such an overshoot actually 

seems necessary to support the credibility of our symmetric inflation objective.  If we find 

ourselves with the federal funds rate at 1 percent or a little bit above that while infl
ation is still 
too low, we could easily regret the conservative credibility that we
™ve built up. 
I would 
also 
say that if we are not willing to allow an overshoot of our inflation objective, 
then I think we should definitely 
be having the conversation that
 President Rosengren was 
suggesting we have in terms of the appropriateness of the level of the inflation objective, if it is 
something that we are not allowed to overshoot with any reasonability.  I think that™s important.  
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR Y
ELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb. 

MS. HOLCOMB.  And now for something completely different.  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  The Texas economy has decelerated since I last reported to the Committee.  Continued 

low oil prices, the strong dollar, and a weaker national economy pushed state employment down 

by almost 12,000 jobs in March, the first decline in 40 months.  Over the first three months of the 

year, combined job growth averaged a positive but still dismal 0.7 percent, down from 4.2 

percent d
uring the fall of 2014.  Our forecast for December-over-December job growth, which is 
      
           
                           derived from the Texas Leading Index, now stands at 0.5 percent.  That™
s down from a forecast 
of 1 to 2 percent growth six months ago. 
Besides oil and gas, the manufacturing sector has seen the greatest slowing.  Companies 
in the computer and electronics industry say that they are losing opportunities as the appreciating 
dollar pushes up the relative price of U.S.-made capital equipment.  Chemical producers report 

lower se
lling prices and margins and lower exports.  Producers of primary metals have noted 

increasing import competition, too.  Companies in the professional and business services 

industry have been indirectly affected by both low energy prices and the strong dol
lar, 
particularly those with a significant fraction of their clientele in the energy and manufacturing 

sectors.  There have been some reports of adverse spillovers from energy to financial services as 

well. 
Our most up-
to-date information comes from our Te
xas 
Manufacturing and S
ervice 
Sector 
Outlook Surveys.  The latest manufacturing survey results, 
released only yesterday
, show 
production declining in April for the second straight monthŠ
the first consecutive two
-month 
decline since the recession. 
The 
New 
Orders 
Index, too, has registered its worst two-month 
performance since the recession, posting readings of minus 16.1 and minus 14.0 in March and 

April, respectively.  In contrast, our latest service sector survey 
results
, released this morning
, show the headline revenue index rising to 14.6 in April from 10.7 in March.  April™s reading is 

the highest reported so far this year, but 
it is considerably lower than levels reported through 
most of 2014. 
Despite slower job growth, the Texas unemploymen
t rat
e continues to fall, and at 
4.2 percent in March
, it reached its lowest level since July 2007. We have anecdotal reports of 
laid
-off energy workers shifting into construction, especially along the Gulf Coast, 
where skilled 
         
             
  
   
    
          
      
  
    construction workers remain
 in short supply.  The wage and benefit ind
exes from our 
manufacturing and service sector surveys indicate that upward wage pressures are somewhat less 
intense than they were last year.  Looking ahead, health-
care contacts are concerned about losing 
experienced workers in a coming wave of retirements.  In finance, our bankers report flat 

demand and unchanged standards across all major loan categories. 
Oil prices have moved irregularly upward since last month™s FOMC meeting, with WTI 
closing some of the gap 
with 
Brent.  Y
ear-to-date volatility has been driven by conflicting supply 
developments, including unexpected increases in OPEC output
Šname
ly, Saudi Arabia™s 
production was up 4 percent in MarchŠinventory buildups in the U
nited 
States
, and reports of 
slowe
r growth in U.S. oil production.  If the Iran negotiations successfully conclude in June, that 
country could ramp up its output by more than 700,000 barrels per dayŠ0.7 percentage point 
of 
world supplyŠby the end of 2016, which would be enough to lower the 
price of crude between 
$5 and $15 per barrel in 2016, all else staying constant.  The conflict in Yemen is another source 
of uncertainty.  Yemen itself is a negligible producer of crude oil.  However, the threat of wider 
conflict between Saudi Arabia and 
Iran
, and Yemen™s proximity to the fourth-
busiest ch
okepoint 
for crude oil flows in the world, have created fears of supply disruptions. 
Our energy industry contacts tell us that the number of drilled but uncompleted wells, or 
DUCs, has increased between 33 and 50 percent since the end of last year. These are wells that 

have been drilled but are kept out of production.  They are underground inventory.  
New capital 

projects are difficult to initiate, but spending continues on existing contracts.  U.S. oil production 

is expected to peak within the next two to three months.  We are also likely to hit above-ground 

storage constraints within that time 
frame.  Drilling costs are down 20 percent, partly as a result 
of real efficiency gains and partly as a result o
f cheaper labor and equipment.  
There is cautious 
                                       optimism that the worst is over, coupled with recognition that we
™re unlikely to see a return to 
$100-per-
barrel oil any
 time soon.  Repercussions and adjustments in the broader Texas 
economy are ongoing. 
We are a bit more sanguine about the national economic outlook today than we were a 
couple of meetings ago.  It appears considerably less likely now that we will blow through full 
employment at full throttle.  That revised assessment is based on predictions from a small suite 

of models we use to forecast real activity two to four quarters out.  Although each model relies 

on its own set of financial and policy indicators, all are now telling a consistent story
:  solid if 
unspectacular GDP growth, on average, in the second and third quarters of 2015 and a gradual 

deceleration in employment growth over the course of the year, with the unemployment rate 

leveling off in the neighborhood of 5 percent heading into 2016.  
We expect 
trimmed 
mean PCE 
inflation, our measure of the underlying trend in headline inflation, to average about 1¾ 
percent 

over the next four quarters.  As compared with the Tealbook, we are more optimistic on both 
halves of the dual mandate, b
ut we
™re certainly not only
 in the same ballpark as the Tealbook, 
but in the same outfield.  Hopefully, it™
s not left field. 
Although we are looking forward to tomorrow™s GDP report, we don™t expect to take a 
strong signal from it, whatever the number turns out to be.  The first est
imate relies on a lot of 
guesswork, and in any case, 
GDP growth is volatile from quarter to quarter.  As a result, we
™ve 
not found real-
time estimates of lag
ged GDP growth to be especially helpful for forecasting at 
the horizons that are of interest to us.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Data on economic conditions in the Eighth 
District have improved notably during the 
intermeeting
 period.  The pace of job creation was 
           
           
   
   
     
        revised up for 2014, and preliminary data for 2015 has generally been positive.  
The 
District 
unemployment rate continues to decline and stands at 5.7 percent today, according to the most 
recent reading
Šonly slightly higher than the national rate. 
According to the revised BLS d
ata, 
District job creation occurred at about twice the pace 
in 2014 as compared 
with
 2013, which was itself revised higher.  One of the largest revisions 
was in the Louisville MSA which was revised from an
 original estimated value of 2.3 percent 
growth to an updated value of 3.8 percent.  By sector, notable upward revisions occurred in 

transportation, manufacturing
, and professional and business services.
  Correspondingly, 
Louisville™s average hourly earnings growth is significantly faster than the national 
average. 
On the downside, one of the most notable developments in the local labor market was the 
announcement by U.S. Steel that they would temporarily idle their Granite City, Illinois, 
plant
, laying off over 2,000 employees effective in May.  Media repo
rts suggest that the layoffs are 

due, in part, 
to a rise in imports of relatively inexpensive Chinese steel
Šsteel that
, evidently, the 
Chinese do not need in their home market. 
On this dimension, 
my recent intermeeting visit to China
, combined with discussions 
with CEOs and my interpretation of some hard data, has suggested to me that trend growth in 

China may be notably slower than commonly appreciated.  I think this goes beyond the relatively 

weak reported growth rate 
in the first quarter 
to a trend rate 
of growth as low as 4½ percent.  
Chinese GDP statistics are notably opaque
Ša topic of macroeconomic discussion for the 
past 15 

years or moreŠbut corroborating data and anecdotes now seem to be diverging more sharply 

from official reports, suggesting that a 
Chin
ese slowdown is to be taken far more seriously this 
time.
  The proximate cause of the slowdown is likely the ongoing anticorruption campaign, 
                 
                       
       
     which is reportedly casting a very wide net and is likely creating a chilling effect on new 
business formatio
n and business expansion. 
Turning to the national outlook, I have five main areas for comments on the current 
narrative for the U
nited S
tates, 
as reported in the Tealbook, 
FOMC speeches
, and popular 
commentary.  The comments are in the following areas:
  one, potential over
-interpretation of the 
Q1 slowdown; two, an unemployment forecast that I think is not credible; 
three, assumptions 
about 
r* that may be suspect; four, over-interpretation of the likely effects of the value of the 
dollar on U.S. growth pros
pects;
 and, five, underappreciation of the risks of asset price bubbles 
during the next two to three years as rates remain exceptionally low.
  I™m going to comment on 
the first three of these today.  I™m not commenting directly on inflation because I think
 the 
situation in that dimension has not changed greatly during the inter
meet
ing period.  I continue to 
expect inflation to return to target and eventually overshoot 2 percent in 2016. 
On the first issue, potential over-interpretation of the Q1 slowdown, d
ata 
are 
clearly 
weaker on a tracking basis since our 
previous meeting.  GDP will be reported tomorrow 
morning, and the s
taff has penciled in an estimate close to zero. But suppose we take the median 
of the nowcasting table reported in the Tealbook, which 
is 
an 
approximately 1½ percent annual 

growth rate of GDP in the first quarter.  On that basis
, the year
-over-year growth rate would be 
3.3 percent.  I think this number gives a better sense of the underlying pace of growth in the U.S. 

economy and provides 
a better point of reference 
for 
shaping GDP expectations for the 
remainder of this year. 
In addition
, I think that seasonal factors for Q1 are being called into 
question.  We considered Q1 GDP growth averages versus averages for Q2 through Q4 over 

differe
nt time periods
, excluding recessions
, since the mid
-1990s.  Average Q1 real GDP growth 
        
                           has been notably lower in these subperiods.  This broad-
brush analysis suggest
s that low Q1 
growth rates are not occurring by accident, and that Q1 seasonals may need revamping. 
The second issue is unemployment projections balancing out at about 5 percent over the 
forecast horizon despite easy monetary policy
, by conventional definition.  I do not think that 
such a forecast is credible, and I continue to disagree with th
e labor force participation 
assumption behind it.  A key 
paper in the 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
Šby Aaronson 
and others
, published 
in 
2014Šsuggests that labor force participation has been dropping 
according to demographic factors since 2000, 
and, furthermore, that this downward trend will 
continue through the forecast horizon.  This suggests that, on balance, there will be no sustained 

upward improvement in labor force participation and, therefore, that unemployment will 

continue to drop into 
the 
4½ to 4 percent range over the forecast horizon, barring any major 

disruption in the U.S. economy.  This dynamic would be very similar to what was observed 

during the 1990s expansion and again during the 2000 expansion.  On both of those occasions, 
unemployment moved into the low 4 
percent range. 
Previous staff predictions in this area have emphasized increases in labor force 
participation but have turned out to be wrong.  Indeed, the predictions given in the S
ummary of 
Economic P
rojections have also re
lied
, in part, on this story and have also been wrong.  
The 
median SEP forecast as of September 2012 for unemployment at the end of 2014 was too high 
by more than 1 percentage point.  The same was true of the median SEP September 2013 

forecast for unemploy
ment. 
So what™s the bottom line?  We™re charting a course for very low interest rate monetary 
policy based on an unrealistic assessment of future labor market performance, and this will harm 

FOMC policymaking in the quarters and years ahead.  
We can, of co
urse, cite other labor market 
                         
  
   
  
    
        
         
         indicators and thereby bring to bear more information on overall labor market performance.  The 
Board of Governors™ l
abor 
market 
conditions index does exactly this, conveniently summarizing 
information on many different dimensions of labor market performance.  
The 
Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis calculated that the value of this index is comfortably above its long-run 

average since 1986.  This indicat
es that
, based on the totality of available information, labor 
markets are n
ot weak but instead are relatively strong viewed in historical perspective. 
I like this 
index because it brings all information
 together in one place and avoids cherry-
picking particular 
indicators that may or may not be indicative of overall labor market 
performance. 
The third issue is 
r*.  Some commentary has suggested that 
an r* parameter in a 
Taylor 
rule is 
low based on estimates of 
Laubach 
and Williams, which
, combined with relatively small 
inflation and unemployment gaps, would suggest, through a Taylor-
rule
-type calculation
, that 
current policy is approximately the policy recommended by the rule.  This argument could 

rationalize current policy settings, although it would suggest that polic
y is 
perhaps not as 
accommodative as people woul
d intuitively think. 
One comment is that the value of 
r* is highly 
uncertain
, either from a theoretical perspective or a measurement perspective.  Time
-varying 
r* Taylor rules are relatively untested and do not represent the empirical tradition behind Taylor 

rule estimation and recommended policy outcomes. For this reason
, I am skeptical of using 
time
-varying 
r* as a rationale for current policy settings. 
The value of 
r* from a broader perspective should represent the 
Wicksellian 
natural rate 
of interest
, which one might view as governed by the real rate of interest that would prevail in 
an economy without frictions and without monetary policy influence.  
In a wide class of models, we 

know what the 
real rate of interest would be.  It would be the sum of the rate of productivity 
growth and the rate of labor force growth.  These factors alone would drive the real output 
      
   
            
       
    
             
  growth rate in this class of models.  
My staff calculated an 
r* value based on such a view.  It 
turned out to be 2 percent today, and this seems like a good benchmark for 
r* from which to 
calibrate Taylor rule policy recommendations.  Such recommendations would suggest that policy 
is indeed accommodative today, which would match most people™s intuition about current policy 

settings. Interestin
gly, this value of 
r* has historically been somewhat lower than the 
Laubach
-Williams measure
.  It
 has been near zero in recent years, but as of today has moved above 
zero to 
a value of about 2 
percent. 
The bottom line is that there are many ways to look at this value of 
r*, but a sensible 
guess is that 
r* is 
2 percent or higher, meaning policy today is accommodative, 
as intuition 
suggests.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you. 

MR. TARULLO.  M
adam Chair, if I couldŠ
President Bullard
, I was a little bit confused 
by what you were saying about labor force participation, 
and particularly the staff™s assessment 
of it.  My understanding of what the staff has been saying is that while they project a downward 
trend in labor force participation because of demographics, they also assess the decline in the 

immediate post
-crisis years to have been substantially steeper than that
.  And what they were 
predicting
Šand continue, I think, to predict, 
unless Bill 
corrects me
Šis a less steep decline or a 
flattening
-out of current labor force participation
, which eventually has their projected 
demographic trendŒbased participation rate converging with the actual participation rate.  And 

that, I think, is what™s been
 happening over the p
ast year and a half or so
, during which, 
with a 
little bit of fluctuation up and down, 
the labor force participation rate 
has been 
roughly stable, 
which I think is bearing out the staff™s expectation of the convergence of their projected trend 

with actual labor force participation. 
       
        
         
                 
      MR. WASCHER.  Yes, I think that™s how I interpret it as well.  I don™t think what we 
have in the forecast is at all at odds with the 
Aaronson and others paper of 2014.  The gap we 
have in there is roughly what we estimated in that paper, and as Governor Tarullo indicated, we 
expect the downtrend in the participation rate to continue 
and the actual participation rate to 
close the gap by falling less than the downtrend we have. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  First Vice Presiden
t Prichard. 
MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Economic activity in the Third District 
slowed during the first quarter.  While still expanding, the rate of expansion has been below 

expectations.  However, it appears that the recent slowdown may be tem
porary, and that 
sentiment is widely held among contacts in our region.  Unemployment in the region ticked up to 

5.7percent in March
, with Pennsylvania experiencing a significant decline in employment, 
enough that the first-
quarter job growth in the state 
was actually negative.
  However, both our 
April 
Manufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey 
and 
Nonmanufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey 
indicate that the manufacturing and service sectors expanded employment in April and point to 

further job growth and capital expenditures over the second half of the year.  One prominent 

manufacturer in the region indicated that his businesses are poised to grow rather more robustly 

in the second half of the year once they have worked through the necessary inventory correction.  

Although he doesn™t anticipate 2015 to be as strong as last year, the second half of the year 

should see solid growth. 
In response to a special survey question on the effect of the dollar™s appreciation on the
ir manufacturing activity, respondents who ha
ve exchange rate exposure indicated that the 
appreciation negatively affected their operations. 
However, our District does not overly engage 
in foreign trade, 
with exports
 accounting for only 10 
percent of revenues and imports 
         
   
              
            representing about 5 
percent
 of nonlabor costs.  
Thus, the overall effect of the dollar™s rise was 
fairly small 
for 
Third District manufacturers. 
Both nonresidential and residential construction weakened in March.  We are also seeing 
a softening in multifamily housing.  Reflecting th
e overall weaknesses in this sector, house price 
appreciation is also slower than in the 
nation as a whole, 
with prices
 growing in the 3 
to 3½ percent range.
  Retailers in the region have been report
ing healthy sales over the inter
me
eting 
period and modera
te year
-over-
year sales growth. 
Contacts report th
at sales are starting to be 
bolstered by lower gasoline prices, and consumers in the region remain highly confident.  They 

are also paying down post-holiday debt, and debit and credit card lines are declining.  Bankers in 

the region indicate that the growth in the commercial loan segment of their portfolios has picked 

up substantially, while other loan activity has remained fairly flat. 
Thus, our D
istrict reflects 
fairly well what might be transpiring in ot
her regions 
nationally
Ša bit of a step back in labor markets, 
a falloff in manufacturing activity
, and a lack of 
any significant improvement in residential investment.  This slowdown is well reflected in one of 

the series we produce in our real
-time resear
ch center, the 
Aruoba-Diebold-
Scotti Business 
Conditions Index.  The ADS uses six high-frequency data series to construct an index of current 

economic activity.  Those series include
, one, initial jobless claims through the week ending 

April 11 of this year; two, payroll employment through March; t
hree, industrial production 
through March; four, real personal income through February; five, real manufacturing and trade 

sales through January; 
and, six, real GDP through the 
fourth quarter of last year.
  The index is 
centered on zero, which indicates normal growth rates, and the index has recently turned 

negative.  However, we are receiving indications that the somewhat slower growth we have 
              
      
       
   
   
             
  wit
nessed is a temporary phenomenon, and that economic activity is expected to bounce back to 
trend growth rates. 
As mentioned by President Bullard, we also find that, 
historically
, first
-quarter GDP 
growth may not be adequately adjusted for seasonal variation.  Over the past 30 years, 
seasonally 
adjusted growth 
in first
-quarter GDP has averaged significantly less than growth over the 
remaining three quarters
Š1.8 percent as opposed to 2.7 percent.  Additionally, if one examines 
the timing of the 10 
weakest qua
rters over that span, six occurred in the first quarter and
, 50 percent of the time
, the weakest quarter 
was the first quarter of the year.
  Observations like 
these may point us to placing more weight on GDIŠ
gross domestic income
Šor on GDPplus, 
which incorporates the income side of GDP, in interpreting current economic activity.  GDPplus 

has the advantage that, unlike GDI, it is available with the same timing as expenditure
-side data. 
With that as background, we continue to project that overall economic act
ivity will 
accelerate modestly
, that utilization gaps will continue to progressively narrow
, and that inflation 
will continue to firm. With 
a substantial amount of data forthcoming before our June meeting, I 
expect that we™ll have a clearer view of the em
erging trends and confirmationŠor notŠ
that 
first
-quarter economic performance was, indeed, a poor harbinger of the year to come.  Thank 

you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  
President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming national data suggest that the 
economy hit a soft patch in the first quarter, which is consistent with the recent information on 

economic activity in the Fifth Federal Reserve District. 
At the same time, our reports indicate 
that the weakness is widel
y viewed as temporary.  Our diffusion index of manufacturing activity, 
released this morning
, was slightly negative in April, and that followed a reading of negative 8 
            
  
                       
       
   for March
.  B
ut our index of expected shipments six months ahead was a robust plus 38, a 
level 
that has not been exceeded since 2011.  
Similarly, our 
index 
for nonretail service
-sector activity 
was also slightly negative in April, but the index of expected demand six months ahead held 
steady at a pretty positive rate.  And the indexes for employment remain positive across all 

sectors. Retail revenue rose 
5 points to plus 17. 
More broadly, commentary from our directors and industry roundtable participants was 
more positive this month than last, and we™ve heard numerous reports about transitory factors 

having affected recent activity.  An executive at an engineering firm in West Vir
ginia said that 
ﬁweather has been the primary factor in our business slowdown.ﬂ 
Several other reports cited 
production slowdowns attributable to the West Coast port strike.  For example, a manufacturer of 

industrial safety products stated that production 
was interrupted by delays in receiving shipments 
of just one critical part manufactured in China.  These reports suggest that it™s quite reasonable to 

expect a rebound in growth in Q2. 
As usual, any discussion of labor markets these days turns quickly to the subject of 
shortages of skilled workers.  It does seem as if these shortages are having noticeable effects. 

For example, the CEO of a large building materials company told of a trucking company 

refusing outgoing shipments due to a lack of drivers.  
We also continue to hear about markets 
experiencing wage pressures
, and, while not universal at this point, the scope of these 

observations appears to have broadened of late.  This was most apparent in the reports from 

representatives of several staffing firm
s, both national and regional, who serve on our 
roundtables, including a regional representative from Manpower.  
One large staffing firm is 

telling clients to expect upward wage pressure ﬁin all skill levelsﬂ later this year.  Two grocers in 

Richmond recently announced double-
digit starting
-wage increases, perhaps 
in response to Wal
-         
     
       
     
  
                 
    Mart™s announcement.  A large auto manufacturer plans to raise starting wages for assembly line 
workers at a plant in our District from $13.17 an hour to $15.85 an hourŠabout 20 
percent. 
A lumber company in West Virginia has responded to a shortage by bringing in entry-
level workers 
from Puerto Rico, renting houses for them, and hiring an interpreter, all of which raise the cost of 
labor by 10 to 15 percent.  
These reports suggest that broader wage pressures may be about to 

emerge, although I recognize that wage acceleration is not yet apparent in the monthly figures for 

average hourly earnings. 
Turning to the national economy, as I said, we™
ve clearly hit a soft patch recently. 
Some 
of that softness was due to well
-known temporary factors.  Combined, these transitory factors 
could well explain a large part, if not all, of the first
-quarter slowdown.  
Moreover, this wouldn™t 

be, as many have noted, the first flat quarter we™
ve se
en during this expansion.  So the question 
is how rapidly economic activity picks up again from here as the effect of these transitory factors 

fade. I share th
is Tealbook™s optimism on consumer spending, and that™s based on robust 
income growth, solid consumer sentiment readings, and continued improvement in labor market 

conditions.  The rebound in car sales last month was an important piece of evidence that 

consumers have the confidence to boost spending in the months ahead. 
Turning to inflation, the late
st readings have been a bit firmer than expected.  Core CPI 
inflation averaged 2.3 percent at an annual rate from December to March.  The staff™s translation 

into core PCE inflation is 1.4 percent over the same three months, and that implies that Q4 will 

be the low point for core PCE inflation.  Oil prices appear to have bottomed out and the run-up in 

the dollar seems to have lost steam, so the transitory downward pressures on headline inflation 

are waning. Thus, it seems fairly clear to me that we are eme
rging from this inflation dip
, and 
inflation will be moving towards 2 percent in coming quarters. 
                      
         
             Looking ahead, as several of you have mentioned, we will receive more than the usual 
amount of data over the upcoming intermeeting period, including, importan
tly,
 two employment 
reports and two reports on personal income and consumption.  
If the data come in consistent with 
the Tealbook forecast, we would have solid evidence in hand at our June meeting that consumer 

spending growth had rebounded and that inflation was moving up.  If so, I believe the case for 

raising rates would be strong, s
o it seems premature to make any statements at this meeting or in 
the days immediately ahead, I believe, that could be interpreted as taking June off the table.  

Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Unemployment in the 
Tenth 
District remains 
very low at 4.2 percent, and recent employment growth has been modest but is mixed across 

states and industries.  Several 
District 
states are seeing sizable oil and gas layoffs, and negative 
spillovers are showing up in regional factory and transportation activity as well as in consumer 
spending 
areas 
and 
those that are 
energy dependent.  
Through the first quarter of this year, 
District energy jobs were down 4½ 
percent
, and firms in our latest energy survey expect 
their 
employment to fall by 12 percent this year.  District manufacturing is also feeling the 
effect, as 
the last time our manufacturing survey composite was lower than 
its April reading was in early 
2009. Firms responding to our energy survey, however, note 
that 
breakeven oil prices have 
fallen considerably as services costs have dropped, providing some encouragement for future 

activity as oil prices edge higher.  On the other hand, D
istrict states with virtually no oil and gas 
activity have seen a solid start to 2015.  Colorado, in particular, continues to grow rapidly, driven 

by strong tourism and construction activity.  
As a result, total employment in the region is up 
       
      
       
         
  
     
              slightly this year, and overall services activity in the District continues to grow despite the 
energy layoffs.  In agriculture, drought has worsened, although winter wheat production is 

shaping up to be similar to its recent five-
year average, and corn a
nd soybean planting intentions 
are generally strong.  Still, persistently low crop prices and elevated input costs continue to 

increase farmers™ short
-term financing needs. 
For the national economy, my outlook for growth over the medium term is little chan
ged
.  I assume that 
the softness in first
-quarter GDP proves transitory, as it has for the past several 
years.  Weather effects and the sharp decline in energy investment look to be important factors 

holding down first-quarter growth.  However, more persis
tent factors 
producing softer export 
growth and a broader slowing in new investment bear watching.  
Alternatively, personal 

consumption appears to have some upside potential, 
as there is yet to be a significant boost to 

spending from lower gasoline prices. 
March™s payroll numbers were clearly below expectations, though the labor market 
continues to improve in several aspects.  The services sector continues to perform well.  In the 

first quarter of this year, services added
, on average, 
179,000 additional jo
bs per month.  This is 
better than the 134,000 
average in the first quarter 
of 
last year.
  Overall, I expect average 
monthly payroll growth to drift down from the rapid pace of 260,000 per month last year to 

200,000 this year before settling down to a pace 
of around 150,000 next year as the labor market 
continues to tighten and growth moves to its trend level. 
Research by my staff also indicates improving labor market conditions, 
as reflected by 
the number of workers moving from lower-
to higher
-paying sect
ors
Šthat is, the extent of 
cyclical upgrading.  Their analysis shows that the rise in the quits rate over the past two years is 

primarily due to a higher quits rate in sectors with lower pay, like wholesale/retail trade and 
           
        
               
  
      
   
      
      leisure/hospitality.
  Tracking individual workers in these sectors using C
urrent 
Population 
Survey data shows 
that 
they have recently been moving into higher-
paying sectors, like 
education and health services, at rates similar to those before the recession. 
Turning to inflation, I expect
 inflation to remain somewhat below target due to lagged 
effects from low energy prices and a stronger dollar.  Inflation in some sectors, such as health 
care, have also notably slowed.  In addition, 
because of some of the current factors affecting 

inflation, year-over-year core could drift lower as stronger readings from a year agoŠ
core PCE 
readings from March to June of last year were 
running at a solid 2 
percent pace
Šdrop out of the 
12-month window.  
Such base effects have not affected 
my overall confidence regarding the 
medium
-term outlook for inflation, assuming 
there are 
continued improvement in the labor 

market and stable longer-
term expectations.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  I will start with a few observations 
about the Ninth District economy.  It™s generally robust, but the decline in oil prices is certainly 

creating challenges in some areas.  I will then turn to the national economy, 
where I see 

continued shortfall
s in aggregate demand relative to supply. 
Labor markets are tight in many parts of the Ninth District, 
with contacts reporting 
significant swaths of unfilled openings.  There are signs of growing wage pressures in some 

economic sectors and geographical are
as.  However, overall, wage pressures remain muted. 
Importantly, many businesses report having little or no ability to pass on wage increases to 

consumers in the form of price increases.  So this is actually a flip side of the argument that 

President Will
iams 
offered
Šhe indicated that he didn™t need to see wage increases to feel 
confident in the 
return 
of 
inflation to 2 percent. 
The flip side of this is that we might see wage 
      
       
             
   
    
           
   increases happening and still not see inflation
, because the question is whether those businesses 
experiencing the wage increases have 
the pricing power to pass that on.  The contacts 
that 
we talk
ed to in the intermeeting period suggested they do not. 
Contacts at businesses with an international footprint expressed concern during 
the 
intermeeting period about how the high value of the dollar would affect the demand for their 

products, especially in light of overall softness in global demand conditions.  And so
me of
 the 
comments that 
President Bullard
 offered about China echo things we heard from our contacts 
during the intermeeting period. 
Not surprisingly, economic activity has slowed greatly in the oil-producing areas of 
North Dakota.  However, overall confidence in the B
akken region remains high.  Many, if not 
most, of our contacts r
eport seeing the currently low level of economic activity as a welcome 
opportunity to shore up critical infrastructure needs in the western part of North Dakota. 
Let me turn to the national economy.  Both real and nominal variables are telling us a 
similar story, I believe:  
There is insufficient aggregate demand to use available resources in an 
effective fashion.  In terms of real activity, if we look back over the past five years since the end 

of 2009, real GDP growth has averaged 2.3 percent.  T
here is l
ittle sign of this pace 
quickeningŠl
ast year
, real GDP growth was only 2.4 percent.  H
ere I
™m using annual averages 
to get away from some of the seasonal adjustment factors that have been highlighted in previous 

interventions.  
This year
 now looks like it may be even worse than this weak average 
performance.  In the wake of the data that we
™ve 
received from the first quarter, Tealbook
, Book 
A, has downgraded its outlook for 2015 economic activity, and it now projects growth in this 

calend
ar year to be less than 2 percent.  We will get more information
, of course
, tomorrow 
morning along these lines. 
            
          
            
                      
  The persistence of these patterns has led some to conclude that they reflect a permanent 
downward shift in the productive capabilities of the United States.  I think we should be very 
cautious before accepting these claims. We saw significant improvement in all labor market 

metrics in 2014.  This improvement seems to have had 
little 
effect
 on the excess supply of 
human resources in the economy. 
We saw little upward pressure on compensation or on the 
inflation outlook.  This conjunction of low price pressures and strong employment growth 

suggests 
that the 
ﬁRoom to Growﬂ 
scenario i
n Tealbook, Book A, might be quite relevant.  And 
if you look at th
e implications of that scenario, the weakness of aggregate demand relative to 

supply creates concerns with respect to nominal variables. 
The outlook for inflation in 
Tealbook, Book A, 
is 
that it will be below target until 2019, well over four years from n
ow. 
Just to follow up on some of the discussion we heard earlier about inflation over the past 
few years, headline 
inflation 
did go above 2 percent in 2011, but I think if you go back over 
2008, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013, and 2014, in all of those years, 
it was below 2 percent.  In 2011, it 
was above 2 percent.  On average, over that time frame since the end of 2007, 
it™s been
 about 
1.3 percent. Market
-based longer-
term inflation expectations remain low. 
I want to
 say something about the prediction issue.  It™
s absolutely true
, I think
, that if 
you do horse 
races of th
e kind 
that President Williams talked about
, market-
based measures 
don™t really fare that well. I think it
™s actually because they™re 
of value to policymakers, not just 
to statistical 
forecasters, because we
™re interested in a different loss function.  We
™re not 
interested in just minimizing mean square
d error
, we™
re actually interested in trying to mitigate 
low inflation, especially when it
™s going to be costly to households.  And I th
ink that 
monitoring 
these market
-based measures of inflation expectations 
is helpful along those lines. 
         
             
   
    
  
    
          
     
       
     Tealbook, Book A, notes that we™
ve seen some slippage in Michigan survey measures as 
well
ŠI don™t want to put too much weight on that at this stage, but 
it™s something to watch.
 I think there are signs in these data that we may be facing a prolonged period of inflation running 
substantially below our target.  Now, why should we care about a possible downward slippage in 

inflation and inflation expectatio
ns? 
This builds on some of the remarks that 
President 
Rosengren already made, that p
ersistently lower inflation expectations translate to lower nominal 

interest rates.  Lower nominal interest rates translate into little recession
-fighting capacity for the 
central bank.  And such a reduction 
in policy capacity would be especially troubling because it 
would build on the policy capacity associated with a significant decline in the neutral real 

interest rate noted by President Rosengren.  
So this decline in inflation expectations really 

creates a first
-order loss in terms of what we are trying to accomplish 
because it increases the 
probability of hitting up against the zero lower bound. 
As President Rosengren 
suggested, the decline in the neutral rate of intere
st should lead 
us to consider raising the inflation target.  I see a great deal of possible merit in this
 suggestion.  
More generally, I think that it would be useful to have discussions about the long-
run goals that 
we have established.  We learn 
more 
over time
, and it™
s useful to take 
that
 on board.  
We d
on™t 
want to do it every year, certainly, but I think at intervals we should be taking on information and 

reevaluating the long
er-run goal statement.  
The 
Bank of Canada does this on a five-
year basis
.  Every five years they go back and relook 
at their framework and what they™
ve learned
, and 
I think there
™s something to be gained from that kind of systematic reevaluation of our framework.  
So I would be very supportive of further discussion of President Rosengren™s suggestion. 
With that said, first things first.  We actually need to forestall a possible decline in 
inflation expectations 
today 
generated by a failure to hit the current low target. 
During the 
               
          
           
         
  
  intermeeting period, Governor Haruhiko Ku
roda of 
the Bank of Japan visited Minnesota 
and 
gave an excellent speech.  He described the aggressive efforts of the Bank of Japan to stimulate 
an increase 
in inflation expectations.  As I listened to him, I was reminded yet again of how we 
need to do all that we can to avoid leaving our successors with the kind of tough situation that 

Governor 
Kuroda now faces. 
I don™t see that determination reflected in 
alternative B, but I won™t 
talk about that until tomorrow.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
  In terms of the economic 
outlook, I™m of two minds.  On the one hand, I™m more uncertain about the growth outlook and 

more concerned about the potential downside risks to growth.  On the other hand, I think the 

downside risks on the inflation side have lessened considerably.  A
t the last meeting
, I would 
have said that I expected further labor market improvement but was not yet reasonably confident 

that inflation would return to our 
2 percent objective ov
er the medium term.  Now, I would at 
least partly reverse things.  Conditional on further improvement in the labor market, I™m getting 

closer to being reasonably confident that inflation will return to our 2 
percent objective
, but I am 
less confident about when I will see further labor market improvement and how quickly it will 

occur. 
Turning first to the growth side
, it strikes me 
that 
there 
are 
a lot of crosscurrents right 
now, and it™s really difficult to assess the net 
effect
.  To me, this sharp slowing 
in payroll growth 
in March should not be a big surprise, however.  As I noted in my comments at the March 

FOMC meeting
, a big gap had opened up between payroll growth and GDP growth, so unless 
one thought that the productivity growth trend would remain ex
traordinarily poor, it seemed 

reasonable to expect 
either 
GDP growth to pick up or payroll growth to slow down.  A
s it turns 
      
        
           
   
              
            out, GDP growth slowed rather than picked up, s
o that left payroll growth to bear the brunt of the 
adjustment. 
As I assess the firs
t quarter, I do think there are both transitory and more persistent 
factors responsible for the slowdown.  On the transitory side, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of 
New 
York™s staff analysis
 does suggest 
that 
severe winter weather did have a sizable effect
. We 
put the 
impact
 at about 1½ 
percent on 
the
 annualized growth rate, slightly less than last year.  Having 
said that, I wouldn™t take that point estimate too literally. 
Also
, I do think the West Coast port 
slowdown did disrupt economic activity.  We had a small business advisory group meeting, and I 
was surprised that two out of the eight or nine businesses that attended referenced the port 

slowdown as hurting their businesses 
in the first quarter
Šthis is 
around upstate New York and 
New Jersey, and that™s not really where I would expect 
the 
port slowdown to actually manifest 
itself
, so I thought that was meaningful. 
There 
are
 also some more long-
lasting components as well. As Steve Kamin made clear, 
the dollar™s sharp appreciation has led to a deterioration in U.S. net exports, and the 
Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York staff estimates that a 15 percent appreciation of the broad rea
l trade
-weighted 
dollar, which is a little bit m
ore than we have right now in hand, would cut about 0.6 
percentage point from the level of real GDP after one year, and I think that™s pretty consistent 

with the Tealbook estimates.
  And I think it™
s important because that™s just the partial 
equilibrium effect.  If you have a trade drag, it also drains real income from the economy, so 

there™s also the risk of second-
order effects. 
Now, the second thing 
is that 
oil and gas investment is plunging.  I™m not sure how 
severe the knock
-on 
effects will be, but I d
on™t think we™re done yet.  Firms have been protected, 
in part, this year by hedging their future forward production by selling oil forward, and they™
ll           
        
       
                      
       
     
   
become more exposed to the current oil prices as time passes
, so I expect a downward trend in 
investmen
t to continue.  As Helen Holcomb pointed out in her comments about the Texas 
economy, the effect does seem to be quite a bit larger, I think, than expected.  
Richard Fisher 

said
Šin January, I 
believe it was
Šat th
at time he thought that employment growth in 
Texas, 
which was well above average compared 
with 
the country, would slow down to the national 
average.
  But if you look at the payroll data in March for states on a seasonally adjusted basis, 
payrolls in Texas fell by 25,400 people, which is pretty sizab
le for Texas. 
And it™s interesting 
that Oklahoma was the state with the second
-largest decline in payroll. So
, clearly
, the fall 
in oil 
and gas investment is having a significant 
effect
.  It™s rippling through to incomes
, and i
t™s rippling through into c
ommercial real estate construction
, so I think it actually has a more sizable 
effect than just looking at oil and gas investment itself. 
Third, I think the inventory accumulation, which I don™t think anyone has mentioned, 
looks to me like it™s poised to be a drag on growth.  If you look at the inventory-
to-sales ratios, 
they have been drifting up, and if you look at the rate of inventory accumulation in the first 

quarterŠ
well, we™ll see what we get tomorrow
, but it looks to be on the high side in terms of 
what™s sustainable over the medium term.
  So if you had to ask yourself, 
ﬁAre inventories going 
to contribute positively to growth or negatively to growth over the next year
?ﬂ 
They are 
almost 
certain to be a drag on growth.  In the face of 
all 
of these cro
sscurrents, I think the next few 
months of data are really important.  I™m really looking at what April and May look like.  And 

even if we get strong April and May data, I™m not really sure what to make of itŠi
s this just a 
bounce after first
-quarter weakn
ess, or is this the new trend? 
In contrast to the growth side, I am getting more comfortable that inflation is starting to 
stabilize and is likely to start dri
fting back up toward our 2 percent objective.  When I look at the 
         
                  
  
      
    
     inflation data and all the other factors that feed into the inflation outlook, I think most suggest 
that inflation
Šdespite a stronger dollar, lower energy prices, and still-
sizable slack in the labor 
market
Šactually seems to be stabiliz
ing.  So let me run through the evidence very q
uickly.  If 
you look at the three-month change in the core CPI, it™s now above 2 percent compared 
with 
a 12-month change of 1.8 percent.  Inflation compensation, 
as measured by the five
-by-
five 
forward TIPS versus nominal Treasury has moved up a bit.  
Surv
ey measures of inflation 
expectations are generally stable, and I would argue that wage compensation growth trends are 

stable to slightly higher. 
So the fears I had of inflation getting unanchored to the downside seem to have 
diminished.  I could imagine that things could have worked out quite differently.  We™d have 

lower headline inflation feeding through into core inflation
.  T
hat, 
in turn
, would 
depress 
nominal 
wage 
growth and cause 
inflation expectations to be anchored 
to the downside.  And the 
fact th
at we haven™t seen that at this point, I think, makes that dynamic much less likely.  So I™m 
much more confident now that inflation will return to our 2 percent objective, subject to having 

sufficient growth to continue to close the output gap.  Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This discussion has appropriately focused on 
the significantly weaker
-than-expected incoming data on first-
quarter economic activity.  The 
staff forecasts a r
eturn to higher growth of around 2 percent or more in the second quarter and 
the second half of the year, and we™ve heard similar forecasts during this round of discussion 

from several of the 
Reserve 
Bank presidents.  The Tealbook forecast is, not surprisingly, 
consistent with what we see in the charts given 
to 
us by Bill Wascher
Šin particular, the two real 
GDP forecasts and their fan charts
.  S
o there™s a fair probability that will happen, but it™s not a 
      
    
               
         
       
    guarantee that we™re going to bounce right back in the coming quarter and there 
have been some 
weak data in April. 
In terms of elementary textbooksŠlooking at C + 
I + G + NXŠthe Tealbook forecast
s expect the bulk of the rebound in the second quarter to come from consumption, which is a 
reasonable forecast i
n light of expectations for employment and real disposable income.  
The 
Tealbook also expects government purchases to rebound significantly, net investment to decline 

more slowly than it did in the first quarter, and net exports to decline at the same rate 
as in the 
first quarter.
  This is all very interesting, but of course, we™re waiting for tomorrow™s first 
estimate of first
-quarter growth to clarify
, perhaps, 
what happened in the first quarter. 
When you focus on recent growth rates, you get a fairly pes
simistic picture of what™s 
happening, and we need to remind ourselves that the overall position of the economy is good.  

Let me start with the labor market.  The unemployment rate remains at 5.5 percent, a level that is 

not that much above many estimates of the natural rate today and is not above estimates of the 
natural rate that we had going into the March meeting.  A year ago we didn™t think we™d reach a 
rate that low until 2016
.  A
nd, importantly, some, though not all, 
of the other labor market 
indicato
rs whose behavior suggested that the U-3 unemployment rate understated the extent of 
labor market problems appear to be returning to pre-
recession levels. 
So, from the policy 
viewpoint, the basic question on output and employment is whether employment wil
l continue to 
grow at a rate sufficient to bring further improvement in the labor market in coming quarters. 
The inflation rate remains below target, and that is a problem.  However, one gets the 
impression that while we are committed to looking through tr
ansitory factors
Šparticularly dollar 
appreciation and the decline in oil prices, 
and gasoline prices in particular
Špopular discussion 
both here and in Europe has not focused on what that means.  It does not mean focusing solely 
      
     
           
          
            on core inflation, because both energy and import prices affect core inflation.  Core PCE 
inflation was 1.3 percent over the 12 months through March.  According to Board staff estimates 

in the Tealbook, increases in the dollar, which are very unlikely to persist indefinitel
y, 
are 
holding down that figure by 0.3 percentage point this year, bringing what could be called 

nontransitory core inflation to something like 1.6 percent.  And current energy price changes are 

reducing core inflation by another 0.1 percentage point, which brings you to a nontransitory core 

inflation rate of 1.7 percent. 
Now, you might be concerned about this if the low core numbers were being reflected in 
declining inflation expectations, but the survey measures seem to be relatively well anchored.  

And a
ll this, again, seems consistent with the data presented in the 
bottom two charts in Bill 
Wascher™s handout
, which show inflation coming back rather quickly to just below 2 
percent. 
I expect that the transitory factors
Šwhich are, fundamentally, 
oil and th
e exchange rate, which 
may or may not turn around reasonably soonŠwill gradually abate and possibly begin to reverse 
themselves.  We only need them to abate.  And labor market slack will continue to diminish, 
putting inflation on a path that, over the medi
um term
, will take us very close to our inflation 
target.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  A lot of people have talked about Q1 and 
have posed the question, 
ﬁWas Q1 an aberration?
ﬂ I certainly
 hope that it was an aberration, and 
I expect that it has been an aberration. 
And I don™t think, personally, that 
we™re going to learn 
that much from the GDP number tomorrow morning.  I
f it
™s kind of low or really low, it may not 
tell us very much because
 we had a really low number in the first quarter of 2014, and that didn™t 

seem to mean very much a quarter or two later. 
       
      
  
           
   
         
    
              
         I actually think the question is not so much 
ﬁWas Q1 an aberration?ﬂ 
but more the 
question that was implicit in some of 
Vice Chairman D
udley
™s analysis a minute ago
: ﬁAre 
there 
things at work in the economy that will give us a growth path for the rest of the year that
™s somewhat lower than what many of us expected toward the end of last year
?ﬂ Not that it will in 
any way resemble Q1, bu
t that somehow there are forces that are restraining growth a little bit 
more than we would have anticipated.  
Vice Chairman Dudley
 suggested one in his presentation.  
Another possible explanation of that phenomenon, should it occur, is the one that 
I think lies 
behind the Tealbook™s alternative scenario of a persistent slowdownŠ
that is, 
that there is a kind 
of confidence problem that™s inhibiting consumer spending despite the extended improvement in 

income fundamentals because of job growth and mayb
e a little bit of wage growth
, as well. 
I think for that reason one has to be a little agnostic right now in awaiting data over the 
next couple of months
Šas President Mester
, Vice Chairman Dudley, and several other people 
have said
.  A
lthough, as someoneŠI 
think it was 
Vice Chairman Dudley
Šalso said
, even then, 
it™s not clear how much some of the questions we™
ve been asking will be clarified because 
there
™s going to be a certain degree of snapback.  So instead of trying to speculate about all of 
that, I wan
ted to put on the table in a little bit more detail something 
Simon had an exhibit on in 
his presentation at the beginning of this meeting and that is the phenomenon of negative interest 

rates on European sovereign debt.  This phenomenon may be relevant to 
an assessment of the 
most likely medium
-term U.S. growth trend because of 
its potential 
effects
 on financial markets 
and the dollar, potential downside risks, andŠ
and I
™m not going to talk about this, but it may be 
relevant to the 
great debate about s
ecul
ar stagnation. 
There have been negative interest rates on some shorter
-term European sovereign debt for 
several years now, but the last six months or so have 
seen a qualitative change in the 
       
     
             
   
       
                    phenomenon in a number of respects.  First, negative rates have m
oved down along the yield 
curve in European countries with the strongest credit reputations to the point that, as in the chart 
that Simon distributed, we now see negative interest rates in a nontrivial portion of 5-
to 7
-year 
debt in the stronger European sovereigns.  Second, yield curves, as he mentioned, are quite flat in 

these countries.  I just checked this morning, and the spread between German 
2-year and 10-
year 
government bonds is about 40 basis points.  That compares to a spread of about 140 basis points 

for U.S. T
reasury securities.
  The 30-
year 
bund is still trading positively but 
at 63 basis points, 
which is a pretty low number for a 30-year.  As everybody knows, the Swiss 10-year sovereign 

issue earlier this month went out at negative rates, and 
I believe that™
s the first time 
in history 
that any sovereign debt of that duration has been priced negatively.  
And 
so, as 
far as Thomas 
Jordan knew, he was setting a precedent, or at least his country™s government was setting a 

precedent. 
Currently, 
as S
imon™s chart shows, more than 35 percent of all euro-zone government 
debt carries a negative interest rate. As recently as two weeks ago
, I think
, it was up over 
40 percent. There
™s been a little bit of an interest rate change since then, which has affec
ted the 
yields in some of those medium
-term tenors.
  Substantial portions of some non-euro-zone 
sovereigns, notably Denmark and Switzerland, also are priced at negative rates, and some 

shorter-duration corporate bonds of the highly rated European firms are 
also priced at negative 
rates now. 
Clearly, this is all related to long
-standing European economic problemsŠand, 
more 
immediately, first the prospect and now the reality of the ECB™s QE program.  It
™s also related
, I guess, 
to the relative scarcity of sov
ereign debt instruments 
issued by countries like Germany 
that continue to run tight fiscal policies and large current account surpluses, notwithstanding 
                                 
  
   
  
           
 economic conditions in the euro zone more generally.  
The unprecedented nature of this 
phenomenon has caused most thoughtful analysts to offer only tentative v
iews of the relative 

importance of various 
stories that explain
 why investors would hold longer-
term sovereigns with 
negative yields.  
Logically, I think the explanations fall into three 
categories. 
First is gloom 
about the long
-term prospects for the countries in question.  Now, it™s true, there™s not a whole 

lot of high optimism to be found about European growth prospects, but almost everybody 

discounts this as a dominant explanationŠ
that is, the idea that there
™s going to be negative 
growth 
or deflation
 for 10 years in Europe. 
The s
econd group of explanations are based on investor inertia, basicallyŠwhether 
forced, as in the case of pension funds and some other institutions, which may be required by 
law 
or regulation to hold certain percentages of extremely low-risk bonds, or unforced, as in the case 

of other investors who are themselves unsure of what all 
of 
this negative rate stuff means and are 
waiting right now to see what happens, and maybe 
chan
ge their investment decision if things 
don™t turn around relatively soon. 
The third set of explanations is that, in an environment that doesn™t offer 
a lot of 
appealing investment options, 
there may be some plays available here.  For example, you may 

get capital gains if yields go even further into negative territory, or you may get exchange rate 

gains whether from short-
term developments that cause quick swings in currencies or from 
longer-term appreciations of currencies with very low inflation or even deflation.  That is, if you 

think that there
™s going to be very low inflation in Switzerland for a long time to come and you 
are a U.S. investor, and you think that there™s going to be inflation in the United States, you 

might actually end up profiting by that play.  
As an example of th
is search for an investment 
play, I took note of one analyst™s advice to his clients that the best play may be in bonds with a 
        
           
  
       
           good bit of convexity so as to m
aximize the chances of catching the wave of large market 
movements when these trends reverse. 
To date, as a very good 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Market
Source 
report 
indicated, there have been relatively few discontinuities observed in European debt markets.  But 
I think this is the point at which Herb Stein™s memorable aphorism comes to mind, because 

unless the medium
-term prospects for Europe are a lot worse than most people think, there™
s going to be a reversal of negative rates at some point.  Even 
if there
™s no near
-term reversal 
resulting from sufficiently enhanced growth prospects or from sufficiently significant policy 

moves, a nontrivial number of investors might, over time, 
overcome their inertia and start 

seeking positive nominal yields elsew
here. 
There are 
a lot of potential outcomes here, some of which are relatively benign.  Others, 
though, are of potentially greater concern.  For example, if enough investors were caught flat
-footed by an unexpected change in ECB policyŠand, paradoxically, an unexpected 
improvement in European economic prospectsŠ
there could be some pretty significant turmoil in 
relevant markets, although there we would have to ask ourselves how much the financial turmoil 

would be offset by the prospect of improvement in the real economy.  I think of 
even greater 
concern to us would be a decision by those investors who did not initially move out of European 

sovereign debt that they couldn™t take the uncertainty or the negative rates any longer.  The 

natural destination for the
se investors is
, of course, U.S. T
reasury securities
, and I think that 
some of the dollar strengthening we™
ve seen this year has been attributable to 
the existence of 
investors
 who have already made such a move.  And it is possible, though very hard to judge 
how likely, that many more could follow.  If they were to do so, the recent modest retracing by 

the dollar could itself be halted and reversed pretty significantly. 
                  
       
      
                  On this last possibility, it™s worth mentioning that, notwithstanding the notable spread
s between 
bunds and T
reasury securit
ies, some European investors have apparently concluded that 
the roughly 80 basis point difference between German and U.S. two-
year 
bond rate
s is 
insufficient to compensate for currency
-hedging costs and other risks.  And 
this calculus is
, I think, what may be contributing to some of the otherwise-
hard
-to-explain changes in the yield 
curves of some of the stronger European sovereigns, since fundamentals are not really changing 
there but you™re seeing some movement in those yield curves, which I take to be everybody 

repositioning
, trying to figure out the best defensive place to be right now.  So investors may be 
moving around within bonds that are either euro-denominated or effectively tied to the euro. 
But if that spread b
etween 
U.S. T
reasury interest rates 
and rates on European sovereigns 
were to widen, either because we raise rates or because QE and other developments in the EU 

drove yields down even further there, then more European investors might be tempted to take the 

Atlantic plunge.  And this, in turn, could cause some market dislocation in Europe, a renewed 
unwelcome strengthening of the dollar, or both.  This is pretty speculative right now, but 
certainly in a context in which the trajectory of U.S. economic perfor
mance is at least in some 
question after the 
past few months, I think this situation is another reason for us not to be in a 
hurry to raise rates, at least not until we
™ve had a chance to see how investors are adapting, and, 
most importantly, what their adaptation means for the dollar. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming data for the first quarter have 
been weaker
, overall, than expected, including data for household and business spending, 
industrial production, and housing starts and permitsŠ
a little bit different but quite similar to the 

first quarter of 2014.  In addition, the initial BLS report on the employment situation for March 
              
   
   
        
      
     
       was also much weaker than expected, and 
that™
s different from last year
, when payroll gains 
continued 
to be 
very strong right through the first quarter.  And the question, of course, is how 
much signal to take.  
One reason to discount these data somewhat are the transitory factors that 
are likel
y to reverse, including bad winter weather and the West Coast port disruption 
as well as 
the technical factors that have been discussed.  Another is that GDP data may eventually be 

significantly revised and is a noisy signal
Šand I thought that the new exhibit in Tealbook, 
Book A, on prediction intervals was interesting and useful on that point.  
In any case, it makes 
sense to me to take some signal from this year™s weak first quarter, both for labor markets and 

for GDP
.  I think the baseline staff forecast 
strikes a reasonable balance for the rest of this year 
by assuming higher GDP growth, but not a significant catch-up quarter like we had in the second 

quarter 
of 
2014. On inflation, I would tentatively say I feel a little better about inflation, which is n
ow 
forecast to run at about 1½ 
percent
 for Q2, well above the Q1 readings.  Survey expectations 
remain stable.  Breakevens have moved up modestly across the curve since the March meeting, 

seemingly driven more by oil prices and liquidity rather than changing expectations.  
In light of 
all of the recent market readings that suggest concerns about low inflation, it™
s an improvement
, for a change, 
to read stories that fixed
-income traders are seeing a greater likelihood of inflation 
getting back to mandate-consistent levels and less risk of very low inflation.  
Of course, we may 

overread these market movements, and it may simply be that TIPS got a little cheap relative to 

nominals, and traders acted on that.  The underlying story of a return to 2 percent inflation over 

the medium term, given GDP and labor market outcomes as forecast, continues to make sense to 

me.  And I look forward to gaining more confidence from the incoming data on that.  I would 
      
  
   
    
                        
   worry more about lower inflation in the case that the economy does slip into a lower gear in 
growth and labor markets. 
Looking forward, the positive narrative is that consumer spending will increase to healthy 
levels supported by low energy prices, high confidence, and much better labor market conditions. 

In fact
, going back to 
Stan
™s basic equation, you could say that the U.S. economy has grown at 
about 2.7 percent over the last two years, with net exports at around zero.  With net exports now 

contributing negative 0.7 to negative 0.8 percentage point, you have to ask, where is growth 

going to come from?  It™s not going to come from government spending
, it™s not going to come 
from housing investment, and it™s not going to come from business investment in a world in 

which
 drilling is being significantly reduced.  So it really has to come from consumption.  And, 
in fact, in the medium
-term forecast
, PCE growth accounts for well more than 100 percent of the 
growth.  That narrative, I have to say, makes sense to me, but it does amount to an airplane 

flying on one engine.  S
o far
, the combination of the weak spending data and high consumer 
confidence says that the consumer, 
in effect
, is now 
ebullien
tly saving. 
In terms of the risks, one, of course, is that PCE growth does disappoint.  Another one, 
frankly, is that
, in a 
world of still
-slow growth, a return to stronger growth here could well lead 
to a tightening in financial conditions not so much through the rate channel as through the dollar 

channelŠi
t may not be a rate tantrum that is really the threat this time.
  We will see
, by the time 
of the June meeting, 
whether there is progress in addressing Greece™s fiscal crisis or whether 

Greece, instead, is headed for control
s on capital flows
, sovereign default, and the like, with 
potential disruption for the U.S. economy.  
We™ll see two more
 employment reports and 
a lot 
more data.  And we™ll know, I think, at that point, something about whether the first quarter™s 
      
               
      
  
  
  
   
         
        
    disappointment is transitory
 and anomalous or, instead, marks some kind of real loss of 
momentum. 
Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to reflect briefly on the quarterly 
assessment of financial stability and then turn to the outlook. 
Although overall risks to financial stability in 
the United States remain moderate, one 
area that 
bears 
heightened scrutiny is the potential for spikes 
in volatility due to changes in 
market liquidity.  In particular, we should be asking whether episodes of severe volatility, 
like 
the wild swings we saw
 in T
reasury 
bond yields on the morning of October 15, 
are likely to 
become the new normal.  Bond inventories held by broker-
dealers have declined
, in some part 
due to regulatory changes.  Separately, and predating the onset of Dodd-Frank, changes in 

marke
t structure may be at least as important in some markets
, for which automated and high-
frequency traders may now account for a majority of the activity.  Coupled with the big run-up 
we™ve seen of investments in bond mutual funds, this raises the specter of amplification of 
volatility and fire
-sale dynamics at times when investors looking to cash out could be surprised 
by lower-
than
-expected liquidity.  Together, 
these changes to the structure of financial markets 
could increase the volatility of asset price 
responses. A modest increase in the average 
level of 
volatility shouldn™t be a concern, particularly if market participants respond with more rigorous 
risk management
.  But a lack of liquidity that leads to large and self
-reinforcing swings in prices 
and market freezes during periods of stress could pose threats to financial stability and would be 

especially concerning in the case of the U.S. T
reasury market, with its traditional benchmark 
status. 
                 
          
               
  
   
     I think it
™s premature to draw conclusions for financial 
stability.  Some of the 
preoccupation with the decline in dealer inventories may, 
in fact
, be misplaced, and I think 
focusing too much attention on the critical role of dealers as reliable providers of liquidity during 
severe stress episodes suggests a ver
y high degree of amnesia.  Moreover, bid-
ask spreads are in 
line with historical norms. 
As we
™re learning from the investigation of October 15, we also do 
not yet fully understand the implications of the growing role of high-
frequency traders in these 
mar
kets. 
With heterogeneity across their size, business models, and trading strategies, some of 
their activities may
, in fact
, contribute to market liquidity, 
while 
some 
may be destabilizing. 
And, finally, it™s unclear how much leverage or high-
quality liqu
idity is embedded in bond 
mutual funds and how vulnerable they might be to liquidity mismatch and fire-
sale dynamics. 
The Dodd-
Frank requirement for mutual funds to undertake stress tests holds some promise, but 
only if deployed rigorously.  In short, I a
m very pleased that we are putting intense focus on this 
issue, and I think it will only rise in importance as the date of liftoff approaches. 
Now let me turn briefly to the outlook in the United States.  The recent data on the labor 
market, aggregate spen
ding, and industrial output have been disappointing.  The key question 
that we are wrestling with around this table is how much of this unanticipated weakness 

represents a slowing in the underlying momentum of activity and how much is due to transitory 

dis
turbances
?  The preliminary conclusion I would draw from the surprises in the recent data is 
that the negative impulse to U.S. aggregate demand from the combined effects of the plunge in 

oil prices and the surge in the dollar seem to be at least as strong as we had expected, while the 

expected positive effects have not materialized so far. 
Turning first to the positive effects, recent shocks were expected to be reflected primarily 
in stronger consumption growth, but the recent data have been disappointing.  Some of the 
               
   
  
  
   
            
      
  preliminary indicators of consumer spending are often substantially revised, so we perhaps 
should not take too much signal from them.  Indeed, auto salesŠamong the most reliable of 

indicators
Šrebounded strongly in March.  Nonetheless, subpar data on retail sales have now 
persisted for four months, suggesting that temporary infl
uences or statistical noise 
are 
not fully to 
blame.  On balance, it™s possible that the forces boosting consumer spending may not be as 

strong as we might have hoped.  
Weaker
-than
-expected consumption would be very unfortunate, 
because strength in other ca
tegories of aggregate demand remains elusive.  The recent data on 
housing starts and permits, for example, suggest that this sector continues to struggle. 
On the negative side of the ledger, the drop in oil prices was expected to curtail business 
investment related to drilling, while the dollar™s rise was anticipated to reduce net exports. A 

broad variety of indicators suggests that these effects are materializing with greater force than 

had been anticipated.  Drilling investment looks to have dropped at an annualized rate of 

50 percent in the first quarter
.  And orders and shipments of capital goods, as well as business 
sentiment, have also been weak and suggest that overall business investment will edge lower 

over the first half of this year.  
A variety o
f indicators also suggest 
that the 
stronger dollar is 
weighing significantly on activity.  Net exports subtracted 1 percentage point from growth in the 

fourth quarter, and the staff estimates 
a contribution of minus 
 percentage point in the first 
quarter.
  The national manufacturing purchasing 
managers™
 diffusion index of new export orders 
has been in contractionary territory for the past three months.  Manufacturing production 

declined at an annual rate of 1 percent, and the outlook for internationally or
iented firms has 
worsened significantly in recent days. 
       
               
  
                
       
      
In parallel, the recent labor market data suggest a slowing in the 
take-up 
of slack. 
Average monthly payroll employment gains were 200,000, down about 60,000 from last year™s 
pace
, and all of the indicators of slack have moved sideways in the last month. 
Of course, there™s a danger in reading too much into this data.  It™s entirely possible we™
ll see the stronger trend in underlying activity that was apparent in the second half of the year 

reassert it
self.  But it
™s important to keep in mind the international context.  On the one hand, we 
have seen some encouraging data from the euro area
Šdata on retail sales and industrial 

production, in particularŠwhich holds out some promise that aggregate demand wi
ll strengthen. 
And the dollar™s sharp ascent seems to have stalled, at least for now.  On the other hand, 

negotiations between Greece and its creditors remain challenging.  And although the macro data 

are
 notoriously unreliable, Chinese GDP growth looks to have slowed noticeably in the first 

quarter.
  On balance, the foreign economic outlook suggests continued weak demand in some 
important advanced foreign economies and signs of faltering growth in some important emerging 
market economies.  In this context
, the threat to price stability from stronger demand growth in 
the United States seems quite limited. 
Let me close by touching briefly on inflation.  Recent data have provided some 
reassurance that underlying inflation is not moving lower.  Oil prices have moved up somewhat 
further since March, and the 
3-month moving average of core PCE inflation has increased from 

the very low level reached in January.
  Even so, current estimates of both the 3- and 12-month 
changes in core PCE prices point to an underlying trend rate of only 1.4 percent.  And while it™
s reassuring that survey
-based measures of inflation expectations are remaining stable
, and there 
has been some improvement in market-
based measures, th
e latter 
are still materially below the 
levels 
that preva
iled
 until the middle of last year. 
The overall picture should suggest at least 
              
     
         
        
                
        
some caution about attributing all of the recent softening to transitory factors and puts a high 
premium on incoming data as we assess the timing of liftoff, which is 
the topi
c for tomorrow™s 
discussion.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, thank you.  Thanks to everyone for another interesting and 
thoughtful round of observations.  As usual, I™
ll try to summarize a couple of main themes and 
add a few remarks of my 
own. 
Starting with real activity 
and 
the labor market, everyone agreed that the news has been 
generally disappointing since our last meeting, although views 
differed 
about its implications. 
With respect to employment, the March employment report show
ed unexpected weakness in 
payroll gains, but many of you emphasized 
that 
one shouldn™t make too much out of one month™s 
report.  And, still, average gains in the first three months of the year are running 
at about 
200,000, which is a respectable pace, especiall
y given how weak output growth looks to have 
been in the first quarter. Other labor market indicators during the intermeeting period were 
mixed but generally, 
I think
, imply little change in resource utilization.  The unemployment rate 
stayed at 5.5 percent.  Broader measures of labor underutilization ticked down one-tenth, but 
the 
labor force participation rate fell 
one-tenth, and the employment-
to-population ratio was 
unchanged.  You noted that 
the JOLTS
 job openings rate ticked up slightly, but there wa
s also a 
slight decline in quits and hires, and 
at least 
the Board™s labor market condition
s index was 
unchanged.  I noted some reports from business contacts about increases in turnover and the fact, 
as President George mentioned, that people who are 
ﬁtur
ning over
ﬂŠwho are quittingŠ
appear 
to be moving to jobs 
in which
 they™
re receiving wage gains. 
On wages, I think everyone agreed that aggregate measures suggest very little pickup in 
wage growth, although some of you suggested that the reports you™
re recei
ving from your 
       
      
    
                  
        
    
  business contacts are beginning to hint at a broader acceleration in wage gains and labor market 
pressures.
  That said, many of you noted that wage pressures are confined to particular regions 
and sectors
, such as high-
tech 
in Silicon Valley
 and San Francisco.  But, 
as President Williams 
noted, the implications of movements in wages for inflation and 
for 
our criterion of wanting to 
have reasonable confidence that inflation will move back 
are 
debatable, and at least in recent 
years it doesn™t 
look like there
™s that much of a close link between 
nominal wages and inflation. 
With respect to spending, everyone remarked on the unexpected weakness we™
ve seen in 
a broad range of spending and production indicators, including retail sales, housing start
s, orders 
and shipments of capital goods, nonresidential construction, drilling, exports, and industrial 

output.  And, of course, tomorrow morning we receive the first-
quarter GDP preliminary 
estimate.
  The underlying cause of the Q1 slowdown and its implications for future growth is 
obviously very important and unclear at this point.  Many of you mentioned, and cited evidence 

from your business contacts, 
of the importance of bad winter weather and the West Coast port 
dispute.  A number of you mentione
d the fact that we have a pattern here
Šover many yearsŠ
of 
Q1 being unusually weak, suggesting some residual seasonality in the GDP figures.  
Views on 
the size of these transitory effects differ, but if they are substantial
, then the prospects for a quick 
return to moderate growth should be good. 
On the other hand, a number of you mentioned that other explanations for weaker growth 
that may be relevant in the first quarter could have implications 
for the remainder of the year.  In 
particular, the dollar rece
ived a good deal of mention.  It looks like the dollar may be having a 
significant negative effect
 and that many of your business contacts mentioned the negative 
effect 
they™re seeing from the stronger dollar.  In addition, the decline in oil prices does seem to be 

having a significant effect
Šmaybe larger than we anticipated on business investment and 
       
      
                       
                
    drilling activity, and we haven™t yet seenŠ
surprisingly
, perhapsŠmuch evidence of a positive 
effect
 on consumer spending.  The anecdotes that you reported fro
m your business contacts were 
somewhat mixed, but I interpreted those as being reasonably positive in terms of not seeing any 
really significant changes in business prospects. 
On the international side, a number of risks 
were mentioned: 
Greece
; China, 
whose growth looks like it slowed more than expected
; geopolitical risks that bear on oil prices
; and 
a very interesting discussion, I thought, of what™s happening in global financial markets, 
with 

negative rates in Europe and the potential for a 
global reshu
ffling of portfolios that could raise 
volatility or could have very significant effects either on the dollar or interest rates and could be 

triggered by a shift in U.S. monetary policy. 
On the inflation front, incoming data came in pretty much as the 
staff
 had expected.  Core 
inflation was a touch higher than expected.  Oil prices were up somewhat since our last meeting, 

and the broad dollar exchange rate actually fell a little bit during the intermeeting period.  S
ome 
of you noted that these are welcome developments from an inflation perspective, as they indicate 

that the downward impetus 
provided by 
oil and the dollar to 
inflation is ebbing and shouldn™t 
continue. We had a nice discussion of measures of inflation expectations, with survey measures 

generally remaining stable and market-based measures of inflation compensation moving up 

slightly, although 
they are 
still bel
ow where they were last summer. 
President Williams™
s discussion about the relevance of these inflation expectations to inflation forecasts was 

interesting.  They don™t seem to be very good forecasts of inflation, and it is interesting 
that 
we have, 
I thin
k, 
repeatedly noticed that these measures are more heavily influenced by oil prices 
and movements in oil prices than, 
it would seem
, is reasonable. 
             
  
            
                   On the other hand, with respect to inflation and the outlook for inflation, a number of you 
suggested
, I thi
nk, that we could be in for a period in which inflation undershoots our objective 
for many, many years to come
 and, crossing over into the policy domain, suggested quite a bit of 
concern that we may be in for a very long period of an inflation undershoot.  That took us to 
some interesting observations on the question of 
what the equilibrium real rate is
; the possibility 
that it may be persistently depressed or not, as some think
; a debate about what
™s happening with 
the equilibrium real rate
; and the possib
ility 
that 
if the equilibrium real rate really is depressed
, what 
that implies for our monetary policy, and particularly for our inflation target, which is 
something that maybe we want to get back to and consider. 
Okay.  Let me just stop there as 
a summary
 of what I heard.  Are there any comments or 
corrections anyone wants to offer?  [No response] 
Then
 I™d like to offer some comments of my 
own, then we can quit and go to dinner.  I, of course, was also disappointed in incoming data on 

employment, spending, and production.  I recognize this may be just another soft spot, akin to 
what we saw last year and in a number of years past
, and I definitely think we should be careful 
not to overreact to what is a few weeks™ worth of news.  I find it reassuring that indicators of 
consumer confidence remain pretty upbeat, and I really haven™t altered my modal outlook for 

employment and output over the medium term.  I guess if I were updating my SEP forecast now, 

I would mark down projected growth this year, but modestly.  That said, I do find the widespread 

nature of the recent negative surprises disconcerting
, and, at a minimum, I am more worried 
about downside risk and 
am 
more uncertain about the outlook. 
In March my concerns focused on the external sector, and now I see question marks 
pertaining to the underlying strength of domestic aggregate demand as well.  I find it particularly 

disturbing that the slowdown in business investment appears to have become more widespread. 
                  
     
    
                In March the weakness appeared concentrated i
n drilling activity, and I think now we are seeing 
outright declines in real equipment outlays and nondrilling, nonresidential construction as well.  
The Tealbook assumes 
that investment in intangibles is still growing at a solid pace, but we 
actually have no idea what
™s happening there because reliable source data won™t be available for 
some time.  The broad weakness in business fixed investment may be partly explained by the 

slowdown in aggregate sale
s and output via an accelerat
or effect, but conceivably other factors 
that may prove to be more persistent may also be at work, and I worry about that. 
I™
m also concerned that we may not see a pickup in residential investment nearly as large 
as the Tealbook forecast
s this year.  Housing starts and permits have been incredibly weak even 
though mortgage rates are low, employment and income are rising, and demographic trends seem 

to call for a faster pace of building.  
According to staff calculations, 
if housi
ng remains weak 
it could shave 
¼ percentage 
point or so off the Tealbook projection of real GDP in the second half 
of this year and in 2016. 
I worry most about retail sales having been soft for several months now.  Savings rates 
moved up 1 
full percentage 
point since the fourth quarter despite large gains in employment, a 

sharp decline in oil prices, record equity prices, 
a solid increase in house prices, and low 
borrowing costs.  I suppose one could explain this by saying that bad winter weather and other 

transitory factors are at work here
.  I suppose supporting such an explanation is 
the fact that 
we did see strong auto sales in March, and consumer sentiment, even though the C
onference 
Board 
number fell today, is still pretty high.
  And I suppose, for tho
se reasons
, the Tealbook forecast 
seems reasonable to me, but I must say my confidence in the Tealbook forecast that projects that 

PCE growth is going to pick up to 4 percent really, 
to me
, is a leap of faith, and I worry that we 
may not see a pickup that™
s that 
large.
  And as several of you have mentioned, at this point the 
                          
         
             
    
  only real source of strength in the economy is consumer spending.  I
f there are question marks 
associated with
 consumer spending, that puts a lot of question marks on the outlook overal
l. I don™t think the risks from the external sector have diminished.  Maybe they have even 
increased to some degree. 
The s
taff has marked down estimates of export growth in the first 
quarter 
appreciably
.  It may well be that the drag 
generated by
 past dol
lar appreciation and slow 
foreign economic growth could be greater than previously assumed.  I also worry about the 
Greek debt situation
.  If Greece were to put in place controls on capital movements 
or, worse, 
exit the euro, 
I think it
™s hard to know what 
effect
 that would have on the dollar.  I™m not sure 
whether it would cause the dollar to appreciate or depreciate
, and 
I think there are reasonable 
stories either way. 
I certainly am hopeful that information between now and June will help us resolve some 
of these uncertainties. We will see
, certainly
, two more employment reports and a range of 
indicators on spending and production that could tell us whether we™ve been through a soft patch 
or if there
™s a more significant loss in momentum.
  But by June, 
the spending data for the second 
quarter will still be incomplete, and we shouldn™t underestimate the possibility that new data will 
confuse rather than clarify our assessments of the state of the economy. 
As for inflation, I don™t really have anything to add to what
™s been said.  Even though 
core CPI inflation came in a touch higher than expected, overall, the incoming data on wages and 

prices has been roughly in line with expectations.  My own outlook is little changed.  Both core 

and headline PCE 
inflation 
rates 
are running well below 2 percent and are likely to do so for the 
rest of the year, barring some major surprise in oil prices or a fall in the dollar.
  And the April 
Tealbook projects that headline inflation will be under 1 percent this year on a Q4-over-Q4 basis, 
                              and th
at core inflation this year is only going to run at 1¼ 
percent.  Those forecasts seem quite 
reasonable. 
Given this inflation outlook, the likelihood that employment and output will expand at 
only a moderate pace in coming quarters, and uncertainties about the global economy, I 
personally think it™s unlikely that the 
conditions we
™ve set out for a firming of policy will be met 
by June, but I have an open mind.  We™ve agreed to be data dependent, and that assessment could 

certainly change 
as we receive additional data on real activity and inflation in coming weeks. 
So let me stop there
.  We should probably break for dinner.  Tomorrow, 
Thomas will 
give his briefing. We may have to make some changes in the statement when we see what
™s in 
the GDP report, but I think we have enough time tomorrow morning to do that.  We™ll begin 
tomorrow 
at 9:00 a.m. 
[Meeting recessed] 
         
   
                       
            
          
   
    
              
  
   
                                                             
  
 April 29 Session 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  I guess 
we should get started
, and 
I™d like 
to first turn to Bill
 Wascher to give us an update on this morning™s GDP announcements. 
MR. WASCHER.
6  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll be referring to the handout 
titled ﬁMaterial for Gross Domestic Product Update.ﬂ  You 
have a table that 
summarizes some of the key aspects of this morning™s GDP data, and the first thing I 

would say is that it™s nice to be lucky once in a while.  [Laughter] 
As you can see 
from the first line of the table, the BEA™s advance estimate of real GDP 
growth in the 
first quarter was 0.2 percent at an annual rate.  That™s 
one-
tenth of 
1 percentage point 
higher than 
our estimate
 in the Ap
ril Tealbook. 
Among the major spending categories, 
real PCE growth slowed from 4.4 percent 
in the fourth quarter to 1.9 
percent in the first quarter, about as we had expected. 

Business fixed investment, which is labeled here by its official title, 
nonresidential 
private 
fixed 
investment, fell 3.4 percent, and residential investment edged up 
1.3 percent.  Again, both of th
ose were close to our expectations. 
The next three lines show some offsetting misses that turned out not to have much 
effect on the top-line GDP number.  In particular, government spending fell by less 

than we were expecting
, net exports fell by more, and 
there was a greater 
accumulation of inventories than we™d written down.  
In terms of their contributions 

to growth, net exports were estimated to have subtracted 1¼ 
percentage points 
from 
GDP growth in the first quarter, while inventories added 
¾ percentag
e point to 
growth.  I should note that, 
for these two categories in particular
, the BEA does not 
have complete data for the 
first 
quarter
.  In the advance GDP estimate
, inventories 
and net exports are based on two months of data and BEA™s 
assumed values fo
r the 
third monthŠin this case, for 
March. 
Our staff had a chance to look at the monthly assumptions and other details of 
both of these components, and Steve mentioned to me that his colleagues in the 

Division of I
nternational 
Finance 
are inclined to disc
ount some of the negative miss 
in net exports between their forecast and the BEA™s estimate.
  Going the other way, it 
looks as though the BEA wrote down a very high assumption for inventories in 

March, and we might be inclined to discount a little bit of that.  So I don™t know that 

it would have much effect on the top line.  B
ut I 
believe
 our thinking at this point 
would be that net exports aren™t quite as weak as the BEA has estimated, and 
that 
inventories may not be quite as large. 
The bottom of the table shows 
the BEA™s estimate of consumer price inflation. 
Total PCE prices fell 
2 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter, the same as our 
6 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
           
        
     
                
                                                                               
  
 Tealbook estimate, while core PCE prices rose 
nine
-tenths 
of 
1 percent, 
one
-tenth 
more than we were expecting. 
Finally, I
™ll
 just mention that real disposable personal income rose at an annual 
rate of 6.2 percent in the first quarter, while the saving rate came in at 
5.5 percent.  

Both of those figures were also close to our expectations.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Are there questions for Bill?  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. Bill, is the staff embarrassed that you missed this by 50 percent? 
[Laughter]  No, congratulations on this.  This is a good call, and I think it was useful information 
to bring to the Committ
ee.  It™s a tough job, and when you get something right, you should 
definitely take some credit for it. 
MR. WASCHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great.  Then let™s turn to Thomas, who is going to brief us on 
our monetary policy decisions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.7  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™ll be referring to the handout 
labelled ﬁMaterial for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.ﬂ 
At previous meetings and, indeed, yesterday, several of you discussed the 
possibility of market turbulence in the run-up to, or following, the onset of policy 
tightening.  Although the Committee now has communications tools, including the 
SEP, that it did not have at the start of previous tightening cycles, unexpected 

movements in yields and volatility, up or down, may nevertheless occur even if the 

expected policy 
rate 
path does not shift markedly.  The upper-
left panel of your first 
exhibit provides some perspective by showing the staff™s estimate of the 10-
year 
Treasury term premium over the past 25 years.  The vertical bars high
light three 
episodes:  the beginning of the tightening cycles in 1994 and 2004 and the taper 

tantrum in 2013.  Within the shaded 18-month windows around these events, term 

premiums moved substantially.  But they also did so at other timesŠ
and likely in 

res
ponse to factors other than monetary policy. 
The upper-
right panel isolates the episodes associated with the three shaded 
regions and, for reference, the current episode conditional on the staff™s assumption of 

liftoff at the September meeting.  As shown by the red line, in 1994, the term 

premium rose substantially in the months following the onset of tightening.  By 

contrast, in 2004, in blue, it moved up several months before the federal funds rate in 

response to stronger economic data that moved up the expected timing of policy 
7 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
                       
     
  
       
           
   
    
  
             
 tightening.  But the term premium then began to decline and continued to do so over 

the remainder of 2004Š
the well
-known ﬁconundrumﬂ episode.  Finally, in 2013, the 
term premium began to rise around the time of Chairman Bernanke™s JEC testimony 

in late May, apparently reflecting market participants™ reassessment of the outlook for 

asset purchases and possibly policy rates.  As shown in the middle-
left panel, these 
term premium movements may, to some extent, have reflected uncertainty about the 

future course of monetary policy.  The panel shows the width of the 90 percent 

confidence interval for the federal funds rate 12 months ahead, derived from options 

on federal funds futures. The term premiums are highly correlated with this pro
xy for 
policy uncertainty in the 1994 and 2004 episodes, but less so in 2013, presumably 

because uncertainty in that episode was driven less by the path of the federal funds 

rate over the next 12 months than by the course of asset purchases and longer
-term 
rates. 
These experiences suggest that, even in a context in which the FOMC™s policy 
communications tools are more extensive than in the 1994 and 2004 cycles, it may be 

prudent for the Committee to consider its likely response to unexpected changes in 

term
 premiums that might occur around the time when it begins policy firming.  A 
special exhibit in the ﬁMonetary Policy Strategiesﬂ section of the Tealbook, Book B, 

provides some background that might be useful.  As shown by the dotted black line in 

the middle-right panel, the staff projects that the 10-
year term premium will rise at a 
modest pace after the Committee is assumed to start raising the federal funds rate. 

This slow projected rise in the term premium reflects in part the waning effects on 

longer-t
erm yields of the Committee™s asset holdings.  The magenta line presents the 
path for the term premium in a scenario, labeled ﬁTightening Tantrum,ﬂ that is similar 

in magnitude to, albeit less persistent than, the rise in the term premium that began in 
May 2013 (the green line).  As shown in the lower-
left panel, in the ﬁtantrumﬂ case, 
optimal control would call for a more gradual increase in the federal funds rate for 
several quarters, with the federal funds rate running, on average, 35 basis points 

below 
the optimal control path associated with the Tealbook baseline (the black line) 
over the four years following the shock. 
Recent public discourse has largely focused on the specter of another market 
tantrum.  However, a repeat of the 2004 experience, in whi
ch term premiums 
remained surprisingly low for a while, is also a possibility.  For example, such an 

outcome might occur through the effects of the very large asset purchase programs 

that are under way in Europe and Japan.  The yellow line in the middle-
right panel 
shows a scenario for the path of the term premium that is similar to the 2004 

conundrum episode.  In this instance, optimal control would call for a federal funds 

rate path that is 40 basis points higher, on average, over the next four years. 
The 
lower
-right panel highlights a few caveats. The tantrum scenario abstracts 
from the possibility of widespread liquidity or solvency problems, a point worth 

mentioning in light of recent commentary about reduced liquidity in key markets, 

which Simon discussed in his briefing.  More generally, the scenarios do not examine 

the consequences of term premium movements that are associated with other 

disturbances.  If, for example, the term premium fell because of weaker economic 
           
                   
        
       
         
          
    
  
  activity abroad and associated fl
ight-
to-safety flows, the optimal policy response 
could be to keep the federal funds rate lower, not higher, than in the baseline.  Finally, 

the appropriate policy response to either scenario depends importantly on the 

persistence of the deviation of the t
erm premium from its baseline path, which will be 
known only in retrospect.  In response to such scenarios, policymakers may wish to 

emphasize that they will respond to financial conditions that are judged inconsistent 

with the achievement of the FOMC™s objectives. 
Turning to the draft policy alternatives, thanks to the excellent work of Bill 
Wascher and his colleagues, I can discuss the alternatives as distributed yesterday. A 

key issue for your decision today is how to convey the implications of recent and 

incoming economic information for the likely timing of policy normalization.  First, 

as indicated at the top of exhibit 2, assuming that the Committee decides to remove 

time
-based forward guidance from the statement, it will primarily rely on paragraphs 
1 and 2 to speak to its assessment of whether its criteria for liftoff
 have been met or 
when they are likely to be met.  In broad terms, with alternative B, the Committee 

would communicate that the conditions for an increase in the federal funds rate are 

not yet in place, while alternative C would suggest that those conditions will likely be 

in place in the near future.  Alternative A would indicate that the preconditions for 

liftoff are unlikely to be met in the near future. 
The second set of bullets summ
arizes how each of the three alternatives may 
shape expectations for the timing of liftoff.  On the Committee™s criterion that it 

would need to see ﬁfurther improvement in the labor market,ﬂ alternative B states that 

ﬁunderutilization of labor resources wa
s little changedﬂ over the intermeeting period, 
citing the moderation in the pace of job gains and the steady unemployment rate.  

Regarding the second criterion, that the Committee would need to be ﬁreasonably 
confident that inflation will move back to its
 2 percent objective over the medium 
term,ﬂ alternative 
B updates the description of recent data in paragraph 1 and retains, 
in paragraph 2, the expectation that inflation will 
ﬁrise gradually toward 2 percent 
over the medium term.ﬂ  Thus, alternative B does not signal a change in confidence 
about the inflation outlook. 
In addition, the Committee noted in the March minutes that the timing of the first 
increase in the federal funds rate would also depend on the evolution of economic 

conditions and the outloo
k.  In that regard, alternative B provides the judgment that 

the Committee sees the recent weakness in economic activity either 
ﬁin part
ﬂ or ﬁat 
least in partﬂ as transitory and indicates that, despite the first
-quarter slowdown, the 
Committee still expect
s economic growth at a pace that will lead to further 

improvement in labor market conditions.  Under alternative B, the Committee would 

remain fully data dependent and offer no time-based guidance about how soon the 

conditions for liftoff are likely to be 
met. 
By contrast, alternative C would communicate the Committee™s readiness to begin 
policy normalization in the near term.  Paragraph 1 indicates that, despite a steady 

jobless rate, ﬁsome labor market indicators suggest that underutilization of labor 

resources continued to diminish.ﬂ  It expresses a more positive reading of recent news 
               
    
    
    
           
    
    
              
                   
         
on inflation and notes that, although inflation remained below the Committee™s 

objective, ﬁit was no longer declining.ﬂ  In addition, paragraph 
1 of alternative C 

attributes this winter™s economic slowdown largely to transitory factors. Paragraph
 2 suggests not only that the Committee continues to anticipate moderate economic 

growth and further improvement in labor market conditions, but also that it now has 

become more (or perhaps somewhat more) confident that inflation ﬁwill rise 

gradually to 2 percent over the medium term.ﬂ  Having made those assessments of 

recent developments and the outlook, the Committee would adopt new guidance in 

paragraph 3.  Rather than repeating t
he criteria for liftoff adopted in the March 
statement, the Committee would announce that ﬁeconomic conditions mayﬂ or ﬁlikely 

will soon warrant an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate.ﬂ  While 

alternative C reintroduces a time dimension 
to the forward guidance, it also retains 
the more general data
-dependent statement that the timing of the adjustment would 
depend on realized and expected progress toward the Committee™s objectives of 

maximum employment and 2 
percent inflation. 
Finally, with alternative A, the Committee would express heightened concerns 
about the underlying strength of the economic expansion, downside risks to the 

outlook for the labor market, and possible persistence of below-
target inflation. 
In paragraph 1, in 
alternat
ive A, 
as in alternative B, the Committee describes 
underutilization of labor resources as ﬁlittle changed,ﬂ but it stresses that inflation 

ﬁcontinued to run well below the Committee™s longer
-run objective.ﬂ  It does not 

offer any judgment on how much of this winter™s slowdown may have been 

transitory. Additionally
, in 
paragraph 2™s assessment of 
the outlook, 
under 
alternative 
A it would be report
ed that the Committee now sees the risks to economic activity 
and the labor market as ﬁtilted to the downside.ﬂ And the statement would voice 
concern that ﬁinflation could run substantially belowﬂ 2 percent for a protracted 
period, and possibly that ﬁthe pace of improvement in the labor market could remain 

slow.ﬂ 
Given these risks to the outlook, alternative A 
introduces a somewhat more 
stringent precondition for the initiation of policy firming, stating in paragraph 3 that 

the Committee would need to see inflation ﬁclearly moving up towardﬂ the 

Committee™s 2 percent objective rather than being ﬁreasonably confi
dentﬂ that it will 
do so.  In addition, alternative A emphasizes concern about the inflation outlook by 

indicating that ﬁthe Committee is prepared to use all of its tools as necessary to return 

inflation to 2
 percent within one to two years.ﬂ All told, alternative A would 
communicate that liftoff appears unlikely for some time. 
Thank you, Madam Chair.  That concludes my prepared remarks, and I will be 
glad to take any questions. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there questions for Thomas?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHA
RT.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Thomas, I™d like to ask you about your 
thinking as you drafted 
alternative C.  Specifically
, I™m referring to the bracketed choices in 
                  
             
            
             paragraph
s 2 and
 3, and I™m interested in how the staff is thinking about the choice of the 
ﬁhas 
become somewhat more confidentﬂ
 and 
ﬁmay soon warrant an increaseﬂ language
, as opposed to 
the 
ﬁhas become more confidentﬂ 
and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ language. 
These two language options could be seen as a sequence of statements over, say, two 
meetings.  They could convey increasing certainty on the part of the Committee or increasing 

probability of a liftoff decision.  Alternatively, I can imagine choosing between these two 

language options 
at the 
meeting ahead 
of liftoff
, with the choice depending on the probability of 
the 
liftoff decision. 
So I can see a case for both of these interpretations of the alt
-C bracketed 
language as something we might consider in the future, and 
I wonder if the staff had either of 
these ideas in mind or 
if 
it™s just providing an option for this meeting alone. 
MR. LAUBACH. 
We also explored the choice between ﬁmayﬂ and ﬁlikely willﬂ 
in 
previous drafts of a
lternative C and in other materials that
, if I remember correctly
, were sent to 
the Committee ahead of the January meeting.
  In my view, just focusing for now on that, one key 
question is how the Committee wants to strike a balance between, on the one hand, sending some 

advance notice and, on the other hand, emphasizing data dependence.  So I think one key 

question for you at some point will be, how firmly do you want to express that the next meeting 

might be likely for liftoff
, and how do you 
balance that against 
the fact 
that
, of course, over
 any 
intermeeting
 period, yo
u will receive data that may change the 
course of policy?  T
hat™s some 
of 
the thinking that went into the considerations about 
ﬁmay
ﬂ and ﬁ
likely will.
ﬂ As to the ﬁsomewhatﬂ in 
paragraph 2, you
™re right that you can see a pair between
Š ﬁsomewhatﬂ in 
paragraph 2 could perhaps fit better with ﬁmayﬂ in p
aragraph 3 because it still 
emphasizes a little bit more that you™re reserving judgment.  So that™s certainly a possibility. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
          
   
    
     
          
     
      
           
     MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes
Šthank you, Madam C
hair.
  I had a question and a 
comment.  The comment is on page 1 of the handout that you provided, ﬁMarket Expectations 
and Policy Issues.ﬂ  I thought that was a very nice set of experiments, and 
I like the idea of 

having these three possible cases
 and 
lay
ing them out.
  My own thinking is, focus more on the 
tantrum case, but, 
certainly
, it™s useful for us to keep in mind 
the conundrum case as well. 
My comment is about the use of optimal control as a way to evaluate the appropriate 
policy response here.  
Whe
n I think about what was going on in these episodes
, it wa
s really that 
there were uncertainties in markets about what the 
Committee was trying to achieve with policy 
Šand you used 
the same language, I believe
, when I was listening to you. 
But
 optimal con
trol, 
of course, involves the 
assum
ption that 
what we were trying to achieve 
with
 policy 
is all pretty 
much common knowledge. 
For example, 
in the tantrum case, we might want a more aggressive response in order to 
rebuild lost reputation, 
in some sense
, abo
ut what we™re actually trying to achieve. In the 
conundrum case
, the same is true
Šwe might want to be even tighter than what™s built in here, 
because we™re actually trying to convince markets that we are really concerned about inflation 
getting too high.  
But
 in the tantrum case, 
we might 
be even easier than what™s described by 
optimal control, because we have this need to rebuild reputation in 
the eyes of the markets 
about 

the fact that 
we really
 care about getting inflation back up to 2 
percent. 
That™s a comment.  The question I had actually builds, 
I think
, on what Dennis was 
asking about alternative C.  I™ll ask the same question about a
lter
native B.  As you described on 
page 2, which was a great way to summarize 
what™s in the various alternatives, we™re really 

relying on p
aragraphs 1 and 2 to speak to the Committee™s assessment of 
the 
criteria for liftoff.
 I         
  
   
            
       
             
         guess we™re relying on the evolution of the data over time to allow the public to figure out what 
we think 
is relevant. 
Another way to proceed is to actually be more explicit about, 
ﬁOkay, we™ve had some 
incoming dataŠparagraphs 1 and 2.  We just saw GDP now.  H
ow does that affect the li
kelihood 
of liftoff in, say, June?
ﬂ  So we could have provided more explicit guidance about that in the 
statement in 
alternative B.
  And I guess my question is, what were you thinking in not doing 
this? 
MR. LAUBACH. 
I have 
two thoughts, perhaps, on that, and maybe Simon can also 
weigh in on 
at least one of them
.  N
amely
, as Simon showed you yesterday, there was a question 
in the primary 
dealer survey on which factors market participants view as most relevant for the 
achievement of reasonable confidence.
  So there is an indirect route in the sense that what you 
say in the statement will be evaluated even though you may not have a direct statement in there 

about how 
the Committee is no
w more or less confident than before.  Presumably, 
market 
participants will
 look at your characterization of these various factors and draw conclusions from 

that about how your confidence has shifted. 
I™m not quite sure how easy it would be to try 
to come up with a summary statement for 
the degree of confidence because, well, my 
guess is that various participants rank different 
criteria differently, and I think that
™s evident from your comments.  Therefore, I believe 
this is a 
step that™s left to market participants and the public in general to draw conclusions about this. 
MR. POTTER. 
Prior to the GDP release, I think 
the 
dealers put an average 
probability of 
13 percent on liftoff in June.  Let™s assume that™s moved down to 8 
percent 
or something 
right 
now based on the 
GDP release
.  If you felt that that 
8 percent 
was way t
oo low compared 
with 
the likelihood that you might lift off in June, then you might want to try 
to indicate something.  
                                          
    
      Before it was way too high, but it 
seems a little bit 
less likely that you would want to indicate 
something at 8 percent. 
MR. KOCHERLAKO
TA.  That™s helpful.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Are there other comments or questions?  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thomas, I wonder if you could, to help us understand these scenarios, 
refresh the Committee™s memory about the extent to which overnight 
short-
term interest rates 
that we influence directly through the federal funds rate target can affect economic activity in 
the 
FRB
/US model 
independently of the value
s of the 
5-, 7-, and 10-
year interest rates
, which appear 
to figure prominently in th
ese scenario
s. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  Monetary policy transmission 
in the 
FRB/US 
model 
is largely through 
long-
term rates
, so I™m
Šlet me think. 
MR. LACKER.  Entirely? 

MR. LAUBACH
.  Largely
Šwell, to varying degrees.  F
or example, there are some rates 
in there
, like
 the rate on auto loans, that arguably are not quite as long term.  So they are not only 
a 10-year Treasury 
yield
. But it™s true that the funds rate
, in and of itself, doesn™t carry a whole 
lot of weight in monetary policy transmission, but only through its ef
fects on longer
-term yields. 
By implication, 
these shifts in term premiums that we are considering in the scenarios are 

actually quite powerful.  So they do have 
a substantial macroeconomic effect
s. 
MR. LACKER. Well, 
I have two follow-ups.  One is, when I think about this, 
I have 
difficulty reconciling that structure with the impression that a sizable volume of bank lending 

among 
the bankers I talk to seems to be priced off LIBOR and other short
-term interest rates. 
The s
econd thing is, what would this imply for Taylor r
ules? 
Have we been wrong for 
years?  Should we have been including a ter
m premium thing that we accommodate in the Taylor 
           
  
       
   
     
      
  
  
    
  
  
               rules? 
Should we think about policy differently now that we™
ve got this transmission 
mechanism 
whose 
strength varies
 depending on what the term premium does? 
MR. LAUBACH
.  There are two separate aspects to this.  One is, what if monetar
y policy 
transmission also importantly works through term premiums?  That means that term premiums 
systematically vary with the path of short-
term interest rates. 
To some extent, that is actually the 
case in 
the 
FRB
/US model
Šnamely
, that the term premium is an endogenous function of 
expected future output gaps.  So to the extent that choices about the path of the funds rate affect 

the outlook for future output gaps, that has an added effect by moving term premiums 

endogenously 
as well. 
A separate ques
tion is, should a Taylor r
ule also take into account other financial 
conditions more broadly?
 And there, arguably, a Taylor rule that responds only to current 
economic conditions may have a shortcoming because it responds only to current inflation and, 

say, the current output gap, whereas financial conditions that you observe today, like movements 
in the dollar and things like that, clearly affect your outlook in the future.  So that is not an asp
ect 
that is captured by Taylor r
ules that
 just mechanically respond to current conditions.  Of course, 
for example, if you look at optimal control, 
it obviously knows about these things because it™
s run under 
perfect 
foresight.  Therefore, agents anticipate that changes in financial conditions 
today more broadly, including changes in term premiums, will affect the future outlook. 
MR. LACKER. 
Let me follow up further.  When I look at the plot in the upper-
left
-hand 
corner, if I took Taylor rules and incorporate this term premium, d
oesn™t that mean that an 

augmented Taylor r
ule should now predict interest rates 
2 percentage points higher 
for
 1994 than 
would a Taylor r
ule without that augmentation
?                            
         
    
          VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  That™s a
ssuming you have a time-constant equilibrium 
real rate, but the equilibrium real rate could be moving, too. 
MR. LACKER.  Yes, there
™s that.
  There™s the gap.  There™s inflation.  But now we add 
the term premium
, and that™
s poi
nting in the other direction by 2 percentage points. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  If you look just at, say, the lower-frequency movement, it now seems 
as though, 
on a
n almost secular or at least a highly persistent basis, the term premium seems 
about 2 percentage points 
lower than it was back then.
  That is an effect that arguably ought to be 
reflected already in current conditions. 
MR. LACKER.  Current conditions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  If you thought about a sudden drop right nowŠ 

MR. LACKER. 
What about the current Taylor r
ule?
  Shouldn
™t it be in the current 
Taylor r
ule, too
?  We should include 
it. MR. EVANS.  It™s in the current Taylor rule through current conditions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  W
ell, I think the point I
™m trying to make is that this 
is a 
secular 
downshift 
in the term premium from a mean of what looks like around 2 percent in the 1990s to 
about close to 
zero
 now.  But that™
s not a recent development
, that™
s been persistent since
 the 
mid
-2000s.  T
he decline in the term premium
, in and of itself, arguably had, at some point, 
a stimulative effect
.  Assuming that this really occurred in isolation
, as I referred to in my briefing, 
you could seeŠ 
MR. LACKER.  So it
™s affected the current gap and the current inflation rate. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  Exactly. 
MR. LACKER.  But your optimal control says that, even given the current gap and the 
current inflation rate
, there should be some response of the funds rate to the term premium. 
               
  
   
     
                         MR. LAUBACH. Yes
, but those are projected future changes in the term premium, not 
where it is today
.  So my point is, if you had just observed 
in recent history a 
2 percentage point 
decline in the term premium, then if that had happened in isolation, 
that should indeed affect 
your outlook.  Your outlook should be stronger, all else being equalŠagain, wit
h the caveat ﬁall 
else 
being equal.ﬂ  If the 2 percentage point decline occurred in the context of a flight to safety, 

that™s no longer so obvious.  But if that had recently occurred, then, indeed, 
there is a little bit of 

a discrepancy in terms of your standard Taylor rule response only to current conditions.  If these 

current conditions haven™t responded yet to that decline in the term premium, then there is a bit 

of 
a tension since 
you project that 
that decline in the term premium, in itself
, actually is going to 
provide a boost. 
If you think, for example, about the staff projection, 
it is, very importantly, driven by our 
assessment of financial conditions today and over the projection period.  So the Taylor r
ule does 
take account of that over the projection period. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Governor Fischer, do you have a two-hander? 
MR. FISCHER. 
Yes, it™
s a two
-hander.  
What is the correlation between the term 
premium and the difference between the short
-term rate and the long-
term rate?  Is it high? 
MR. 
LAUBACH
.  The correlation between the term premium and the slopeŠ
sadly, I do 
not know this right off the top ofŠ 
MR. 
POTTER
.  It has to be high on a daily basis. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It has to be high. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Yes, i
t would be high. 
MR. POTTER. 
That™s because the short
-term
 rate is not moving that much
, because the 
FOMC
 is not moving 
it, but the 10-year is moving around every day. 
                                      
    
         
         
  
         MR. EVANS.  Yes, arithmetic, I guess. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS. 
My question is related to P
resident Lacker™s topic, but I guess it
™s really more about how we think about movements in the term premium in general.  A
s I understand 
the 
FRB
/US model and 
the way you described it, Thomas, is that these 
movements 
have very powerful effects because they affect all asset prices. 
They 
affect mortgage rates, the 
stock market, and the 
exchange rate. These 
movements are really spilling over throughout 
financial conditions, 
and 
so have a very powerful effect on GDP, employment, and inflation. 
The research on the effects of QE
ŠI™m thinking of the work of 
Vis
sing-Jorgensen 
and 
KrishnamurthyŠa lot of the research has looked at this and 
seems to have called into question 

whether there
™s this full pass
-through of T
reasury term premi
um effects onto private rates, 
such 
as corporate bond rates 
and 
mortgage rates, 
as well as asset prices in general.
  I guess the 
question is, to what extent are you buying into the story that maybe the term premium doesn™t 
affect financial conditions as fully as the FRB
/US model would tell you? 
Or how do we think 
about some of the more recent research in terms of these simulations? 
MR. LAUBACH
.  I think the short answer to that is, what I have here on the handout and 
what is being shown in the 
ﬁMonetary Policy S
trateg
iesﬂ section of Teal
book, Book B, of course, 
buys fully into the FRB
/US view that, to the extent that long rates matter for re
al a
ctivity, 
changes in the term premium are in 
long-
term
 rates.  So no distinction 
is drawn between
 whether 
the movement 
is in the expectations compo
nent or in the 
term
-premium component
. We could certainly 
try 
to look at how the results will change.  Broadly speaking, my 
expectation would be 
that 
the lines 
you see in the lower-
left 
panel 
are based on 100 
percent
Šthat 
                     
     
                 
        is, t
erm premiums are worth 
exactly 
as much as changes in expected future interest rates
.  Then 
you can shave that if you thought that a more reasonable estimate was, say, 50 percent. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you.  The second comment is really to President Lacker.  
This 
is why you have a 
time
-varying 
r*. In my view, this is the argument for thinking about the fact 
that the term premium changes over decades.  Other factors
, such as 
risk premi
ums
, the equity 
premium, 
and the sovereign risk premiumŠlots of things change in the 
economy
, whic
h is 
basically the argument not to have a constant 
r*. Your point is exactly right.  On its own, the term premium going down would argue for a 
higher 
r*. So what™
s really striking is that 
Laubach
-Williams, which just tries to let the data 
decide, has 
r* falling all 
of 
the way to zero, despite the fact that QE and other factors have 
pushed the term premium down.  T
he way I view this is
, there are these factors pushing 
r* up, but the other factors, the headwinds and the other things, are just so much more po
werful that
, on net, they push 
r* down.  Through the lens of 
r*, everything makes sense.  [Laughter]  Thank 
you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Why don™t we begin our round now?  O
ur first speaker is 
President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m looking forward to hearing 
President Williams™
s remarks through the lens of 
r*. [Laughter]  We™
ll see how that goes. 
Madam Chair, I favor alternative A.  My rationale for alternative A is based on the modal 
outlook for prices and employment, the risks to that outlook, and the zero lower bound.  On the 

benchmark outlook in 
the 
Tealbook
, Book
 A, you see 
that inflation does not return to the 
FOMC™s target of 2 percent until 2019, which is four years from now.  We should take steps to 

facilitate a fas
ter return of inflation to target.  These additional steps would also help boost 
           
   
    
                          
  
   
    employment over the medium term.  
Our congressional mandate calls for us to achieve 
maximum employment and stable prices.  If we are able to simultaneously create more jobs an
d impro
ve our performance on the price-stability goal, we should do so. 
That™
s the argument 
just 
based on the modal outlook alone.  It provides a clear 
justification for the policy course described in a
lternative A. 
I think this argument is enhanced 
by consideration of the risks to the outlook.  I agree with the Tealbook, Book AŠthe risks to the 
outlook for prices and employment are to the downside.  The standa
rd risk
-management 
considerations that are often advanced by the Committee suggest that these fut
ure downside risks 
bolster the case for current accommodation. 
When we think about the zero lower bound, as recent Brookings 
conference paper 
by 
President Evans 
and his colleagues 
makes crystal clear, these risk
-management considerations 
are significantly 
enhanced by the presence of the zero lower bound.  The past five years have 
taught us that when we™
re close to the zero lower bound, as we expect to be over the medium 
term, we will not be able to mitigate downside risks as effectively
 as we would like.  A
s President Evans™
s paper points out, this means that we should make policy choices so as to 
strengthen the economy in advance of these shocks hitting.  That, again, argues in favor of the 

kind of stance described in a
lternative 
A. So I see three arguments
 in favor of a
lternative A
Šthe modal outlook, the risks to the 
outlook, and the constraints on policy imposed by the zero lower bound. 
As I
™ve indicated in the past, I believe that it is important for monetary policy decisions 
to take account of the macroe
conomic risks created by potential financial instability.  My own 

reading of the QS report is that the main financial stability risk we face right now is actually 
          
         
      
     
   
                
associated with higher, not lower, interest rates. This will build on some of the work that 
Thomas was showing us earlier this morning. 
In May 2013, we began to tighten policy while we were still apparently several years 
away from achieving our macroeconomic objectives.  Market participants lost confidence in the 

willingness of the FOMC to buffer the economy against adverse shocks, and we saw a rapid 

increase in the term premium. If we raise the target range for the federal 
funds rate when 
headline inflation and core inflation are both running so low, we risk sending the same message 

that we did in 2013, and, accordingly, 
we risk seeing the same rapid run-
up in the term premium. 
Madam Chair, the modal outlook for inflation is too low.  We can best address this 
deficiency and simultaneously create more jobs by making clear, as 
alternative A does, that we 

are willing to use all 
of 
our tools to return inflation to target within one to two years, and that 
such a determined approach
 in 
the pursuit of our mandated objectives is also the best way to 
manage the risks we face, especially
 near the zero lower bound. 
I™d like to conclude by suggesting a topic for a possible research briefing
.  I
t builds on 
President Bullard™s comments yesterday and
, actually
, the conversation we were just having 
among 
President Williams, President Lacker, an
d Thomas.  I think it would be really useful for 
us to understand the work going on in the System on 
r*Šwhat™s determining it and 
what
™s moving it around.  It plays, actually, a pretty critical role, even in the statement itself.  So I 

believe
 exposing the Committee to the research going on in the System on this would be very 

valuable.  
With that, I
™ll conclude.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Today™
s GDP report confirms what we 
alr
eady knewŠ
that GDP growth slowed significantly in the first quarter. It™s too early to 
       
                  
   
  
       
      
     
 determine whether that slowdown will be persistent or whether it will be t
emporary, as last 
year™s first
-quarter slowdown turned out to be.  With no decision on the table, we don™t have to 
make that determination today.  
June™s decision is going to be data dependent, 
and we™ll be receiving important 
information
, including two monthly employment reports, 
to help
 come to a decision about liftoff 
in June.  Thus, I think it™s important not to signal anything today about a June decision.  
I support the spirit of a
lternative B today because
, at this point
, I favor data dependence 
and the meeting-by-meeting nature of the decision of liftoff.  
I believe it is appropriate to 

acknowledge the slowdown in growth and employment in paragraph 2, but then to maintain the 

characterization of the risk
s to the outlook for economic activity and 
the labor market as nearly 
balanced.
  However, in my view, the tone of the first paragraph on inter
meet
ing developments is 
too negative.  I think some of that negativity comes from focusing too much on short-
term 
changes 
in economic indicators instead of providing the Committee™s assessment of changes in 
economic cond
itions that matter for a policy decision. 
I do appreciate some of the changes that 
were made between the first draft of statement language that was circulated and the draft on the 

table today that addressed this issue of tone, but we have to remember that the public doesn™t see 

the evolution of our drafts. 
The 
Tealbook, Book B, 
tells us that the intention of 
alternative B is to avoid any date
-based guidance and ret
ain the option of beginning policy normalization in June if the data and 
outlook justify it.  
My concern is that 
alternative B doesn™t seem to achieve this.  My concern is, 
it™ll be read as our signaling that we™ve taken June off the table when that™s not the case, and it 

would be inconsistent with our data-dependent approach. 
             
  
    
           
                      Since our 
March meet
ing
, market expectations have shifted to a later liftoff and 
a flatter 
policy 
rate 
path.  In normal times, 
such a shift would be reflecting their assessment of the 
incoming data for the economic outlook, and we might want to take some signal from it.  
But 
as we prepare for liftoff, markets are particularly sensitive to our communications.  The shift in the 
expected policy 
rate 
path may not be providing any independent assessment of the economy.  
Instead
, it might be reflecting the market™s view of the Committee™s view. 
As former Chairman Alan Greenspan once said when discussing how difficult policy 
communications are, ﬁPeople hear what they want to hear.ﬂ  In such an environment, 
we must be 

even more careful than usual not to say things that could be misinte
rpreted
, even if they™re 
factually true.
  Of course, anticipating how the market might react to anything 
we do say is a 
difficult task. 
Turning to language specifics, in paragraph 1, I would opt to say ﬁgrowth slowed . . . , in 
part reflecting transitory f
actors,
ﬂ rather than ﬁ
at least in part.
ﬂ  And at this point, I understand 
that the rest of the language is pretty well locked down, but I would like to suggest one change.  

Instead of 
ﬁGrowth in household spending declined,ﬂ 
can we say ﬁH
ousehold spending 
continued to grow
, although at a slower pace
ﬂ? Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  So you said 
that, 
instead of 
ﬁGrowth in household spending 
decline
dﬂŠwhat did you want? Just review what you wanted to say instead. 
MS. MESTER.  Ye
s.  ﬁHousehold spending continued to grow, although at a slower 
pace.
ﬂ CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  
President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I support 
alternative B, including the 
statement and President Mester
™s suggestion concerning ﬁin part.ﬂ 
                 
        
                    
I see t
he decision 
at this meeting on both policy and statement as straightforward.  So I™d 
like to spend a few minutes looking ahead and thinking aloud about statement language 
possibilities in alternative economic scenarios, obviously evidence
d by incoming data, and 

alternative liftoff decision scenarios. 
I expect it will be evident in this round that there is some desire to keep June an active 
option.  In any event, I think having various communication strategies in mind could help the 

Committee achieve as smooth a policy transition as possible and reduce the chances of avoidable 

and unwanted market volatility associated with liftoff.  For my part, I™m not so optimistic that by 

June we will be able to make a clear and plausible case that the economy is on track 
in terms of 
our two decision criteria.  Having repeatedly emphasized the data dependency of our liftoff 

decision, I think it™s important that we not cause impartial observers to scratch their heads about 

the data on which we™re basing a liftoff decision.  I expect 
that the data picture will be 
sufficiently inconclusive by the time of our next meeting to justify waiting a bit longer. 
As my earlier question to Thomas indicated, I™m trying to think through how 
communication might evolve in the coming meetings should we decide not to move in June.  As 

I suggested in framing the question for Thomas, there are a couple of ways the language options 

in this meeting™s 
alternative C might serve as a template. 
The ﬁ
has become 
somewhat more 
confidentﬂ and 
ﬁmay soon war
rant an increaseﬂ language option
, combined with the ﬁhas become 
more confidentﬂ and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ version
, could be viewed as a 
sequence of statements o
ver two meetings in advance of the liftoff decision.  
Alternatively, the 
two v
ersions could be viewed as distinct choices
, with one or the other selected depending on the 
degree of certainty or probability the Committee wishes to convey, presumably in a statement of 

the meeting just ahead of the liftoff meeting. 
         
             
             
          
        Having said all 
of 
that
, my sense of 
opinion in 
the Committee is that there is not a lot of 
appetite for signaling liftoff two meetings in advance, even if couched in very tentative terms.  I 
also doubt there™s much support for a move to language along the lines of a
lternativ
e C unless 
the liftoff decision is highly probable.  So I have difficulty actually envisioning circumstances in 

which we might choose to use the softer ﬁ
has become 
somewhat more confident
ﬂ and 
ﬁmay soon 
warrant an increase
ﬂ version in a
lternative C. 
Where 
this leaves me is the view that the most 
feasible approach to some amount of guidance in advance of a liftoff decision is the ﬁhas become 

more confidentﬂ and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ choice.
  I apologize for walking 
everyone through my tortu
red thought process.  [Laughter] 
It™s certainly possible that we will receive a string of data reports between now and June 
that is strong enough to justify pulling the trigger.  If we were to move in June, 
the advance
-
signal decision will be moot, of cour
se.  In that case
, the question becomes whether the June 
statement ought to address what comes next
Šthat is, provide some more concrete guidance on 
what is the Committee™s expected path of policy over the subsequent meetings. 
As I said at the top of my remarks, 
I just want to air some communications 
considerations.  I think it would be helpful to further discuss the question of whether to provide 

advance guidance and, if so, how to phrase it.  And it™s not too early to start thinking about ways 

to prepare the public for the path of policy 
after 
liftoff. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
alternative
 B.  The data to 
date have 
not 
met the conditions we provided in the Marc
h statement for raising rates.  I am very 
skeptical that these conditions can be met by June.  
With t
wo quarters of weak real GDP growth, 
        
  
             
  
              
  
  
   
  
       
we once again are faced with a forecast of improvement
Šthe data reflect broader
-based 
weakness. 
In addition, interna
tional conditions since the 
March meeting have become more 
worrisome.  The frustration among Greek leaders when talking with European policymakers is 
palpable, while the European policymakers I spoke with seem
ed to have more confidence that 
any problems as
sociated with a Gree
k default could be readily contained. 
I am less confident 
that a smooth resolution will be achieved.  Moreover, I worry that this misplaced confidence 
in the likely 
containment of spillovers arising 
from a possible Greek default may ge
nerate 
conditions that make default even more likely. 
As I discussed yesterday, it is possible our inflation target is too low, given the 
accumulating evidence that we set the target based on research that underestimated both the 

likelihood and severity of being at the zero lower bound.  If we are willing to entertain a higher 

target, then a later liftoff would be further justified.
  In part, this would also indicate a higher 
standard for moving, shifting from reasonable confidence that we are moving toward our 

inflation target to just plain confidence that we are moving toward our inflation target. 
As the 
data to date should not make us even reasonably confident, this distinction will become more 

relevant at future meetings, presumably in the fall. 
In term
s of language, I would take out the ﬁat least,ﬂ and I would keep ﬁin part reflecting 
transitory factors.ﬂ
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
First Vice President Holcomb. 

MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
There
™s no denying that the bulk of data 
on real activity released since our March meeting has disappointed expectations.  However, a 
                              
       
      
    
     review of what has happened and what may be revealed to have happened argues for maintaining 
flexibility with respect to the tim
ing of liftoff. 
Labor market conditions continue to improve, albeit at a slow pace.  We™ve also seen the 
trade
-weighted exchange value of the dollar fall slightly against other major currencies and the 
price of oil move irregularly upward.  So we have some reason to think that the two main forces 

that have driven down headline inflation and which might pose a threat to long-
term inflation 
expectations are abating. 
Measures of core inflation have ticked upward. 
In the University of 
Michigan survey, longer-term inflation expectations edged downward in April™s preliminary 

report but remain within their recent range. 
Between now and the June meeting, the information that we will receive may shed new 
light on jobs, retail sales, consumer sentiment, and the overall health of the manufacturing and 

nonmanufacturing sectors.  We will also have two new reports on trimmed mean PCE inflation 

and household inflation expectations. Several of the current uncertainties hanging over the world 
economy may be at least partia
lly resolved.  It seems to me to be well within the realm of 
possibility that the information we receive between now and June will warrant a policy response. 
I believe it is important, therefore, that a June liftoff remain on the table. 
While
, technically
, there is nothing in the language of a
lternative B that takes June liftoff 
off the table, I do have some concern.  I can readily imagine people in the financial markets and 

business press drawing the conclusion that June action is all but impossible, given the lack of 

foreshadowing in a
lternative B.
  This move in market expectations could prove to be an 
impediment to Committee action.  Therefore, the language in paragraph 3 of a
lternative C with 
the ﬁmay soonﬂ option is attractive, 
as it more clearly indic
ates that June remains a viable option. 
On the other hand, a
lternative B states the Committee™s intention to take timely action once its 
         
            
    
                 
  criteria have been met
.  With the possibility of continued uncertainty on both fronts, 
I support 
alternative B.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, although with a 
language change, which I will get to toward the end of my remarks. 
I first wanted to say that I agree with people that once w
e have removed the forward 
guidance, as we™ve now done, every meeting should be a live meeting in which the possibility of 

a change in the federal funds rate can be on the table.
  Having said that, though, we still have 
different assessments as to how like
ly it is that we think we
™re going to want to raise the federal 
funds rate target range in the next couple of meetings.  I, for one, don™t think it™
s very likely at 
all.  But I do 
believe
 that we should not do anything that formally takes it off the table. 
I wasn™t going to comment on this, but 
President Lockhart
™s 
thoughtful observations did 
provoke me to say a couple of things on how to begin moving forward.  I think I™m coming out 
in a somewhat different place, although only in a tentative way, and would 
like to hear other 
people™s views on this.  I™d be reluctant to put back into paragraph 3 at some point an indication 

that, one or two meetings from now, we are more likely to move.  T
he reason 
is, I think that 
becomes a form of calendar guidance of its o
wn.  J
ust as
, when we put in the quasi-
calendar 
guidance before, saying, ﬁWell, 
this isn™t really calendar
Šit™s all data dependent,ﬂ the markets 
all read it as calendar guidance
, I think the same thing is going to happen now if we put in 

language such as t
hat included in paragraph 3 of a
lternative C. 
My preference would be that we use paragraph 2 as the vehicle for beginning to 
communicate a change in the Committee™s collective view as to where the economy is headed, 

which
, it™s hoped, actually begins to, I would say, 
increase some volatility a little bit as people 
        
           
         
  
      
  
       begin to think 
liftoff
 is more likely but is not a done deal.  T
hat 
way, we don™t have a surprise at 
the meeting in which we eventually lift the target range, but it is not de facto occurring just by 
the inclusion of language in paragraph 3 at a meeting before we™
ve actually decided to lift the 
target range. 
As I said, my current view is that June is very unlikely as an appropriate time to increase 
the target range.  I thought that paragraph 1 as originally circulated a week or two ago actually 

hit about right the factual characterization of the economy.  It™
s fairly
 hard to argue with the 
proposition that the data w
ere 
rather 
disappointing and pretty bad, yet paragraph 1 began with 
something sayin
g that it was 
ﬁin part reflecting transitory factors.ﬂ  M
ost important, 
I think, the 
beginning of paragraph 2 communicates that ﬁAlthough growth in output and employment 

slowed during the first quarter, the Committee continues to expect
–ﬂ In other words, 
the basic 

direction of the 
Committee™s expectations ha
sn™t changed, notwithstanding the disappointing 
developments reported in paragraph 1. 
Notwithstanding the fact that I thought the original paragraph 1 got it about right, I
™m okay with most of the chang
es that have been made since the original language was circulated, 

although I wouldn™t want to see us going too much further to try to look for the cheery in a way 

that would obscure what™
s actually happened.
  The one exception, Madam Chair, is the 
sentence 
on inflation, which is the second-
to-last sentence in paragraph 1.  Back in March, that sentence 
said ﬁInflation has declined further below the Committee™s longer-run objective, largely 

reflecting declines in energy prices.ﬂ So the phrase 
ﬁlargel
y reflecting declines in energy pricesﬂ 
was, in effect, explaining how the decline had gone further below.  It was an explanation of the 

delta. 
                                
       
  
       
 I think the language that was circulated 
originally to the Committee a week or two ago is 
now in a
lternative A
, and the language is as follows: 
ﬁInflation continued to run well below the 
Committee™s longer
-run objective, largely reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and 
decreasing prices of non
-energy imports.ﬂ  There, the way I read it when that language wa
s circulated was that now this 
phrase 
ﬁlargely reflectingﬂ in effect explains the ﬁwellﬂ part
Šwhy 
it is ﬁwellﬂ below.  But as it
™s been modified, the sentence now reads ﬁInflation continued to run 
below the Committee™s longer-run objective, largely reflect
ing earlier declines in energy prices 
and decreasing prices of non-
energy imports.ﬂ 
I don™t think it
™s the case that all of the difference between the Committee™s target and 
where we are right now is explained based on the earlier declines in energy prices 
and decreasing 
prices of non-energy imports.  On the contrary, as many people pointed out yesterday and a little 
bit today already, we haven™t been hitting the inflation target for quite some time now.  And if 

you pull out housing inflationŠ
which
, of cour
se, is largely a function of rents imputed to 
homeownersŠthen you have an awful lot of continuing questions 
about how much inflation 
there is. 
As a factual matter, I think we should modify that sentence to say something like the 
following: 
ﬁInflation cont
inued to run below the Committee™s longer-
run objective, partly 
reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non
-energy importsﬂŠ
or something just making clear that that second phrase does not account for all of the difference 

betw
een the Committee™s target and where we are right now. 
Finally, like those who have gone before me, I would prefer removing ﬁat leastﬂ in the 
first sentence.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 
                   
                             MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Our March statement provided forward 
guidance only as far ahead as this meeting, and it effectively said we were going to go to a 
meeting
-by-
meeting
, data-dependent approach to decisionmaking.  From now on, that™
s the right 
thing to do, and I think 
tha
t™
s imp
ortant.
  This means we will not be in the business of 
telegraphing interest rate moves in the previous meeting™s
 statement.  I support the observations 
President Lockhart made on this.  A
n important corollary 
of that is that we should not be 
encouraging pe
ople to believe we won™t raise rates without having sent a telegraph on the issue 
in the previous meeting™s 
statement. 
Concerning 
alternative 
C as a stalking
-horse for future statements, I don™t feel the need to 
include language like that in paragraphs 2 or 3 
at a meeting prior to liftoff
.  So I agree with 
Governor TarulloŠevery meeting should be live, and we should, to the extent that we have the 

opportunity, condition people to expect that we could move without forewarning, perhaps.  
A critical aspect is today™s characterization of the economy
, especial
ly in the first 
paragraph.  As I said in the earlier round, a substantial amount of data is scheduled to arrive 

between now and our June meeting.  If those reports are reasonably close to what the Tealbook is 

forecasting, they
™re going to show a rebound in consumer spending growth, and they™re going to 

show a firming in the monthly inflation figures. 
In that case, there could well be a strong argument for raising rates in June.  Now, we 
don™t know for sure the data will come in that way, and we don™t know for sure there won™t be 

some looming concerns on the horizon that alter the outlook. We could find we™ve hit a more 

prolonged soft patch.  I
n that case
, we may be inclined to delay raising rates when we get to 
June, and I™m open to that possibility.  But, in view of the information we™
re going to get, I think 
it™s very important not to take June off the table. 
        
  
                 
   
         
          As I said, the critical aspect is how the statement characterizes the data, and that focuses 
attention on the first paragraph.  T
he revisions that were made between 
the 
beginning of last 
week and the end of last week in the first paragraph were good, important, and 
necessary
.  But I 
agree with President Mester that the first paragraph still has somewhat of a ﬁglass half
-empty
ﬂ tone, emphasizing the empty half of the glass I guess you™d say.  I support her suggestion for 
changing the characterization of household spending.  I 
also 
support Governor Tarullo™s change 
of ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpartl
y.ﬂ I think he™
s right on there. 
But I 
believe 
that the inflation sentence in 
alternative 
C is more balanced and fair
, as it acknowledges that inflation is no longer declining.  
It calls that out. 
Central bank communication i
s all about what you choose to call out, and I 
think it would be fair to call out that inflation isn™t declining
.  S
o I™d put that suggestion on the 
table. 
Regarding 
the phrase ﬁat least,ﬂ 
I™ve 
been wrestling with that in my mind.  Certainly, in 
a broad-brush kind of way, you can see how including it might make things a little more dour than 
they ought to be, as President Mester argued.  But, on the other hand, ﬁat least in partﬂ means 
that the amount that™
s attributable to transitory factors is 
ﬁin part
ﬂ or ﬁgreater than in part.ﬂ  F
rom 
that point of view, 
ﬁat least in partﬂ seems to me like a more upbeat assessment than just ﬁin part 

reflecting.ﬂ But I could be persuaded either way on that.  Those are my comments on language, 

Madam Chair.  Thank you very much. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank y
ou.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m going to make three comments here.  
First of all, I support President Kocherlakota™s call for a symposium on 
r*.  We could probably 
benefit from getting a lot of views on the table about th
is important parameter in our models
Š         
  
    
                 
    
        
  
  
   how we
™re thinking about it and how that thinking shapes policy choices.  So that would be an 
excellent thing to do, if we could fit that in at some point. 
That leaves me with two comments.  One is about building credib
ility for data
-dependent 
policy, and the other is about shading policy to prevent asset price bubbles.  On the credibility 
question, as we all discussed yesterday, recent data ha
ve been relatively weak.
  We have been 
trying to build credibility 
regarding 
a data-dependent policy 
being the basis for rate decisions 
as we go forward.  
I guess my assessment so far is that we have indeed built some credibility, even 
considerable credibility, 
regarding 
a data
-dependent policy rate for the period ahead
, despite the 
fact that we haven™t moved the policy rate for six and a half years.  And that™
s an achievement. 
Markets
Šappropriately
, in my viewŠmoved the likely date of liftoff back in response to 
weaker
-than-expected readings on the U.S. economy during the intermeeting period.  That™
s exactly what you™d expect to observe if policy is data dependent.  If we can maintain this type of 

credibility as the 
data wax and wane during 2015, we™
ll be in excellent shape at the time of 
policy liftoff, whenever that should arrive, in the sense that there will be few surprises in the 

markets at that juncture. 
The more we can do to convince people that we™re going to 
react to the data
 and be clear 
about what data we™re going to react to, the better off we™
ll be
.  I™m hopeful that the day of the 
first move will be an anticlimactic event because we have credibility that that
™s what we 
were 
going to do.  T
hen we make the 
move, and it™s pretty smooth.  I think we™
re well on the way to 
that, but we probably have more work to do during the spring. 
Let me turn to the second comment on the shading 
of 
policy.  The staff™s forecast is that 
there will be a smooth glide to the steady state.  This forecast envisions unemployment only a 

few ticks lower at the end of the forecast horizon in 2017 than it is today.  This is not my 
        
                   
          
    
     
    baseline forecast. 
I envision unemployment falling well into the 4 percent range over the 
forecast horizon,
 barring any large negative shock to the U.S. economy.  This is what happened 
in the 1990s and in the 2000s, and I think it™
s a good baseline forecast of what
™s going to happen 
again this time. 
Simultaneously, the labor market conditions index, which takes 
into account all aspects 
of labor market performance, will continue to rise far above its average value
.  So we
™ll be 
talking about, 
in the years ahead
, a very robust labor market performance when compared 
with 
metrics on past labor market performance in 
the U
nited S
tates
.  This is going to constitute a 
boom phase for the U.S. economy, notwithstanding this morning™s GDP report, which I think is 
going to prove to be temporary. 
The boom will be associated with about 3 percent growth, at least for a time, in the U.S. 
economy.  That 3 percent growth, while not stellar, is still about 1 percent higher than the 

potential growth rate for the U.S. economy.  T
his is very similar to the 1990s
, when we had years 
in which 
we were at 4
 percent in an economy that had a 3 
percent potential growth rate. We
™ll be growing at 3 
percent for a time in an economy that has a 2 
percent potential growth rate. 
Inflation will rise
, go through the inflation target, and be higher than 2 percent over parts of the 
forecast horizon. 
Duri
ng this period, interest rates will remain exceptionally low by historical standards. 
We™ve already committed ourselves to that by saying 
that
, even 
when 
we start to normalize, it 
would be very small and very gradual.  You could throw in that my view is t
hat this policy rate, 
as we
™re envisioning it over the next couple of years, 
will be below the likely natural rate of 

interest, the 
r* value.  I
n this sense
, we™re going to provide accommodation as currently 
                         
        
        
      envisioned all 
of 
the way through this boom phase for the U.S. economy.  This is how I™
m thinking about it. 
Now, the boom period, combined with exceptionally low policy rate settings, is a recipe 
for asset price bubbles.  Asset price bubbles have plagued the U.S. economy during the 1990s 
and 2000s and have been a major point of debate at this Committee over the p
ast 20 years. 

These bubbles are not in our models.  They were not in the past 20 years, they™
re not in our 
models today, and we don™t see any component of this in our standard presentations on w
hat we 
should do about monetary policy.  So we do not have a good understanding of where these 

bubbles come from or how to control them when they occur.  Furthermore, bursting asset price 

bubbles can have devastating consequences for the U
nited S
tates
 and the global economy.  It™
s no small matter if this thing gets going and develops. 
The basic strategy, in my view, should be to head off this kind of possibility.  We™ve had 
boom-and-bust cycles during the 1990s and the 2000s.  What you™d like to do this time around is 
not to 
have that boom
-and-bust cycle
.  Then you™ll get a longer expansion, and you
™ll 
get better 
outcomes for everybody. 
It™s true that we have an improved macroprudential stance today, and that 
will help 
mitigate some of the more severe consequences of a bursting bubble.  But untested 
macroprudential tools alone are, in my view, insufficient to rely on, given the exceptionally dire 

consequences of bursting asset bubbles not just for the U.S. economy, but 
also 
for the global 
economy. 
The prudent policy, in my view, is to combine our efforts on macroprudential policy with 
a sensible monetary policy that hedges our bets in the direction of prevention of the kind of asset 

price boom-and-bust cycles 
that we
™ve
 experienced during the 1990s and 2000s.  I think we 
      
   
                    
       
    
     
  
  
      should be shading in the direction of slightly higher interest rates than we would otherwise have, 
on the grounds that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure on this dimension.  We do
n™t 

have very good knowledge of what these bubbles are or how they form, so we should be hedging 

our bets on this.  This is an important reason to get going on a modest normalization program 

when the opportunity ar
riv
es, which I expect it will later this y
ear. 
Let me turn just to alternative
 B for a minute.  I support 
alternative
 B, 
as written, for 
today, without the ﬁat leastﬂ phrase 
in the first paragraph.  T
he ﬁin partﬂ covers the bases there, 
and I don™t think we need to add anything more to that. 
I do 
agree with President Mester™s suggested change. 
The wording ﬁG
rowth in 
household spending declined; household
s™ real incomes rose stronglyﬂ is a little bit jarring, and I 
like President Mester™s suggestion there that would smooth that out a little bit. 
I agree with Governor Tarullo and President Lacker that we should not try to reintroduce 
calendar
-dependent language as liftoff nears.  We™re trying to get away from that, so we should 
not try to do that.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  P
resident Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  President Kocherlakota made a good case for 
alternative 
A, and I™m sympathetic to his view, but I can support a
lternative B.  I continue to 
believe that economic conditions will most likely be consistent 
with an appropriate time for 
liftoff being sometime in 2016.  I currently think, based on data, that it will take until then for me 

to be reasonably confident that we™re on course to achieve our inflation objective within an 

acceptable time 
frame. 
The information we™
ve received since our 
March 
meeting has not changed my opinion on 
this.  Indeed, I™
m a little nervous over the latest data on activity and their implications for further 
                    
                            
             slower reductions 
in resource slack. The recent stabilization of energy p
rices and 
the 
dollar are 
positives.  But, 
as I discussed yesterday, I need to see a good deal more broad
-based, concrete 
evidence before being confident that underlying inflation trends actually are heading up with 
adequate momentum.  But, having said that
, we
™ll see how the data evolve. 
Let me make a couple of comments about other things people have mentioned.  I agree 
completely that we have moved to the point 
at which 
it™s a meeting
-by-meeting decision.  
They
™re all live decisions on the rate increase, 
so data conditionality, by itself, is all we need.  I 
don™t think we need special language, 
either
, to signal our intent. 
I agree completely with Governor Tarullo on the paragraph 1 language on inflation.  I had 
noted that myself.  T
he problem is that the 
previous iteration had talked about the gradientŠ 
inflation declining
Šand now it
™s a level concept
Šﬁcontinued to runﬂŠ
but it leaves the same 
factors in place. 
So if you add, as I think you said, ﬁ
part
ly reflecting earlier declines,
ﬂ that would 
take care of 
that.
  Alternatively, if you leave the language, you could also add ﬁand resource 
slackﬂ as part of the explanation, but the more minimal ﬁpart
lyﬂ would probably be better there. 
I™m indifferent on the language about 
household spending
 growth that Preside
nt Mester 
indicated.  I™
m a little worried that it
™s going to sound like 
the message you communicate 
when 
you go out and say, ﬁI support so-and-so 1,000 percent.ﬂ  When you say, ﬁHousehold spending 

continued to grow,ﬂ the alternative to that is a recession.  If household spending doesn™t grow, 

it™s a recession, so I
™m not quite sureŠbut, 
at any rate, that
™s fine. 
On ﬁ
consumer sentiment remains high
,ﬂ these are factually correct observations, 
but
 I™
m a little worried that it might be risky.  After all, we
™re thinking that the energy price declines are 
transitory.  Gas prices are going to go up, and we know that sentiment goes down when gasoline 

prices go up.  
So we might be providing a different bright line for people looking for a bright 
            
  
    
      
                 
     
  
  
    sign here.  Then, if you see that one go down, 
it might have a little more of an implication than 
we intend
.  B
ut otherwise, I don™t have a problem with that.  I support a
lternative B. 
Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B and the latitude it 
offers the Committee to consider a change in policy at its next meeting. 
In terms of guidance that we can glean from policy rules, the benchmarks in the 
Tealbook, Book B, continue to generally suggest 
that 
the funds rate should be higher than its 
current setting. Granted, the equilibrium real rate, or 
r*, we
™ve been discussing remains 
depressed and raises 
questions as to whether these benchmarks are providing appropriate 

guid
ance today. 
At the same time, common frameworks used to estimate 
r* also provide an estimate of 
potential GDP in which 
declines in 
r* go hand in hand with lower potential.  
For example, the 
current Laubach
-Williams framework indicates that 
the equilibrium real rate is negative, though 
it also implies that output is actually above potential.  So
, while policy should incorporate a 
lower equilibrium real rate into the appropriate setting of the funds rate, it also should not neglect 

the implications for potential GDP and the output gap.  For example, using the lower 
r* measure 
and positive output gap in the Taylor (1999) rule with inertia suggests a higher current funds 

rate.  The Taylor (1993) r
ule indicates a setting above 1 percent, even with the lower equil
ibrium 
real rate.
  I don™t take the positive output gap to completely reflect current conditions by any 
means, since some labor market slack remains.  However, this example illustrates 
that 
taking on 
board a lower equilibrium real rate may also imply a sma
ller output gap. 
      
              
          
              Finally, although this is not a decision for today, I note increasing uncertainty about the 
timing and effects of ceasing reinvestments.  I
™m a bit concerned in looking at the market 
participant surveys and noting that expectations on the 
timing of when reinvestments will be 
ended are quite diffuse. For example, a slight majority of dealers expect 
Treasury reinvestments 
to end in the first quarter of 2016, but then expectations are spread over the next four quarters 
into 2017.  This is somewhat concerning, especially given the risk highlighted in the QS report 

and recent IMF financial stability reports that longer
-term rates could increase sharply 
approaching liftoff.  Or the Committee could be facing another conundrum in which longer-
term 
rates 
remain low.
  I think we should try to manage some of this risk by providing more guidance 
on the timing of reinvestment, perhaps incorporating 
it into the SEP or perhaps just 
distributing it 
on an internal basis for our own use, to think about 
expectations on when we anticipate ceasing 
reinvestments.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Prichard. 
MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I view the evolution of the draft 
alternative 
B to finally contain entirely data-dependent language.  This is a very positive 
development and, 
I believe
, an essential step on the path to policy normalization.  I also interpret 
the language in alternative B as leaving our options open for beginning normalization at any 
future meeting 
as we are
 informed by incoming data. 
My biggest concern with a
lternative B is its overly weak interpretation of the current 
economic environment.  As I mentioned yesterday, expenditure-side data for Q1 over the past 

30 years appears to be suffering from poor and pe
rhaps incorrect seasonal adjustment.  An 
ind
icator that incorporates income
-side data, GDPplus, which was posted to 
the website of 
our Real-T
ime 
Data Research 
Center this morning, indicates that the first quarter may not be nearly 
             
              
     
    
          
   as weak as many of the 
nowcasts
 being reported.  GDPplus grew at 1.65 percent in the first 
quarter after growing 3.3 percent 
on a year
-over-
year 
basis
 in 2014:
Q4. 
Further, 
I suggest that the Committee consider
, now or in the future, 
simplifying its 
assessment of the labor market. 
Many labor market indicators paint a relatively healthy picture 
of the labor market.  F
or that reason
, I would favor deleting the third full sentence in 
paragraph
 1Šagain, either now or in the futureŠand simplifying it.  T
hat sentence begins with 
ﬁA range of labor market indicators–
ﬂ  This sentence is fairly imprecise, and it adds little to the 

meaning that is already embodied in the preceding sentence.  The idea would be to seek every 

opportunity to boil the FOMC statement down to its essence by eliminating sentences that don™t 

add particularly to meaning or understanding. 
I am otherwise supportive of the suggestion to eliminate ﬁat leastﬂ and 
of the other 
suggestions that have been made.
  Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Presid
ent Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B.
  Let me respond to 
some of the language suggestions first.  Like others, I would not include the phrase ﬁat leastﬂ in 

the opening paragraph.  That™s not needed.  It™s even unclear. 
On Governor Tarullo™s suggestion, I think he™s absolutely right.  I would put ﬁpartly 
reflecting earlier declines in energy pricesﬂ in the penultimate sentence in 
paragraph 1. 
That™s 
exactly right.  In the recent data, core is running about 1 per
cent.  O
verall 
inflation
 is running 
at around zero over the past couple of quarters, but 
it was 
obviously negative in 
the first quarter
.  There are a lot of factors going onŠPresident Lacker made this point, too.  T
hat™s just accurate 
and, 
I think
, better.
  Paragraph 2 is really 
the place in which we do the heavy lifting and explain 
how we interpret things. Paragraph 1 is really about the data. 
         
                              
  
    
   
     
   I™ll 
make a comment about data dependence in 
paragraph 1.  T
his is part of life. We™re in 
the data-dependent mode.  Paragraph 1 is going to describe the data.  We had only a month, 
really
, of data here.  This is a very small sample, but these are the data we have, and I think we 
have to just describe them accurately. 
The part of the statement 
in which we try to expl
ain how we interpret 
them 
is 
paragraph 
2. In that respect, 
I thought 
paragraph 2 did a nice job of making the point that, yes, the data 
have been weaker.  Yes, we™ve had th
ese 
factors in terms of inflation
.  But, basically
, our outlook 
hasn™t changed much.  I™m not concerned so much about the weakness or the signaling in 

paragraph 
1 as currently stated
, because I think that™s the way the data have been.  It™s just a 
small sample, and
, of course, we™ll get a lot more data bef
ore our next meeting.  So I™m fine with 
that. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo and others who™ve commented on where the future 
statements should go, obviously President Lockhart started us down that road.  I strongly agree 
with Governor Tarullo and, 
I think
, P
resident Evans 
as well as
 some others that we shouldn™t be 
going back to trying to put some quasi-
date
-based guidance in there.  That whole thing of how 
we have to take a couple 
of 
steps before we act is a kind of straightjacket we don™t want to get 
ourselves in. We™re in a good place now on our statements, and I wouldn™t want to see us move 
back to that. 
Now, my own view in terms of the outlook hasn™t really changed based on the data we™ve 
seen in the 
past month, 
which is similar to what 
others have mentioned.  
First
-quarter 
data seem 
to be distorted by some seasonal factors and other factors.  We™ve been down this road before.  

In terms of the inflation data, I haven™t changed my view there, 
either. I still have 
the 
view that 
inflation 
will come back over the next couple of years to our target. 
                    
                               
  But this is 
all 
forecast
, and we™re now in the data-dependent mode.  When I™m asked 
when I think we™ll be raising rate
s, I say,
 ﬁI might have a view on this, but I don™t know.ﬂ 
I try to avoid tal
king about June, September, December, or whichever year because it really depends 
on how the data 
come in
, how they influence our outlook, and what the right policy is. 
That™s a hard message for us to get across
, because we™ve been focused on June versus 
September versus December or whatever.  So I™ve been thinking a little bit outside the box here 
about how we can, beyond this statement, get to a more data-dependent approach.  
Madam 
Chair, I have a suggestion for you.  I made you a special T-
shirt 
[Laughte
r].  The message reads 
ﬁMonetary P
olicy Is
 Data 
Dependent.ﬂ 
CHAIR YELLEN.  How about one for everybody? 

MR. WILLIAMS.  I have a whole box of them.  You wear this around, and then I think 
that™
ll make the point pretty clear
.  We won™t have to worry so much aboutŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Fantastic. 
Love it. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you. 

MR. 
TARULLO. 
Have the softball team wear th
ose. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Another great idea.  Oh, I have one 
last comment I want to make
Š sorry
.  [Laughter] 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You can™t top that, 
John. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  No, I know.  Actually, 
President Kocherlakota
, I can
Šin this way.  I 
would like to second the comments of 
President Kocherlakota
 and 
President Bullard about 
having more of a discussion 
regarding 
the natural rate of interest, 
with 
r* e
stimates
 obviously 
being at the center of this.  I get a lot of feedback, pro and con, about this, and there is some 
                    
              
      
  
           literature developing on 
this besides just the Laubach
-Williams 
model.  So I really do think that 
having a further discussion about 
that wo
uld be helpful. 
The basic logic of Laubach
-Williams is actually pretty simple.  Over the 
past five years
, output growth 
has been averaging 2.3 percent
ŠI™m picking up on President Kocherlakota™s 
point yesterday about 
how L
aubach
-W
illiams
 works.  The 
trend
 growth in our model is 2.0 
percent
.  I think that™s consistent with most people™s views. So we™re getting growth of 
0.3 percentage point above trend over five years, while the real federal funds rate has been about 
minus 1.7.  The only way you can interp
ret this statistically is 
to think 
that the real rate gap
Š basically
, the 
amount of monetary stimulusŠis very modest over the p
ast five years, and this 
hasn™t changed in our model. 
What 
Laubach
-Williams is telling you is simple.  We™ve had negative real rat
es for five 
straight years.  Output growth has been just a smidgen above potential.  Therefore, 
there™s really 

not much monetary stimulus relative to the neutral rate going on.  This is something we should 
discuss further, but, 
basically
, that™s how the mo
del interprets the data.  If the equilibrium real 
rate really were 
2, growth would have been a lot faster than 2.3.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I had read about the T-
shirt in the 
media, and I™m glad to see the real thing in front of us. 
But the 
more 
serious thing 
is, President Williams summarized a number of people™s 
comments that we want to get away from being date 
dependent.  One challenge 
with regard to 
that is the way the 
Summary of 
Econom
ic 
Projections presents our policy outlooks.  That™s very 
date dependent.  In fact, that™s what I™m often asked about
:  ﬁBoy, it looks as though everyone™s 
saying 2015. What do you think about that?ﬂ  So it™s something to be thought about
.  I
f we™re 
        
         
    
                       really trying to get away from date dependence, I think that says something about how we want 
to be talking about interest rates in the 
Summary of 
Economic P
rojections as well. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  That™s a good suggestion.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FIS
CHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d like to first discuss briefly the inflation 
target issue that arose yesterday
, and then turn to the monetary policy decision and explain why I 
support 
alternative 
B. Yesterday President Rosengren
, supported by President Kocherlakota and one or two 
others, 
suggested raising the target inflation rate, a suggestion that™s also be
en made by 
Olivier 
Blanchard.  I believe 
that 
we should constantly be reexamining all 
of 
our assumptions about 
monetary policy and the behavior of the economy, but that, 
particularly in the case of targets, we 

need to be very careful about our public stance. 
With regard to our public stance, we fixed a target inflation rate in 2011 and announced a 
2 percent target in 2012.  The setting of a 
target inf
lation rate was a major achievement and
, to 
those outside the S
ystem
, a major surprise
.  We need to be very careful indeed about reopening 
that decision and that discussion. 
The argument for raising the target inflation rate is that the higher target would permit 
normal monetary policy to attain a more negative real rate of interest than is now possible.  That 

is true, but there™s not so far been public discussion of the negative aspects of a higher inflation 

target. 
The main cost, I believe, relates to Al
an Greenspan™s definition of the desired inflation 
rate as a rate such that inflation is not taken into account in routine economic decisions.
  In 
particular, at around 4 
percent inflation
, we very likely would see the return of indexation into 

relatively 
short
-term contracts, including labor contracts.  Monetary policy becomes much more 
difficult in heavily indexed economies, in part because the inflation rate typically becomes more 
                  
        
    
  
      
               
  variable the higher the indexation rate and 
because 
the probability that t
he dynamics of inflation 
become unstable increases. 
A second cost relates to the credibility of the inflation target and of the F
OMC
.  It is possible that we should, at some future point, 
raise the inflation target
.  But if we 
go out now and 
start a public discussion about the inflation target, we will undoubtedly be asked why we™re 
raising the target and what the effects of doing so are likely to be.  
There are answers to these 

questions, but the answers may well reduce our credibility precisely at a time when reasonable 

people regard us as the most credible and most professional of the macro policymaking 

institutions in the United States. 
WeŠthat is, the participants in this meeting
Šshould not take that risk.  We should not 
go public with any doubts that we might have about the goals of monetary policy.  At the 

moment
, we™re in the middle of the process of trying to normalize monetary policy.  We should 
always be reconsidering our policy framework, but there are times to go public and times not to 
do so.  That is why our discussions of the target inflation rate should continue within the Federal 
Reserve System and within the Committee, and that is why it is fine that Eric raised the issue in 

yesterday™s go
-round, but we should not go public with that discussion. 
Turning now to the monetary policy decision, yesterday™s discussion, 
in which almost 
every participant said, 
rightly
, that 
the key issue is whether first
-quarter weakness i
s transitory or 
a signal of a longer-term weakening of growth, and this morning™s announcement 
of the first 
estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth make it clear that we should wait before making a decision 
to change the interest rate. I say that while bearing in mind an almost true maxim I once heard:  

ﬁThe situation is never clearer in the future.  It™s just unclear in a different way.
ﬂ  [Laughter] 
         
      
       
       
        
           
    I support 
alternative
 B, in which the first three paragraphs do a good job of showing that 
we are watching the data carefully
, and that the probability of a June liftoff has declined, but that 
June remains on the table. As weak as the incoming data have been and as threatening as 
the 
many black clouds that are out there 
are, it remains important to keep June as a possible liftoff 
date.  How could it be possible?  Well, we™ll receive two more employment reports before the 

June meeting.  If we see very high payroll gains in April and May and if the unemployment rate 

comes down to, say, 5.3 percent while the spending data firm as expected, it would be reasonable 

to argue 
for liftoff. 
Some might suggest that we should wait just a little longer to be sure
, since September 
isn™t really that different from June
, to perfect our communications about liftoff or to reexamine 
the tools we intend to use to raise the interest rate.
  That would mean that even in the face of very 
good data, the June versus September decision would be a close call.  But in making that call, 
we 
need also to take into account the importance of our credibility, which would require us to act 
when the conditions for acting that we have set out are fulfilled. 
Turning to the bigger picture, my views on when to lift off were influenced by the very 
helpful paper that was sent to this Committee in January by 
Oliver d
e Gr
oot, 
Etienne 
Gagnon, and Robert 
Tetlow
, whose results I quoted in the March FOMC meeting.  In that paper, they 
compared the probabilities that policymakers might regret their decisions under early and late 
liftoff scenarios.
  Using random draws from historical shocks, they show that the probability that 
we would fall behind the curve and wish that we had tightened sooner was negligible if we go on 

the early side but 
was close to 
10 percent if we wait a year longer
.  In contrast
, the difference 
between the probabilities that we would need to retrace our steps if we go earlier, 10 
percent, 

rather than later, 
5 percent, w
as not as great. 
        
        
              
           
       
Now, it™s a very good paper, but it™s not obvious where we are today relative to going 
early or
 going late.  Nonetheless, all in all, I found that analysis very useful, and it helped 
persuade me that we should seriously be contemplating lifting off soon.  It further helped 
convince me that ﬁ
early and gradual
ﬂ is a much better approach to raising the 
interest rate than 
ﬁlate and steep.
ﬂ  Of course, in the event, 
we may have to raise the rate faster or slower than we 
anticipate, but, 
at this stage
, we have to work with expectations. 
I™d also like to relate to the argument that we™re only in this relati
vely good position on 
employment and 
this 
potentially good position on inflation because the interest rate is so low, 
and that, therefore, we should not move anytime soon.  It™s undoubtedly true that the U.S. 

economy would not be in this relatively favorable position if the F
OMC
 had not moved rapidly 
after Lehman Brothers to the zero lower bound and then undertaken three rounds of QE 
as well 
as Operation Twist.  I believe history will show that the 
Federal Reserve
Štogether with the 
decision to recapitalize 
the banking system, in which the Treasury and the Congress played 
critical roles
Šsaved the United States from a second Great Depression. But we need to realize 
that, at some point, we have to put the interest rate back into action as a tool of monetary policy.  

In so doing, 
we™ll not only begin to activate a more normal way of undertaking monetary policy, 
but we™ll also be sending an extremely important signal to businesses and households that, 
after 

seven years
, the American economy is ready to exit the Great Recession and begin the return to 

normal. 
When should we do this?  The answer is, we should do it w
hen an interest rate higher 
than we have now is still consistent with 
the closing of the output gap.  I believe that, on the 
inflation rate
, the 
staff 
forecasts we heard yesterday from Bill Wascher are far less pessimistic 
than what I™ve heard around this table this morning.  I
t™s true we™ve got negative inflation in the 
          
           
  
    
                         
  
   first quarter, but it™s very important to note that forecasts of core PCE inflation 
are somewhere 
well above 1 
percent, and that when you take the special factors into account, it™s expected to 
rise not to 0.7 percent, but to 1.7 percent, which is very close to target. 
We should also note that even the 
r* in the Tealbook, Book B, is about 110 basis points 
above our current real federal funds rate, suggesting that a sooner liftoff would not be 
incompatible with further progress toward our goals if the situation improves.  Or, to put the 

criterion in the words of 
alternative 
B, we should move when the Committee ﬁ
has seen further 
improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 

2 percent objective over the medium term
.ﬂ  And I expect that will happen reasonably soon.  
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B.  On the 
statement
, I support taking out ﬁat leastﬂ and changing ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpartly.ﬂ 
More broadly, paragraph 1 initially struck me, and continues 
to strike me
, as fairly 
downbeat.  But what saves it for me is this comment about how household real income is rising 

strongly, which I think really sets out our narrative for just how much we™re counting on 

consumer spending and is a pretty strong statement in a context of weak spending.  
So, overall, 
it achieves a level of balance, and I™m fine with it with those changes. 
In terms of forward guidance, I™ll just add that I 
believe 
it™s a very bad idea to surprise 
the market with l
iftoff.  I would avoid calendar-based guidance.  I would let the data speak.  I 

would let the statement
, the minutes, 
and the speeches speak. 
I do think the market will get it. 
It™s very unlikely that the people in this room would be approaching a decision to lift off the 

interes
t rate
, with all 
of 
the attention we™re getting, and that this would be a surprise to the 
        
         
     
   
                    
  
   
          
   market.  T
hat™s incredibly unlikely. 
In fact, my guess 
is, as we approach that, it™s not going to be 
a surprise to the market, 
in light of 
all of 
the transparency and all of the attention being paid. 
More broadly, I think that policy is right where it™s supposed to beŠlooking at incoming 
data to see whether the liftoff narrative still holds together, that narrative being reasonable 
growth that is strong enough to support further improvement in the labor market at a meaningful 

pace and inflation moving up to 2 
percent in the medium term. 
The sense I had at the beginning of the year was that the labor market would continue to 
heal fairly quickly in a context of moderate growth, and I thin
k there™s a better
-than-
even chance 
that something like that narrative will reemerge as we leave the first quarter behind, just 
as it did 

in 2014.  
So, as I said yesterday, I feel good about where the current Tealbook forecast is, and 
I consider that to be still on the same path we were on
Ša little bit slower, but a reasonable path. 
I do have to admit I have a concern now, though, that the speed limit on U.S. growth may 
now be closer to 2 percent than 3 percent, because of the drag gen
erated by
 the behavior of net 
exports, and that improvement in the labor market will also slow down as a result.  TimeŠand 

dataŠ
will tell
.  Monetary policy can respond and really has already done so through 

expectations.  It may 
limit further tightening bu
t doesn™t feel 
as though 
it can reverse 
the 
tightening 
in financial conditions that we have already experienced. 
In the case of returning closer to the old path that had strong job growth, we™re close to 
the natural rate.  Monetary policy works with long lags.  Zero isn™t the right number.  This 

remains for me a very satisfying approach if we do get back to that path, and, 
again, that™s my 

modal case. 
The lower path is just much tougher. We™re still close to the natural rate. We™re still 
eliminating slack
, but at a much slower pace, and I think 
that, 
more important, 
the economy is 
       
                      
              more vulnerable to an unwanted tightening 
in financial conditions and probably in a nonlinear 
way. 
I would still want to lift off, just a little bit later
.  But I would point 
out that the 
communication challenges and the risks are much less attractive. 
I™d be very happy to see data come in that would justify liftoff in June or at any meeting 
subsequent to that
.  But, 
having resisted predictions so far for the most part, I™ll co
ntinue to do so 
today.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  I support a
lternative B.  It seems appropriate for the 
statement to recognize that incoming data ha
ve shown softness across a range of 
spending 
categories
, in industrial production as well as in labor market conditions. 
Although there is reason to believe that some of the weakness reflects transitory factors 
or statistical noise, my best guess is that some of it also reflects a more persi
stent slowing in 
economic momentum.  In particular, the negative effects of dollar appreciation and weakness in 
activity abroad on net exports and business investment, as well as the negative effects of earlier 
oil price declines on drilling and mining, appear to be greater than expected, and the boost to 

consumption has not materialized. 
This softness of recent data
, along with the advance estimate of GDP, 
leads me to favor 
removing the bracketed ﬁat leastﬂ language from the first sentence. 
I also support Governor 
Tarullo™s modification to the sentence on inflation.  T
hat is simply a more accurate statement. 
By the same token, reflecting our uncertainty about the persistence of these effects, it is 
appropriate to include mention of some continuing positive economic signals, such as the 

relatively high level of consumer sentiment.  For that reason, I support the additional words in 
        
  
           
            
        
       paragraph 2, which stress that, 
despite the weaker data, the Committee continues to expect the 
economy to expand at a moderate p
ace. 
For those who worry 
that p
aragraph 1 is too downbeat, I would note this is significantly 
counterbalanced by the fact that a
lternative B makes few changes to 
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the 
March statement, including importantly reiterating that the risks to
 the outlook and the labor 
market are nearly balanced rather than emphasizing downside risks in light of recent data. 
In my view, the incoming data, on balance, do not suggest we™re appreciably closer to our 
two conditions for liftoff.  The incoming data on the labor market do not provide evidence of 

further improvement.  If anything, the softer tone of the aggregate spending data raises the 

possibility that labor market improvement may stall this year.
  My reading of the data on 
unemployment, labor force p
articipation
, and the number of employees working part time for 
economic reasons is that slack remains.
  Nonetheless, we™ll have two additional labor market 
rea
ding
s to help with our assessment before the June FOMC deliberations. 
Meanwhile
, the modest improvement we™ve seen in putting a floor under inflation falls 
short of our standard of reasonable confidence.  We™ve seen some encouraging movement in 

core CPI, although core PCE remains persistently soft relative to our 2 
percent target. 
The recent 
firming
 of oil prices and the recent 
plateauing 
in dollar appreciation raise the possibility that we 
might be seeing an inflection point
, but further appreciation seems likely
, accelerating wage 
growth has 
yet to materialize, and market
-based measures of 
inflation expectations remain soft, 
although they™ve shown some improvement as the price of oil has firmed. 
It™s possible that the data we 
will 
receive 
in the coming months 
will reveal the weakness 
in the data to have been a temporary aberration, and that momentum in underlying activity is 

undiminished.  It could also be that incoming data and economic developments abroad will show 
                  
     
                  
       
 foreign activity to be on more stable footing than now appears to be the case.  
If so and if price 
inflation 
and 
measures of in
flation expectation
s show further signs of firming, then liftoff could 
be appropriate.  On balance, my assessment is that
, although June should remain on the table, the 
probability of liftoff has shifted from June to later in the year.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLE
N.  Thank you.  
Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.
  I support a
lternative B.  Given the 
slowdown in growth, the weaker payroll trend, and a host of other weak economic data, I think 

it™s unlikely, speaking for myself, that I™m going to see su
fficient news in the next seven weeks 

that™
ll cause me to want to lift off at the June FOMC meeting.
  That said, I wouldn™t rule it out 
completely
, because, as 
Governor 
Fischer makes clear, it™s possible that we could see two strong 
employment reports and a big upturn in economic activity.  So we could get there.  I just don™t 

think that™s very likely at this point. 
I hope the economy is going to cooperate and is going to make a September liftoff 
feasible, but I 
don™t even 
really have that much confidence about that, 
either. 
The Tealbook 
forecast is actually interesting now in the sense of how flat the unemployment rate trajectory is. 

So modest shortfalls in growth could actually cause the unemployment rate trajectory to be 

completely flat or even tick up.  In that case, we might not find ourselves yet 
able to pass the 
ﬁfurther improvement in the labor market
ﬂ test. 
I think that 
ﬁfurther improvement in the labor marketﬂ and ﬁreasonably confident [about] 
inflation
ﬂ are really good tests, and I feel very comf
ortable using those 
when 
speaking about my 
own views in terms of the tim
ing 
of liftoff
.  We should talk about that in speeches and make 
those our criteria, and that will help the market participants think along with us. 
       
                                
   
     
             
In terms of language, I™m with every
one else. I would delete ﬁat least.ﬂ  I™m not that 
confident that it™s all due to transitory factors
, so 
I think ﬁat leastﬂ goes a little too far. 
With respect to President Mester™s suggestion to change the sentence about consumption, 
I believe 
the meanin
g is the same. 
MS. MESTER.  The meaning is the same. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Given 
that 
the meaning is the same, I guess I prefer to go 
with the more parsimonious number of wordsŠ
a more direct approach.  So I think 
I prefer what 
we have. 
MS. MESTER.  I 
think second derivatives are harder to understand. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo™s ﬁpartlyﬂ versus ﬁlargely,ﬂ 
I think you really could go either way.  You think about the gap between our target of 2 
percent 

for inflation and where we 
are. 
My judgment would be 
that
 about two-thirds of that gap is due to 
lower energy prices and the stronger dollar, so about one-third is due to other things.  You could 
call that ﬁlargelyﬂ if you wanted to
, or you could call that ﬁpartly.ﬂ 
It™s really wh
at the 
Committee wants to communicate in terms of how concerned they are about inflation being low 
that should drive whether you want to be ﬁ
largely
ﬂ or ﬁ
partly.
ﬂ  I would slightly favor ﬁ
partly
ﬂ because I™m not as concerned about inflation today as I was six weeks ago, but I™m happy to 

accept the judgment of the Committee. 
With respect to the statement, I™m really glad that we™
re now in a data-dependent place, 
and I don™t feel bad about that in the slightest.  The market should be able to think along with us 

as they see the data
, as long as they can interpret them through the prism of labor market 

improvement and 
whether we are
 becoming reasonably confident about the inflation outlook 

over the medium term.  
If the market starts to diverge from what our expe
ctations are, there 
are 
                    
     
                        
       
 plenty of forums in which to remind people of what the data mean to us in terms of those two 
criteria.  I think we can easily pull the market back. 
Lastly, Chair 
Yellen 
opened the meeting by recognizing Chris Cummings
, so I want to 
close my remarks similarly.  I want to acknowledge Chris™
s service to the New York Fed
, the 
Federal Reserve System
, and this Committee.  On several occasions during the crisis
, Chris was 
forced to sit in this chair and provide the New York Fed™s views on monetary policy, and she did 

that very ably.  We hope that will never have to happen again. 
In terms of Chris™
s contributions to the 
System, they™re very large.  She™s been a great 
colleague to me and to many others throughout the Federal Reserve System.  I™ve heard many 

people comment to me over the past few days and weeks about how much they™re going to miss 

her and how important she™s been in contributing to the Federal Reserve System writ 
large, as 
opposed to just the New York Fed.  She embodies, in my mind, the modern central banker 
in that 
she has a 
very deep and broad portfolio, ranging from 
serving as p
roduct d
irector for the 
Wholesale Product Office to chairing the Financial Stability Board™s Cross
-Border Crisis 
Management Group.  That™s a pretty wide span of responsibilities. 
I want to thank her personally for her wise counsel and support during my tenure.  And, 
of course, I wish you the best in all 
of your future endeavors.  [Applause] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thanks, everybody.  
First of all, 
let me acknowledge 
that I 
heard the support for 
a Committee discussion about 
r* and the factors influencing it, and I also 
think that™s a good idea
.  W
e™ll work with Thomas and others to see if we can put that together.  
It™s a great idea. 
I heard
, in gene
ral
, broad-based support for 
alternative 
B for today, and we have a few 
language issues to review.
  First, starting at the top of 
paragraph 1, we have the bracketed ﬁat 
         
       
               
   
               least,ﬂ and I actually heard a large number of people who suggested we not include the bracketed 
ﬁat least.ﬂ
  Let me give anybody who wants it in there an opportunity to say 
so.  President 
Lacker
, I heard you support putting it in there, but are there others?  [No response] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Then I will
Š MR. LACKER.  I c
ould support deleting 
it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great. 
So we will remove the bracketed ﬁat least.ﬂ
  The next 
change suggested was President Mester™s recommend
ed change in the language about household 
spending.  Just to remind you, she suggested changing the words ﬁGrowth in household spending 

decline
dﬂ to ﬁ
Household spending continued to grow
, although at a s
lower pace.ﬂ 
I heard a little 
bit of support, not a great deal, and a couple of people 
were opposed.  Let me just ask
ŠI think I 
heard two supporters in addition to 
President Mester.  Is there widespread support for that 

change?  If so, please indicate if you support that change. 
MR. FISCHER.  I do. 
PARTICIPANT.  I support the change. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I see 
three
 people who are supportive.  And how many are 
opposed?
  [Show of hands]  Okay.  I™m going toŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Chair™s prerogative. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Chair™s prerogative
.  I think leaving it as is
, rather than going with the 
suggestion, is, frankly, my own preference. 
Finally
, we have Governor Tarullo™s 
suggested change
.  That would be in the ﬁinflationﬂ 
sentence, the next
-to-last sentence in 
paragraph 1, and the suggestion is to change ﬁlargely 
reflectingﬂ to ﬁpartly reflecting.ﬂ 
I did hear quite a bit of support for that.  Personally
, I™m also 
               
  
   
      
                
   open to making that change, but let me see what people think who didn™t weigh in on that.  H
ow 
many people wouldŠ
President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  C
ould I ask a clarifying question? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sur
e. 
MR. EVANS. 
Vice Chair
man
 Dudley, you mentioned two-
thirds o
fŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  That would be my characterization. 

MR. EVANS. Was that 
of 
headline inflation or 
core? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Headline 
is zero
.  Core is running about 1.3-ish on a 
year
-over
-year basis
. MR. EVANS.  So you™re saying two-thirds of the low headline inflation. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Yes, exactly. 

MR. EVANS.  Ye
s.  That™s fair. I agree. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It refers to inflation.  It doesn™t refer to core inflation. I 
think you can argue it either way, frankly. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Inflation is running about ¼ 
percent.
  Core is running about 1.4 or 
something like that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.  So about two
-thirds of the gap is in these transitory 
factors
, and about one
-third is
Š MR. EVANS.  When I s
ay inflation
, I™m thinking underlying inflationŠ
something closer 
to coreŠso that™s why I 
believe 
ﬁpartlyﬂ is important
.  But you™re right.  If this was nailed down 
and 
it said headline inflation
, that would be okay.  At any rate, I support Governor Tarullo™s 
recommenda
tion. 
             
          
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
            CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. 
Let me see support for Governor Tarullo™s suggestion.  [Show 
of hands] 
I see broad
-based support.  Is there anyone who feels strongly opposed?  Okay.  So let 
us also make that change. We will change the word ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpart
ly.ﬂ
  And those are all 
of 
the suggestions that we need to review, s
o I think we™re ready, Matt
. MR. LU
ECKE.  The vote will be on a
lternative B 
as depicted 
on pages 7 and 8 of 
Thomas™
s handout, with the changes of taking out the words ﬁat leastﬂ in the fir
st sentence and 
replac
ing ﬁlargelyﬂ 
with 
ﬁpartlyﬂ in the penultimate sentence in 
paragraph 1
.  It will also cover 
the directive on page 12 of Thomas™s handout. 
Cha
ir Yellen 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
Governor Brainard 
Yes 
President Evans 
Yes 
Governor Fischer 
Yes 
President Lacker 
Yes 
President Lockhart 
Yes 
Governor Powell 
Yes 
Governor Tarullo 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You should have your gavel.  [Laughter] 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
Okay.  
We need 
to confirm the date of the next meeting, which is 
Tuesday and Wednesday, June 16 and 17.  Thanks, everybody, for your participation.  The 

meeting is adjourned. 
END OF MEETING 
      
                                                                
    
 ________________ Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
April 28
Œ29, 2015 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 28, 2015, at 

1:00 p.m. 
and continued on Wednesda
y, April 29, 2015, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the 
following: 
Janet L. Yellen, Chair 

William 
C. 
Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Lael Brainard 

Charles L. Evans 

Stanley Fischer 

Jeffrey M. Lacker 

Dennis P. Lockhart 

Jerome H. Powell 

Danie
l K. Tarullo 
John C. Williams 
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, and Eric 
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Helen E. Holcomb and Blake Prichard, First Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Dallas and Philadelphia, respectively 

Thomas Laubach, Secretary and Economist 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 

David 
W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle 
A. Smith, 
Assistant Secretary 
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Eric M. Engen, Michael P. Leahy, and William 
Wascher, Associate Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account 

Robert deV. Frierson,
1 Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market Committee and t
he Board of Governors. 
                             
                           
  
       
         
   
 ________________ Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of 

Governors 
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Governors 
James A. Clouse and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 
William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, 
Board of Governors 
Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider, and Stacey Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board, 
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Michael T. Kiley, Senior Adviser, 
Division of Research and Statistics, and Senior 
Associate Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 

Governors 
Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Joshua Gallin, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci,
2 Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 
of Governors; Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, 

Board of Governors 
Jane E. Ihrig
1 and David López
-Salido, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Edward Nelson, Assistant Director, Division
 of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Eric 
C. Engstrom, Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Penelope A. Beattie,
1 Assistant to the Secretary, Of
fice of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
2 Attended the portion of the meeting following the joint session of the Federal Open Market Committee 
and the Board of Governors. 
                                    Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Katie Ross,
1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
Jonathan E. Goldberg, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

James M. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

James J. McAndrews, Executive Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 
Troy Davig, Michael Dotsey, Evan F. Koenig, and Spencer Krane, Senior 
Vice 
Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Todd E. Clark, Sylvain Leduc, Giovanni Olivei, Douglas Tillett, and David C. Wheelock, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, San Francisco, Boston, Chicago, 

and St. Louis, respectively 
Kei
-Mu Yi, 
Special Policy Advisor to the President, Federal 
Reserve Ba
nk of 
Minneapolis 

Matthew D. Raskin, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Jame
s M. Egelhof,
1 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 
                   
             
  
      Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
April 28
Œ29, 2015 April 28 Session 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Good afternoon, everyone.  I™d like to welcome back First Vice 
President
s Holcomb and Prichard, who will again be representing Dallas and Philadelphia, 
respectively. 
On a sad note, my understanding is that this is the last FOMC meeting for New York 
First Vice President Chris Cumming.  Chris has attended 92 FOMC meetings, 70 of which she 
attended as an alternate voter
.  And, as all of you know, Chris has been involved in a wide array 
of 
System work over many years in all facets of what we do and has been a very wonderful 

colleague.  Chris, I really thank you for your service and want you to know that you will be very 

much missed.
  [Applause] 
Next, I™m pleased to let you know that Brian Madigan has agreed to return to the Board™s 
Division of Monetary Affairs as 
deputy d
irector
, reporting to Thomas, effective June 1.  I think 
all of
 you know that Brian served as d
irector 
of the 
division 
and as FOMC 
secretary
 from 2007 
to 2010.  
Since he retired from the Board, Brian has been a visiting professor in the Department 

of Economics at Georgetown 
University
. Now, as I think many of you know
, in recent years
, the job of 
director 
of 
the Division of 
Monetary Affairs has become increasingly burdensome.  It has entailed serving as the 

Committee™s chief monetary policy advisor, as s
ecretary of the FOMC, and as leader of a large 
organization with c
ritical responsibilities.
  As part of a strategy to create a more sustainable 
situation, Brian will have oversight responsibility for the FOMC Secretariat and will play a key 

role in the production of the minutes and transcripts of FOMC meetings.  Obviously, 
these are 
things he has done superbly well in the past and for which he is eminently well qualified. 
                           
                               
                                                           
  Accordingly, I intend to propose that Brian be appointed by the FOMC as its s
ecretary
.  Unless there are objections, I will 
ask the 
FOMC 
Secretariat to send out a request 
in early June 
for notation 
votes to select Brian 
as our 
secretary
.  Under this 
arrangement, Thomas will 
continue 
to serve as 
the 
Committee™s primary advisor on monetary policy and will also be able 
to 
dedicate more of his 
energy to ensuring that 
the Division of 
Monetary Affairs fulfills its critical 
role 
in supporting our monetary policy and other responsibilities. 
Okay.  Now, 
the first two items 
on our agenda 
today will be 
considered in a joint meeting 
of the FOMC and the Board of Governors, and, accordingly, I need a motion to close the Board 
meeting. 
MR. FISCHER.  So moved. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  O
ur first item is financial 
developments and open market operations, and let me call on Simon to delive
r the 
Desk report. 
MR. POTTER.
1  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Lorie and I will split the briefing into 
three parts. 
First, I will review financial market developments. Next, Lorie will 
review Desk operations.
 Finally, I will discuss staff work on enhancing 
the 
calculation methodology for the federal funds effective rate. 
Over the intermeeting period, domestic financial conditions eased following 
more
-accommodative-
than
-expected U.S. monetary policy communications and 
weaker
-than-
expected
 economic data, including the March employment report.  
On net, nominal Treasury rates declined by as many as 25 basis points, the S&P 500 
index gained 2 percent, and the DXY dollar index decreased nearly 3 percent. 
A substantial portion of these changes came around 
the time o
f the March FOMC 
events, which were characterized as 
being 
more
 accommodative than expected 
despite the removal of ﬁpatientﬂ language from the statement. 
Investors pointed, in 
particular, to the large downward shift in the target 
federal funds 
rate projections 
in 
the SEP 
and, to a lesser extent, the downward revisions to Committee participants
™ projections of inflation, GDP growth, and the longer-run unemployment rate.  
The 

left column of your top-
left panel shows 
that nominal and real interest 
rates declined 
in the one-hour window around the statement and SEP releases
, while measures of 
inflation compensation rose, equity prices increased, and the dollar weakened. 
As shown in the right column of the table, the absolute magnitudes of these moves 
were 
1 The materials used by Mr. Potter and Ms. Logan are appended to this tran
script (appendix 1). 
             
            
    
         
           
     
         
     very large relative to changes in one-hour windows around FOMC statement releases 

over the past decade. 
One hypothesis for seeing moves of this magnitude could be decreased market 
liquidity. Indeed
, late in the trading session outside the window use
d to measure 
these FOMC announcement effects, there was a very large move in the euro
dollar 
currency pair.  The move pushed the intraday trading range for the currency pair to 

over 4 percent, a 5 standard deviation move over the period since 2004, as shown in 

the top-right panel.  The size of the move is comparable to the 6 standard deviation 

range in the 10
-year Treasury yield on October 15, both of which took place amid 

very high volumes.  
The March FOMC events shifted out expectations for the timing of 
liftoff 
according to the Desk surveys, as shown in the middle-left panel.  
The ﬁflashﬂ survey, 

taken 
three 
business days after the March FOMC meeting
, suggests that most of the 
shift occurred in response to the meeting and the large price moves in the hou
r 
following the March FOMC 
statement release
, therefore likely reflect
ing shifting 
policy expectations as opposed to outsized liquidity 
effects
.  Since the flash survey, 

soft domestic economic data and speeches from Federal Reserve officials appear to 

have further solidified this shift in policy expectations. 
The April surveys also showed a notably slower expected pace of policy 
normalization after liftoff. 
The middle
-right panel shows that the probability 
distribution for the pace of tightening in the fir
st year after liftoff, assuming no return 
to the zero bound, shifted toward a slower pace over the period, the first notable shift 

in these views since 
the question was originally asked last September.  
A similar shift 
occurred in the distribution of the expected pace of tightening in the second year after 

liftoff. 
In considering when the Federal Reserve will begin to normalize monetary policy, 
market participants are particularly focused on the outlook for inflation and the 

Committee™s reasonable confidenc
e that inflation will move back to its 2 percent 

objective.  
We asked survey respondents to score the importance of various factors 
they believe the Committee will use in assessing whether reasonable confidence in 

the inflation outlook has been achieved.  As shown in the bottom-left panel, 

respondents assigned the most importance to a further improvement in the labor 

market and the absence of weakening in realized core inflation.  
Over the intermeeting period, market-
based measures of inflation compensation 
increased alongside higher energy prices and a weaker U.S. dollar, as shown in the 

bottom-right panel.  Forward measures of inflation compensation increased at both 

shorter-
and longer
-dated horizons but remain below levels at the end of 2013.  
The 
increa
ses over the period were attributed to the March FOMC communications, 
somewhat higher-
than
-expected 
realized inflation, the increase in oil prices, and 
positioning dynamics in the TIPS market.  Longer-
term inflation expectations from 
Desk surveys were little changed over the period.  Meanwhile, front-month Brent 

crude increased nearly 22 percent but remains more than 40 percent lower since the 
      
   
               
          
            
       
   
                        
  end of 2013.  
As I noted, the DXY dollar index declin
ed nearly 3 percent over the 
intermeeting 
period but is over 20 percent higher since the end of 2013. 
Despite the depreciation over the period, market participants expect the exchange 
value of the U.S. dollar to continue its broad appreciation amid ongoing monetary 

policy divergence across major economies.
 Desk dealer survey respondents reported 
that dollar appreciation seen since last summer has prompted them to revise lower 

their forecasts for 2015 growth and inflation, with the median markdowns to 2015 

GDP growth and core PCE inflation of roughly 40 basis points and 20 basis points, 

respectively. 
A key factor contributing to broad dollar strength has been widening global 
interest rate differentials, especially between the 
United States
 and the 
euro area. 
These interest rate differentials became more pronounced as 
euro-
area sovereign rates 
have traded increasingly negative and yield curves have flattened substantially. 
The 
top-left panel of your next exhibit shows the extent of 
negative rate trading
 by country and maturity. 
 Red indicates that 100 percent of the bonds in that category 
trade at a negative yield, while green indicates that none trade negative. 
Despite the continued decline in 
euro
-area rates and the increasing universe of 
securities trading at negative yields, there have been few market
-functioning issues, 
and the ECB has stated that it has had little trouble achieving its purchase targets thus 

far.
 Even so, it is possible that market functioning strains will emerge over time, and 
to help address such strains, the ECB unveiled details of an augmented 
securities
-lending program aimed at supporting bond and repo market liquidity. 
The declines in 
euro-area rates, coupled with the very large currency depreciation 
and increase in equities, have s
ubstantially eased European financial conditions since 

President Draghi™s remarks at 
the 
Jackson Hole symposium last August.  
It is interesting to compare the asset price reaction 
with
 recent LSAP programs.  Using the 
price changes from when asset purchase
 expectations began to form until three 

months after the purchase programs were announced, the 
ECB™s PSPP and B
OJ™s 
QQE, shown in the left and middle columns of the top-
right panel, 
respectively, 
contributed to significant currency depreciation and meaningful equity price 

increases. The ECB™s program resulted in large declines in German nominal forward 

rates, but 
it has not been accompanied by an increase in longer
-dated 
forward 
inflation measures
.  In comparison, Japanese policies supported a large rise in 
forward inflation compensation and a pronounced increase in equities, perhaps 

stemming from the focus on reaching the new higher inflation target.  By contrast, 

U.S. asset price reaction
s to 
LSAP3 
were
 more limited, as the right column showsŠ 
though it did have a large effect in the mortgage markets, which is not included in the 

panel. 
One potential flashpoint for 
financial markets is the highly fluid situation in 
Greece. While Greek asset prices
 have responded sharply to recent developments, the 

broader market reaction to perceived downside risks in Greece has been relatively 

muted and perhaps a bit complacent.  
Market participants attribute the lack of 
          
  
                  
               
    
     
                
       
  
             spillovers to institutional improvements in 
the euro area, reduced 
private
-sector 
exposure to Greece, and the effects of ECB asset purchases. 
Reflecting the mounting 
liquidity pressure from deposit flight and bank funding strains, Greek banks have also 

increased their borrowing via the emergency liquidity assistance program to 

•76 billion in April from •69 billion in March.  
As would be expected, Greece™s 

Target2 liability, which represents balances owed to others in the E
urosystem
, rose in 
March, shown in the middle-
left panel. This level is near Greece™s prior peak Target2 
liability in June 2012.  It is uncertain how long the Greek government will be able to 

meet its debt obligations. 
Some market participants still expect an agreement 
between Greece and its creditors to be reached but only after
 a high-
stakes game of 
brinkmanship.  
Steve will further discuss Greece in his briefing. 
Shifting to emerging markets, there has been a very sharp increase in Chinese 
equities over recent months, shown in the middle-
right panel. Over the intermeeting 
period, mainland Chinese and Hong Kong equities rose by 23 
percent 
and 16 percent, 
respectively, and, 
over the past year
, the Shanghai Composite has more than doubled.  
Mainland equity outperformance 
came despite a worsening domestic economic 
outlook and proba
bly involved some speculative dynamics, though it was supported 
by expected and actual monetary policy easing.  
During the intermeeting period
, the 
People™s Bank of China 
cut their reserve requirement ratio 
by a larger
-than
-expected 
100 basis points; most contacts expect additional cuts to reserve requirements or 

decreases in lending and deposit rates in the near 
term. 
Equity prices in other emerging markets also increased
, and, as shown in the 
bottom-
left panel, broader EM asset prices rose, partially retr
acing prior period 
declines.
 The moves were supported by the accommodative March FOMC 
communication as well as a moderate abatement of risks in a number of countries, 
including Brazil and Russia.  
This partial retracement of emerging market asset prices 
came despite continued markdowns of expected growth in several countries.  
These 

markdowns and recent U.S. dollar strength have contributed to a broader trend of 

emerging market currency depreciation since the May 2013 JEC testimony or 
so-called 
taper tantr
um. 
Some market participants are concerned that taper tantrum
Œlike volatility in 
emerging markets could materialize as the Federal Reserve approaches normalization. 

Recall that implied volatility in emerging market currencies rose sharply with U.S. 

interest rate implied volatility in spring 2013, shown in the bottom-
right panel, and 
has recently moved back to similar levels.  Decelerating emerging market growth and 

rising corporate leverage, as well as volatility in commodity prices may make 

emerging markets vulnerable as normalization nears. However, these risks are 

somewhat offset by lower emerging market asset valuations and reportedly more 

cautious positioning fro
m emerging market investors, as discussed in the special QS 
memo. 
Volatility in emerging markets is only one part of broader financial market 
volatility that some worry could ensue from expected Federal Reserve normalization.  

Indeed, a senior IMF official 
recently warned of a ﬁsuper taper tantrum,ﬂ 
in which 
              
     
                                        
     negative term premiums 
would be rapidly decompress
ed as domestic policy rates are 
increased; Thomas will comment more on this risk in his briefing.
 Given the 
punctuated bouts of recent realized volatility in the very deep and liquid markets I 

discussed earlier, financial market volatility during normalization could be even more 

challenging for relatively illiquid markets. 
I will now take questions before turning to 
Lorie. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  No questions? 
Lorie. 
MS. LOGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll start 
with
 exhibit 3 and provide an 
update on MBS reinvestments, discuss testing of normalization tools, and conclude 

with the staff recommendation to extend the existing central bank liquidity and swap 

arra
ngements. 
The Desk™s MBS reinvestment operations continue to go smoothly, 
and MBS 
market liquidity remains stable.  
The continued trend 
toward higher prepayment 
speeds in March was largely an ongoing result of the low mortgage rates witnessed 

earlier in th
e year and has pushed the current monthly reinvestment amount up to 
approximately $40 billion, as shown in the top-left panel of your third exhibit.  

Despite the increased size of reinvestments, we do not anticipate having any issues 

with the execution of MBS operations, but we have increased the frequency of our 

operations to accommodate their larger size. 
Testing of the Federal Reserve™s overnight and term RRP operations continued 
over the intermeeting period.  Patterns of total RRP demand remained broadly 

consistent with recent experience, as shown in the top
-right panel.  
The additional 
25 counterparties that began participating in operations on March 16 have only 

modestly 
affected
 overall RRP usage. 
For broader perspective on the Federal Reserve™s 
involvement in reverse repo 
activity, this panel also includes reverse repos conducted with foreign official 

institutions, known as the ﬁforeign RP pool,ﬂ shown in gray.  The size of the foreign 

RP pool is notably above its pre-
crisis levels, largely a ref
lection of central banks™ 
desire to hold greater dollar liquidity buffers, while at the same time they are 

tightening their counterparty 
risk
-management
 frameworks.  Increases in the foreign 
RP pool this period, and since the beginning of the year, have been primarily driven 

by a single customer who has sought to increase the liquidity profile of its FX 

reserves 
due to precautionary 
financial
-stability motivations, in part by raising its 
cash balance 
held 
at the Federal Reserve. 
The Desk conducted two term operations over March quarter-end, the first a 
$75 billion, 14
-day operation and the second a $125 billion, 7-day operation, 

summarized in your middle-left panel.  This $200 billion offering in term RRPs 

reduced the Federal Reserve™s overall RRP offered am
ount spanning quarter-
end to 
$500 billion, down from the $600 billion offered at year-end.  However, the reduction 

did not appear to have an adverse 
effect
 on markets or meaningfully change 
participation, likely because the amount offered was perceived to still provide ample 
           
      
   
    
                     
   
           
         headroom above expected demand.  The 14-day operation was modestly 

oversubscribed, with $81 billion in propositions and a stop-
out
 rate of 9 basis points, 
a slightly higher rate than was expected.  
The 7
-day operation conducted on March 30 
was undersubscribed
, with $101 billion in propositions submitted and a stop-
out rate 
at the max offering rate of 10 basis points, similar to the rates on the undersubscribed 

operations held closer to year
-end.  Substitution between overnight and term R
RPs 
and the breakdown of counterparty demand at the March term operations were 

broadly similar to behavior observed in December. 
As shown in your middle-right panel, the Desk™s RRP operations continued to 
provide a soft floor under short-
term interest rate
s, even around quarter-end.  
The 
federal funds effective rate averaged 12 basis points over the period and printed at 

6 basis points on quarter-end.  While rates and volumes in unsecured 
markets
 over 

quarter-end were broadly in line with expectations, temporary funding pressures in 

secured markets
 were much larger than expected, with the overnight GCF repo index 

for Treasury collateral, shown in the dark blue line, printing at 45 basis points. 
Further, the dispersion in repo rates increased notably.  For ex
ample, the spread 
between rates on overnight Treasury GCF repo and 
triparty 
repo widened 
considerably on quarter-end.  This spread, shown in your bottom-
left panel, reached 
30 basis points on quarter-end.  
While all the factors that drove the larger
-than
-expected widening between repo rates are not fully understood, institutions with 

stable access to triparty repo funding appeared to demand increased compensation to 

intermediate between triparty cash lenders, like money funds, and GCF borrowers, 

such as sma
ller or less creditworthy dealers. 
It should also be noted that the spread between GCF and triparty repo rates has 
been gradually widening over the past several months even outside quarter-end.  
This 
trend is likely partially driven by financial institutions modifying behavior in 
response to regulatory changes and associated higher costs to intermediate between 

triparty and GCF repo markets. 
Looking forward, pursuant to the resolution adopted at the March FOMC 
meeting, the staff proposes conductin
g term RRP tests over June quarter
-end. 
For the June quarter-end, we suggest a slightly different approach to 
the 
public 
communication about the term RRPs than was used in December and March.  As 

outlined in your bottom-right panel, the Desk proposes to re
lease a statement shortly 
after the April FOMC meeting minutes on May 20 that would note the tentative 

intention to offer at least $200 billion of term RRPs in addition to capacity 
of 
overnight 
RRPs for the June quarter-end.  Based on our experience with t
he March 
term operations, we believe that $200 billion in term RRP capacity over June quarter-

end, in combination with at least $300 billion capacity in overnight 
RRP, should 
provide sufficient headroom on total RRP availability, assuming no change in the 

target range.  Further, we would propose noting in the statement that the Desk would 

release the remaining details on Monday, June 22
Šthat is, after the June FOMC 
meeting. 
        
   
     
  
                   
   
  
       
       
     
       
            
        We would thus come back to the Committee with a recommendation of the exact 
size and
 maximum offering rate for each operation at or shortly after the June 
meeting.  This communication approach could be replicated in future quarter-ends 

and should provide the market 
with 
confidence in available supply around quarter-
ends, but, 
importantly
, retain some flexibility to adjust the specific parameters of the 
operations should the Committee decide to lift 
off. 
In order to maintain operational readiness with the TDF
Šboth within the Federal 
Reserve and 
among banksŠthe staff is developing plans to resume a routine, every-
other-month testing schedule that would be similar to that employed prior to the 

series of special larger test operations conducted over the 
past year. Offering rates, 
counterparty limits
, and other terms of these operations would b
e set so that the scale 
of such testing operations would be modest.  The tentative plan is to announce and 

resume the routine periodic testing beginning next month. 
Additionally, the work on implementing changes to the methodology for 
calculating interest 
payments is proceeding according to schedule.  Comments on the 
Federal Register 
notice 
are due by the middle of May.  
If there are no major issues 
raised by those comments, the staff should be in a position to implement the new 

methodology before the June 
FOMC meeting as planned. 
Your fourth exhibit begins with the focus of some market participants over the 
intermeeting period on the discussion of normalization tools 
that appeared 
in the 
March FOMC minutes.
 Contacts specifically highlighted the discussion concerning 
temporarily elevated capacity for the ON RRP facility. 
In the Desk™s April surveys, 
respondents were asked to provide their expectations for both the level of the daily 

aggregate cap and level of ON RRP demand around the time of liftoff. 
As sho
wn in the top-left panel of your final exhibit, 10 respondents expected there 
to be no cap on the ON RRP facility immediately following liftoff.  Among those 

respondents expecting a cap at liftoff, the median expectation was a cap of 

$500 billion, and all anticipated that ON RRP demand would be at or below the cap.  

Across all respondents, regardless of whether they expected a cap, the median 

expected level of ON RRP demand immediately after liftoff was $300 billion, 

unchanged from the March survey. 
However
, many respondents did update their expectations for ON RRP demand 
from the previous surveyŠ
both immediately after liftoff and 
one- and 
three
-years 
ahead.  Expectations shifted in both directions, with a number of participants moving 

their expectations by several hundred billion dollars, perhaps pointing to significant 

uncertainly about the likely level of 
take
-up. 
Respondents were also asked about 
their 
expectation
s for the variation in ON 
RRP demand over various time horizons.  They expected the variability of the ON 

RRP demand around the time of liftoff to be more elevated than recent experience, 

largely due to uncertainties over the mix of overnight and term RRPs 
as well as how 
      
    
   
    
    
    
                       
              
          
      
   
    regulatory reforms might 
affect money markets when rates rise from the zero lower 
bound. In terms of the expected levels of money market rates at liftoff, the median 
estimate across respondents for the level of the federal funds effective rate was 

35 basis pointsŠ
very close to the center of the expected target range. 
The April 
surveys also asked respondents for the probability 
they attach to the level of the 
effective rate averaging within certain ranges during the month following liftoff.  
As 
shown in the top-right panel, respondents assigned very high probabilities to the 

effective rate 
being within the target range and only a negligible probability to the 

effective 
rate 
being outside the range. 
Finally, as discussed in the memo sent to the
 Committee on April 15, we would 
like to ask the Committee to vote on the authorization to renew for another year the 

standing liquidity swap arrangements with foreign central banks and NAFA swap 

arrangements. 
While the liquidity arrangements were authori
zed for an indefinite 
period in October 2013, the FOMC has the ability to unilaterally terminate its 

participation with 
six months™ notice. 
This is similar to the NAFA swap 
arrangements with Mexico and Canada, which are renewable annually on or before 

Dec
ember 15 of each year and require 
six 
months™ notice to terminate. 
The use of liquidity swap lines recently has been sparse, as shown in the middle-
left panel, with demand limited to regularly scheduled 
seven
-day dollar auctions held 
by the 
Bank of Japan
 over year
-end and March quarter-end.  
While this is consistent 
with relatively calm conditions in 
dollar funding markets
, we believe the swap lines 
are an important liquidity backstop, helping to maintain stability and confidence in 

global funding markets.  Additionally, liquidity swap and NAFA swap arrangements 

are tangible and constructive signals of cooperation among central banks, and their 
attendant costs are minimal.
 Liquidity swap arrangements also support the approach 
that the Federal Reserve along 
with other major central banks have endorsed that 
there are ﬁno technical obstaclesﬂ to central banks™ capabilities to provide liquidity 
quickly to a systemically important financial market utility. 
Therefore, the staff 
recommends that the Committee vote to renew the liquidity swap lines and NAFA 

arrangements. 
I will now turn back to Simon to discuss the calculation methodology for the 
effective funds rate. 
MR. POTTER.  Thanks, Lorie.  As detailed in a memo circulated in advance of 
the meeting, the staff has assessed that there might be some merit in changing the 

calculation methodology underlying the federal funds effective rate concurrent with 

the change in data source to the 
FR 2420.  We are interested in the Committee™s 
initial feedback on this 
assessment. 
As you a
re aware, the federal funds effective rate is currently calculated as a 
volume-weighted mean.  That is, each observed transaction rate is weighted by the 

share of total volume transacted at this rate
, and the effective rate is the sum of these 
                         
    
             
                      
 weighted rates.
 The distribution of volume by rates for a particular day from the 
FR 2420 data is shown in the middle-
right panel. 
The 
staff
™s 
assessment is that it may be more appropriate to calculate the effective 
rate as the median (
that is
, the 50
th percentile) of the distribution rather than its mean. 
As shown in the bottom-left panel, the volume-
weighted median generates a statistic 
that is the same as
, or very close to, 
the mean at most times
 except for 
the crisis 
period.  However, on tho
se occasions 
when
 the mean and median do differ 
significantly, the 
staff
™s 
preliminary analysis shows that the median is typically a 
better measure of broad money market conditions across a wide range of situations.  

Moreover, the median is much more robus
t to invalid data.
 In general, for an invalid 
transaction to 
affect
 the median, it must have a large volume attached to it, while the 
mean can be moved by an invalid transaction that has a more typical volume and rate.  

The s
taff believes this characteris
tic of the median would enhance both the integrity 
of the effective federal funds rate as a reference rate as well its credibility as a 

monetary policy instrument. 
 We look forward to your views on this subject, and, 
based on your feedback, the 
staff may p
resent a plan to move forward at the June 
meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  T
hat concludes our remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Are there questions or comments
, particularly in 
response to Simon™s request for comments on the federal funds rate?  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I found 
that 
the staff memo and also the 
memo to Reserve Bank r
esearch 
directors
 made a pretty good case, 
to my min
d, for using the 
volume-weighted median.  I
t™s a better measure of financial conditions for all the reasons that 
you went through, Simon.  
In addition, it™s more difficult to manipulate. 
What 
I mean 
is, in 
theory, 
any trade moves a mean, whereas to move the median
, it either needs to be 
fu
rther 
away 
or bigger.  Anyway, I think it is a good case, and I guess I have two questions 
relating to 
when 
we do ﬁ
socialize
ﬂ this to the public, 
which we may not have the answers 
to today.  One is, 
will a 
median versus a mean have a differential effect on existing contracts
, of which there are many 
trillions?
  Two is, I™d be interested to hear how market participants react to this mean
Œmedian 
thing. 
I think that the potential cost that™s laid out in 
the memo is that of successfully 
communicating 
it to the public.  I don™t really see that as an insurmountable concern.  I mean, 
                       
       
   
  
    
    
                 
  
      very few people even know what the 
effective 
federal funds rate is in the first place, and the kind 
of people who know that ar
e probably able to tell the difference between a 
volume-weighted 
mean and a median if they want to and need to.  I don™t see that as a big thing, but I would 
certainly be sensitive to the views of market participants on that. 
MR. POTTER. 
In terms of the c
ontracts that are written on the 
effective 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate, if we were to pursue this, there would be a long lead time 
during which 
the market 

participants would know that the change is coming.  We would have to weigh the effect that that 

would have, an
d it would have some effect because the median is not always equal to the mean, 

but many of these contracts average over a long period of time.  
So occasions on particular days 
when 
we do see differences 
are
 probably not going to have a large 
effect
 on tho
se contracts. 
What they will be perhaps more interested in is the level of rates that you™ll be setting in 
the future.  If you think about a contract in 2016, that™s going to be very heavily influenced by 

where they think you™ll be setting the target rate. 
The
 kinds of issues to do with the gap between 
the mean and the median are very second-order, compared 
with
 that.  They also have to think of 
things 
like
, ﬁWhere would the 
effective 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate
 be trading in the range?,ﬂ and so on.  
I don™t believe this change is anything 
of 
first
-order importance for 
a contract, and it™s pretty 
typical for the uncertainty that market participants face overall in terms of trading in the fed
eral 
funds market
, which 
we know some large participants have 
left
 and s
ome other participants 
could leave in the future, 
affecting where the federal
 funds 
rate 
trades 
in the range. 
On the market participants™ knowledge of this, I agree that many people probably don™t 
know that much about the detailed calculation of 
the effective 
federal funds rate.  Those who do 
would find it pretty understandable, I believe, that we switch from a volume-weighted mean to a 

volume-weighted median, partly because one of the things that we do know is 
that 
the mean is 
       
                                    
        quite heavily influ
enced by a small transaction at a rate 
that 
is far away from where most of the 
volume is. 
MR. POWELL.  That™s helpful. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I
n the 
LIBOR 
case, the issue about really 
small changes in LIBOR from what was perceived to be a correct LIBOR pricing was considered 

a big issue. 
Here you™ve got a picture of 
a 20 or 40 basis point difference.  I
t gives me a little bit 
of pause that the people 
who
 are contracting on this might be upset by this change. 
MR. POTTER. 
In the crisis period, particularly as the balance sheet got larger, we didn™t 
have that much control over the fed
eral
 funds 
rate
, and that was an event that really was 
exogenous to the calculation method.  Whichever calculation method we would have used, there 

would have been more variance at that time.  If
, arbitrarily
, the Federal Reserve
 had turned up on 
one day and sa
id, ﬁWe are going to change that calculation method,ﬂ without any kind 
of 
forewarning, that would make payments flow differentially to what people expected.  The plan 

here is
, if there is support f
or moving forward 
with
 this, 
it will be clearly communicated well in 
advance, and it will be the type of consideration that all market participants should have to take 

into account when pricing contracts. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments?  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL. 
Well,
 I have a question now.  This 
refers 
to the expectations about the 
size of the 
ON RRP facility 
post-
liftoff. 
This is anecdotal, but it sounds like there™s a systematic 
difference between 
buy-side 
participants
, who tend to be predicting a larger facility, and primary 
                      
        
      
    
     
   dealers
, who are predicting something more in line with what the Committee has been thinking 
of saying.  
Is that accurate? 
MS. LOGAN. We do see some distinction between the two.  The median for the dealers 
is 
$190 billion at liftoff for demand.  For the buy side, 
it is 
$350 billion.  T
here is some variation, 
but there is variation within the dealer estimates as well.
  But I think you are correct that the buy 
side is skewed a bit higher. 
MR. POTTER. 
There is variation within the same 
firm
. MR. POWELL.  Are we incl
ined to attribute more or less weight to the buy side? 
MS. LOGAN.  I don™t think there™s anything in the commentary that would suggest the 
buy side has some better analytics of understanding that from what we™re reading in the 

commentary.  As Simon said, even within firms, we™re hearing the numbers to be quite different.  

In the survey, we did find that some firms had produced written reports that had different 

expectations than 
those 
who
 filled out the survey, 
so I don™t think there™s any additional 
knowledge or analytics that the buy side is drawing upon. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions or comments?  [No response]  Okay.  Then let™s turn 
to swap arrangements.  We have a proposal to renew both the NAFA swap arrangement with 

Canada and Mexico and a proposal to renew the liquidity swap arrangements.  L
et me first ask 
whether there are any questions or comments on these proposals.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d like to respectfully dissent again 
on the 
foreign swap arrangements.  
The 
Richmond 
Reserve Bank has dissented on these swap lines 
going back 20 years on the grounds that they facilitate inappropriate actions by 
the Fed
eral 
Reserve
.  One is sterilized foreign exchange operations, which are inappropriate for reasons I 
       
   
                
                     
   
    
                                                              spoke about in January.  The other is channeling intergovernmental assistance to our 
NAFA 
partners, among others, who may be well deserving of such assistance, but that constitutes fiscal 
policy that™s best left to fiscal authorities
, in our view.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments or questions?  [No response]  Okay.  Hearing 
none, seeing none, we need two separate votes
.  I™d like to first ask
Šand this is an FOMC 
voteŠon the renewal of the NAFA swap arrangements with Canada and Mexico.  All in favor? 

[Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed? 
MR. LACKER.  Opposed. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker is opposed. 
Okay.  I think that passes, and, second, 
I™d like to ask for a vote on the liquidity swap arrangements.  All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes] 

Any opposed? 
MR. LACKER.  Opposed. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Okay.  We need one more vote to ratify 
domestic open 
market operations
. Is there a motion? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Any opposed?
  [No response] 
Okay. 
We will consider those 
approved 
as well
.  Next, I think we™re going to move to our second topic, which is normalization 
procedures, and I™m going to call on Ellen Meade to provide 
a briefing. 
MS. MEADE.
2  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  I will be referring to the handout 
labeled ﬁMaterials for Briefing on Governance Issues Associated with Liftoff.ﬂ  
When you commence the normalization process, the Committee will set the 
stance of policy by announcing the new target range for the federal funds rate.  In 
addition, as you™ve discussed previously, the Committee and Board will set the 

administered rates
Šthe IOER rate will be set to the top of the new target range and 
the ON RRP rate will be set to the bottom of the new target range.  The Federal 

Reserve will also announce the details associated with the capacity of the ON RRP 
2 The 
materials 
used by 
Ms. Meade 
are 
appended 
to this 
transcript 
(appendix 2). 
            
                                      
    
          facility and the discount rate, which will be set at a spread above the top of the federal 

funds rate target range. 
Earlier this month, you received a memo outlining possible arrangements fo
r enhanced reporting of market developments and the governance of decisions on 

operational adjustments to the administered rates around the time of liftoff.  In the 

early days after the liftoff announcement, it may be somewhat difficult to get a clear 

pict
ure of how normalization is proceeding because it may take several days for some 
participants in money markets to adapt to the new market environment.  For example, 

money market participants may need to revise investment guidelines, counterparty 

limits, or other restrictions on their allocation of 
funds 
so that they are able to engage 
in the arbitrage opportun
ities available after liftoff. 
Even if the federal funds rate initially lies below the Committee™s new target 
range, you may judge that the prudent course is to monitor developments while giving 

money markets some time to adjust.  During these early days, you may find it useful 

to 
prearrange
 briefings during which the staff could provide updates on market 
developments and assess the effectiveness of pol
icy implementation, and you could 
ask questions.  For example, you could schedule daily briefings for perhaps the first 

two weeks following the liftoff announcement; such briefings could be held via audio 

or videoconference.  These briefings would not be F
OMC meetings
, so no transcripts 
or minutes would be prepared.  Should you wish to express your views about market 

developments or discuss whether to adjust the target range or the administered rates, 

the briefings could be readily converted into joint meetings of the Committee and 

Board.  If the liftoff process does not proceed as planned and the funds rate is 

persistently outside its new target range, then you would presumably wish to discuss 

the timing and course of possible policy actions, and the scheduled briefings would be 

replaced by joint videoconference meetings. 
As discussed in the memo we sent you, the FOMC and Board may also 
wish
 to 
establish decisionmaking procedures that would govern small operational adjustments 

to the administered rates after the first tw
o weeks or so following the liftoff 
announcement.  Adjustments to these administered rates could be helpful if the 

effective federal funds rate were persistently outside its new target range. The memo 

did not discuss the advantages or disadvantages associ
ated with adjusting the IOER 
and ON RRP rates, either separately or together, relative to the new target range for 

the federal funds rate.  The memo focused on the governance of any such 

adjustments, and we provided two approaches for you to consider. 
Under the first approach, each adjustment would be approved by a vote of the 
Committee or Board.  The Chair could convene a joint FOMC and Board meeting via 

videoconference at which you could discuss potential changes to the administered 

rates; all policymaker
s would be involved in the discussion of changes to the IOER 

and ON RRP rates.  Following that discussion, the FOMC would vote on any change 

to the ON RRP rate, while the Board would approve any change to the IOER rate.  A 

variation on this approach would involve policymakers using SDS to submit 

comments on proposed adjustments to one or both of the administered rates, with 
       
           
      
  
        
   
                      
   
    
          
           
 approvals for changes to the ON RRP rate and/or IOER rate recorded via notation 

votes by the FOMC and Board, respectively.  While this would be operationally less 

burdensome than holding a meeting, and would not require the preparation of 

transcripts and minutes, it would not allow for an interactive discussion and, as a 

result, might be most appropriate for relatively straightforward adj
ustments that the 
Committee had previously discussed. 
Under the second approach, you would delegate to the Chair authority to adjust 
the ON RRP and IOER rates, subject to limitations established by the FOMC and 

Board.  If the first couple of weeks of the normalization process had proceeded 

smoothly and you felt comfortable with the delegation approach, one of the staff 

briefings could be converted to a meeting at which you would formally take the 

decision to delegate authority.  You might prefer this approach to ensure that the 

Federal Reserve is able to respond quickly should market conditions warrant.  This 

delegation would allow the Chair to make small adjustments to the administered rates 

if deemed necessary to keep the federal funds rate trading in its 
new target range.  As 

an example, the memo suggested that the Chair could be authorized to make 

adjustments of perhaps 5 or 10 basis points in the administered rates and 
also 

indicated that policymakers could determine in advance whether they preferred to 

address such a situation by adjusting the IOER rate, the ON RRP rate, or both rates in 

parallel in order to maintain a constant spread between them. There may be some 

communications advantages associated with the delegation scenario in that it would 

clearly separate your decisions on the stance of policy
Šthe target range for the 
federal funds rate established by the FOMC
Šfrom small technical adjustments to the 
administered rates necessary to achieve that policy stance. 
The final page of your handout lists the questions that were distributed with the 
memo for today™s go-round on governance issues.  Another memo that was 

distributed at the same time concerned the setting of the primary credit rate.  The 

lending rate for primary credit was originally set in 20
03 at 100 basis points above the 
Committee™s target for the federal funds rate.  The spread was reduced twice during 

the financial crisis, and has stood 50 basis points above the top of the federal funds 

rate target range since February 2010.  The memo discussed two options for the 

setting of the 
primary credit rate spread:  maintaining that spread at 50 basis points 
above the top of the Committee™s new funds rate target range at the time of liftoff and 

for some period thereafter, or raising the spread to 1
00 basis points at the time of 
liftoff.  During the go-round, you may also wish to share any views you might have 

on that issue.  Thank you; this concludes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Before we turn to questions for Ellen and our go-round, I 
would like to just make a few remarks of my own.  
At the outset, I want to emphasize that 
although our policy tools, by law, have different governance structures, the overall conduct of 

monetary policy is obviously the purview of the FOMC.  The gov
ernance issues before us this 
                           
                   
       morning really don™t concern the determination of our intended stance of monetary policy.  
Rather, this discussion pertains to the narrow issue of how to make tactical adjustments to our 

policy tools to deliver the intended st
ance of policy. 
We have spent a great deal of time and effort in devising our framework for 
normalization, and I am highly confident that it will work. But it is clear that when the time 

comes to raise the federal funds rate, we will face unprecedented un
certainties, and we need to 
stand ready to make adjustments, if needed.  It is important that we agree on an approach for 

managing both the initial phase of liftoff and the process for subsequent adjustments that may 

conceivably be needed once that initial 
phase is complete. 
The staff memo proposed that, 
for the first two weeks or so after liftoff
, we set aside time 
on our calendars to receive frequent market updates and, if necessary, hold meetings to make 

adjustments to our tools through the Committee and Board votes.  During this time, the FOMC 

may need to reconsider the setting of our tools, including the administered rates, parameters of 
the overnight RRP facility, and the use of term tools.  I just want to make clear that
, in my own 
view, decisions during this initial period should not be delegated to me. 
The FOMC and Board should vote on adjustments that are deemed necessary after 
debating the relevant policy considerations and alternative approaches.  For example, if the funds 

rate is trading soft relative to the target range, the Committee should decide whether to raise both 

rates, keeping 
the 
IOER

 RRP 
spread
 constant, or to instead adjust only one of the rates.  
These decisions are not entirely tactical or routine.  My expectation, however, is tha
t after some 
initial period, which the memo is guessing might be two weeks, we will have a reasonably good 

sense 
regarding
 how our approach is working, and only minor adjustments, if any, might be 
subsequently needed to keep the federal funds rate in the t
arget range. 
              
   
         
  
    
         
   
Assuming that our approach works roughly as expected, such intensive monitoring on the 
part of the Committee shouldn™t be necessary beyond this initial phase.  We ought to be able to 
settle into an arrangement in which
, at most
, modest adjustm
ent to our tools, especially to the 
administered rates, will be called for to keep the federal funds rate in the target range.
  I hope 
that such adjustments, if they prove necessary at all, can be made in a simple and efficient 

manner.  From a practical pe
rspective, I tend to favor an approach in which authority is delegated 

to me as 
Chair to make modest adjustments, perhaps up to 5 or 10 basis points, to the IOER and 

overnight RRP rates to help maintain the federal funds rate 
in the Committee™s target range. 
These adjustments would be in accordance with a strategy pertaining, for example, to the spread 

that had been decided by the Committee.  In such circumstances, I would, of course, keep the 

Committee fully apprised of ongoing developments.  If any problems in implementing policy 

emerge
d, clearly we would need to convene a meeting. 
I would expect the Committee to decide on any such delegation only at a time when we 
feel we have a good sense for how our approach is working and n
ot at the time of liftoff. Of 

course, if many of you are not comfortable with such an arrangement, we will have to, as Ellen 

indicated, work out a method for holding Committee and Board votes, likely by notation voting, 

and possibly on short notice, to ma
ke these potential modest adjustments once the first couple of 
weeks after liftoff have passed.
  Regardless of the approach we agree on, it 
will be important that 
it serve
s to reinforce rather than undermine market confidence and our normalization approach.  
Let me stop there.  I very much look forward to hearing your views.  W
e have now scheduled a 
full go-round, soŠ
Vice Chairman
 Dudley. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
So I am going to make a forecast that we are all going to 
agree that
, at least for the first few 
weeks
, we are going to want to have some sort of 
a discussion 
            
        
             
  
        
       if the funds rate is trading outside the target range.
  If we are going to do that, I have a couple of 
questions of the staff.  
At w
hat time of day would it be most appropriate to have those meetings? 
How would it work in terms of having the meeting, making the decision, notifying the marketsŠ 

what would the timeline look like as you are carrying that forward?  Because the memo didn™t 

really get into the mechanics of how you would actually implem
ent this.  I was just curious if 
there is any thought given to that at this point. 
MS. MEADE.  I think that we were trying to be optimistic when writing the memo
.  So we were thinking about the first couple of weeks or so as being briefings and not being about 

decisionmaking. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let™s say they were 
about decisionmaking.  When will 
you know enough in the day to have a meeting, to have decided?  When would you have to 

announce it to the market? 
MR. POTTER. We are still looking at when some of the volume is transacted and also 
scheduling, because not everyone is in the same time zone.  I think 
we believe that 
later in the 
afternoon 
will work
.  And that will give us enough time to then announce to the market that 
evening what the changes would be. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay. 

MR. POTTER.  The other choice is to announce very early in the morning. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I guess I would say that
, if we agree on this, we should 
nail that down pretty soon, because, in principle, this could happen as early as June, and it would 

be helpful if people actually had the time blocked out on their calendar.  I think we need to figure 

out the time slot. 
MR. POTTER.  We are working on it. 
                             
       
               
    
  
      CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions before we begin the round?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Just to clarify your proposed approach, 
any adjustment in the first two weeks of the overnight reverse repo rate would be an FOMC 

meeting. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  I know the memo used two weeks.  I am thinking there is an 
initial period. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Until things settle down, basically. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. When we are figuring things out, and if we have to make 
adjustments, we need to meet, we need to discuss it, and during that phase, until 
we decide 
further things are
Šlet me just call them ﬁroutineﬂ
Šthere would be FOMC votes.  We would 
probably be having videoconference briefings that would be converted to meetings, and both 

groups would be voting. O
nly after whatever that initial period is 
when
 things have settled down 
would we agree 
that 
now we have fallen into a rhythm, and any adjustments, if they are needed 
at all
ŠI mean, I think 
in 
the most likely case, we are not going to need any further 
adjustmentsŠbut if we do, those things 
will be 
routine, and then we are talking about delegating. 
Let™s see.  First, President Lacker, then President Rosengren. 
MR. LACKER. 
In this initial period, would you envision all meetings, or a mix of 
briefings and meetings? 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
My understanding is 
the idea 
is that 
we are going to preschedule 
these times. 
When we start the video meeting, we will have some sense of whether things are 
going smoothly, and we really don™t have decisions to make, in which case the staff could be 

relieved of the burden of doing transcripts and so forth.  I would call that a briefing.  
But clearly, 
if things are not going very smoothly and we need to deliberate, we would convene that as a 
         
           
      
  
                  meeting 
right from the outset
.  And, I suppose, even in the middle, if something bega
n as a 
briefing, and we decided in the middle of that briefing, ﬁLook, we need to discuss something.ﬂ 
Is that fair 
to say? 
MS. MEADE.  Yes. 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
We could then say, ﬁLook, let™s convert this now to a joint Board and 
FOMC meeting.ﬂ 
MR. LACKER. 
Okay.  I ask because it has been a while since this group gathered in a 
briefing format.  I think we did it back during the crisis.  There are some rules about not saying 

something that matters, or has substance, orŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN. Well, we can™t deliberat
e. 
MR. LACKER.  That™s not quiteŠ 

CHAIR YELLEN. We can™t deliberate. 

MS. MEADE.  It is really a distinction, I believe, between asking questions and 
discussing among yourselves. 
MR. LACKER. 
If we have something to say
, like ﬁI think this means we should do 
X,ﬂ then we have to convert it to a meeting to say that? 
MR. 
POTTER
.  Well, you could pose it as a question. 
MR. ROSENGREN
.  Like in 
Jeopardy!
  You have to ask a question.  [Laughter] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I see Scott 
Alvarez is 
fretting
 back there. 
MR. 
ALVAR
EZ.  A briefing is an interaction with the staff, and you can ask questions, 
and it is for the purpose of disseminating information.  If the Committee wanted to have a 

discussion in which they are deliberating about a decision, that would be a meeting itse
lf. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 
      
          
          
                MR. ALVAREZ
.  We could set it up so that it could start as a briefing and be converted 
into a meeting, if that seemed to be the direction the Committee wanted to go in.  We can, 
as the 
Chair says
ŠI think the thought process is 
that 
we will have a pretty good idea before we set it up 
whether there is going to be a discussion, and we will just start from scratch as a meeting if that
™s the case. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Just a 
follow-
up to 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley™s question.  For how 
many of the short-term credit markets is it important to know about the closing in Europe?  A
s we think about the timing of the meetings, are there a bunch of short-
term instruments 
that
 would 
make it 
relevant to 
act
 in the morning, 
because of when Europe closes? 
MS. LOGAN. 
For the repo markets, most of that is going to be U.S. activity, and that is 
going to be early in the morning.  For unsecured fed
eral
 funds and E
urodollars
, there is going to 
be some very active trading in the ea
rly morning hours from Europe.  We saw this during the 
crisis when there was a lot of volume done early, and then there is some late-
day volume as well 
in the 
United States
.  It is going to be a mix.  We are going to do more analysis on the full pattern 
of volume data in the unsecured markets before we recommend a time of 3:30 or 4:00 or 4:30 in 

the late afternoon.  But you can think of the unsecured markets as having two trading periods, 

and the repo as being mostly very early in the morning. 
MR. ROSENGREN
.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  I was looking for a clarification.  In the context, the memo offers that 
both the 
IOER or ON RRP 
rates might be subject to these technical adjustments if we delegate 
them.  When I go back and look 
at the normalization principles, as they are described, they talk 
        
     
                 
              
          about IOER as being the primary mechanism by which we will move the funds rate into the 
target range. 
Let™s say we delegate on a technical adjustment basis 
the 
ON RRP rate
.  That 
seems to 
take care of itself.  But by delegating some adjustment to 
the 
IOER 
rate
, does that 
signal a change in policy stance in any way?  Or will it be understood that you are trying to move 

the spread in lockstep? 
MR. POTTER.  I have gotten this question quite a few times in public.  I use an idea that 
Jamie came up with, which is 
that 
everything we are doing in terms of the mechanics of lifting 

rates comes from interest on excess reserves.  We are trying to keep the overnight RRP as small 

as possible, and that me
ans it is just trying to get better trading in the arbitrage relationship 
in 
which 
you are getting interest on excess reserves. 
I view it as the primary way we are lifting 
rates.  But it is not really a measure of the stance of policy.  The stance of policy is the federal 

funds target range. 
MS. GEORGE.  Okay.  In the context of these basis points we have talked about, it 
would be understood these are technical moves, and thatŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN.  The Committee has set the target range and decided to make small 
adjustments to keep the funds rate there. 
MS. GEORGE.  All right.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Yes.  This is just a logistical question, Madam Chair.  Do I understand 
correctly that what you anticipate doing is, if we agree with the concept of having these 

prearranged 
briefings, that all of our calendars will need to be kept open for two weeks following 
each of the next I-don™t-know-how-
many FOMC meetings? 
       
     
         
                    
 MS. MEADE.  I think we were thinking initially about the liftoff 
meeting.  Oh, well, yes, 
of course. 
MR. TARULLO.  Unless you know something I don™t know.  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You™d have to prepare for the earliest meeting you might 
liftoff for, right? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I suppose
ŠI mean, people will have some conflicts,
 right? 
MR. TARULLO.  They have major ones. 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
We can™t for the next whatever meetings
ŠI mean, we can try to 
block out 
those times.  But
 some people will have trips presumably that they can™tŠI suppose if 
somebody can™t participateŠ 
MR. TARULL
O.  There are already a number of international meetings that several of us 
on the Board, 
I think
, are going to haveŠand 
Vice Chairman Dudley will have conflicts with as 
well. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s my point.  I™d prefer to get this nailed down 
sooner rather than later, so we can block out the time as efficiently as possible.  That would be 

my preference. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Maybe we can call in
ŠI mean, we normally have videoconferences, 
but conceivably we can 
call. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In the old days, 
we had telephone calls, right? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. 
Maybe we could have some telephone calls that people could 
take fromŠ 
MR. POTTER.  As long as they were secure.  That would be the 
issue. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Well, we need to work this out for sure.  Governor Brainard. 
             
               
             
      
  
  MS. BRAINARD. 
This is just 
from a communications point of view.  Would we 
communicate at the outset that the FOMC is going into the mode of daily briefings with the 
possibility that they could take intermeeting action?  Or would we simpl
y be silent on that until 
such time as we found it necessary to take an action? 
MS. MEADE.  The minutes of this discussion will reflect that you have discussed some 
of these issues. 
MR. POTTER.  I take your question as, 
ﬁLet™s be very careful,
ﬂ and I agree
 we should be 
very, very careful.  Maybe we want to think hard about how this is described, because we don™t 

want everyone thinking every day the FOMC is meeting at 4:00 p.m., and we are waiting for this 

thing to come over the wires 
about what the rates ar
e going to be the next day.  That is probably 
notŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  This is contingen
cy planning. 
MR. POTTER.  Yes.  This is a contingency plan. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
This is contingency planning for something that doesn™t 
work as well as we think i
t is going to work.  I think we want to present it in that manner. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. 
My question 
is in terms of contingenciesŠdo you anticipate that we could 
do this by notation vote?  Possibly, 
if there was a conflict
 and you 
were
 traveling, you missed the 
videoconference and 
maybe a staff member was sitting in
Šthey could give you a quick 
executive summary and then the notation vote could be done by a BlackBerry anywhere, right? 
MR. POTTER. 
Again, we would have to look at the timing exactly and tell you what that 
window is, because the meeting could go quite long.  Then we would still have to put out the 

announcement or switch to 7:00 a.m. in the morning or something. 
         
             
      
  
  
                  
     
  MR. EVANS. 
You anticipate making an adjustment in the middle of the dayŠI mean, 
for the market. 
MR. POTTER.  No, no.  After the meeting, it is probably pretty good practice to 
announce the decision.  I would feel more comfortable announcing quite soon after the 
conclusion of the meeting, rather than waiting, 
but
Š MR. EVANS.  That does put a premium on the turnaround. 

MR. POTTER. 
Šyou could have some time gap there and 
instead 
do it earl
y in the 
morning.  To 
Governor Brainard™s question, there 
are 
a lot of complications
Šif this is the way 
you want to goŠ
that w
e would need to describe to you, so you understood exactly which way 
you wanted to go. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Presumably, Simon, you would want to announce this 
the day before, because the money market trading starts very early they need to have this 

information, so they can digest it. 
MR. POTTER.  We are actively checking so you have the full information to 
make 
that 
choice. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let™s begin the go-
round.  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the first question, m
y answer 
is ﬁY
es.ﬂ It™s as simple as that. 
On the second question, regarding approaches, I actually think you laid 
out 
the approach we should take really well in your comments just a moment ago.  W
e hope we 
won™t need to do any of this, but having a 
serious meeting 
to 
discuss what is causing the 
funds 
rate to 
trad
e outside 
the target range, understanding what the effects of moving the two different 
administered rates would be, and having 
FOMC
/Board of Governors 
decisions seems like the 
right 
approach.  But once things haveŠ
I think ﬁsettled downﬂ is the phrase 
you usedŠ
I think it 
                
          
                  
      
       would be completely appropriate to delegate to you any further tweaks, plus or minus 10 basis 
points, say, to the two administered rates.  I fully support the approach that you laid out today.  
I do view this as representing prudent contingency planning more than something that I would 

expect to happen.  I am still pretty confident that we won™t have problems keeping the fed
eral 

funds rate within the range, but I think it is goo
d planning. 
I do think that one of the issues that came up 
in the questions 
asked 
in the 
past minute or 
two is really important, and that is about the communication
s in connection with 
this.  
One of the 
Committee™s long
-standing principles is that, to th
e extent possible, policy decisions regarding 
monetary policy really should be separated from technical issues associated with the 

implementation of policy.  
I™m thinking back to the good old days when the Desk had wide 
latitude to adjust the amount of 
reserves in the 
System
 in order to achieve the 
target fed
eral
 funds 
rate.  I think it would be very useful, if we canŠand this is going to be 
the 
challengeŠ
frame 
the 
communications regarding 
these adjustments t
o the administered rates so 
that 
we indicate t
hat 
these are just mostly technical decisions reflecting, of course, the decisions of the FOMC and the 

Board of Governors on the policy decisions, but really communicated as technical means to 

achieve the policy goals that we have agreed on.  
We really wan
t to avoid this perception that 
moving around these administered rates reflects some kind of shift in the stance of policy or 

creating some noise 
in connection with
 that.  I think we are doing prudent planning.  It is April 

now.  Thinking through these iss
ues now 
makes a lot of sense. 
Again, I support the approach 
that you laid out.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am in favor of delegating to the C
hair 
certain tactical decisions that en
sure that we attain the policy goals voted on by the FOMC.  This 
             
        
  
      
   
   
  
        
          is consistent with the FOMC setting strategy 
but delegating tactical implementation of monetary 
policy.  However, determining the scope and timing of that delegation should wait until we have 
a better understanding of how the constellation of short-
term interest rates will respond to our 
setting of IOER and overnight RRP 
rates 
at, and immediately following, liftoff.  I am still 
somewhat uncertain about how successfully we will be able to targe
t the federal funds rate and 
other short-
term rates at liftoff.  As a result, I could imagine a wide variety of adjustments that 
may be necessary following liftoff. 
While the federal funds rate and other short-term rates may be comfortably bounded by 
the IOER and overnight RRP 
rates
, I can easily imagine situations 
in which 
that is not the case. I 
can also imagine circumstances in which some market rates do not adjust as expected to changes 

in our policy rates. In addition, it is difficult to predict how variable policy or market rates will 

be at liftoff. 
My preferred approach, 
in light of
 my concerns, would be to have frequent briefings, 
initially following liftoff, 
along 
with the flexibility to turn those 
into 
joint FOMC
Board 
meetings, if necessary.  Once the relationship of the funds rate and other market rates to our 

tools, as well as the variability of those rates, 
is better understood, we could agree on the 
appropriate delegation of tactical decisions to the 
Chair.  
Predetermining 
our arrangements for 
delegation at this time serves little purpose
, if they are quite likely to change after liftoff. I 
recommend being humble about how much we know now about liftoff and plan appropriately to 

have significant consultation and adjustments as we develop a more practical understanding of 

the challenges of lifting interest rates from the zero lower bound. 
Similarly, it is probably premature to determine the normal relationship we expect for the 
primary credit rate.  The current spread of 50 b
asis points above the IOER rate seems an 
           
   
                  
             
  
    
    
     
appropriate spread at liftoff. We can decide to alter the spread once it is clear where the federal 

funds rate and other short-
term rates are likely to trade relative to our policy tools. 
In summary, I suggest a highly flexible policy that is highly consultative.  Once 
relationships are better understood after liftoff, we can discuss delegation of tactical decisions for 

achieving our goals.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank 
you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable with a governance 
approach that involves prescheduled staff briefings for a period 
of time after liftoff and then
, after the initial period when things appear to have settled down, delegating authority to the C
hair 
to ma
ke small technical adjustments to the ON RRP and IOER rates between FOMC meetings. 
These technical adjustments would be for the purpose of keeping the funds rate from moving 

persistently outside the FOMC™s target range.  If the Committee agrees on the del
egation 
governance structure, then this delegation of authority should be communicated at the time of 
liftoff. 
It is important that the Committee be aware of the developments in financial markets and 
the effectiveness of policy implementation after the li
ftoff announcement, and the briefings 
would be very useful in that regard.  Whether two weeks is the appropriate time for the initial 

period isn™t clear to me at this point.  If we opt to prearrange daily briefings for two weeks, we 

might also prearrange a weekly briefing for the remainder of the intermeeting period.  Of course, 

the briefings could be converted to meetings, if necessary. 
I do believe it is important that we demonstrate after liftoff that we have the tools to bring 
the fed
eral 
funds rate int
o our target range.  That may necessitate making modest changes in the 
ON RRP rate or IOER rate in a nimble way.  Delegating the decisions for these technical 

changes to the 
Chair seems appropriate. I believe we should treat the IOER rate and the ON 
      
        
   
    
   
     
         
   
   
                  
RRP r
ate symmetrically with respect to delegation.  That is, if we delegate to the 
Chair, we 
should delegate the authority to make technical changes in both rates. 
Changes that are strategic policy decisions should remain under the purview of the full 
Committee
.  These would include decisions to deploy the auxiliary policy tools, like term 
deposits and term RRPs, as well as making larger changes in the IOER and RRP rates and, of 
course, changes in the federal
 funds rate target.  
Particularly if liftoff doesn™t g
o as planned and 
the funds rate is trading persistently outside its target range, the full Committee needs to be 

responsible for making those hard choices and helping to communicate them to the public.  The 

Chair shouldn™t have to go it alone. 
The Committe
e hasn™t had a full discussion of what constitutes successful liftoff.  This 
will help inform whether a technical adjustment is needed.  Let me offer 
the view 
that liftoff will 
be successful if the federal 
funds rate is within the target range
 on most, but not necessarily all, 
days.  In my view, successful liftoff does not require that the funds rate be at the midpoint of the 
range.  
We plan to operate with a target range of 25 basis points because we don™t expect to have 
precise control over the funds rate.  Under those conditions, I don™t think we should require the 

funds rate to be close to the midpoint of the range. 
Communication of any technical adjustments is an issue.  We have indicated to the public 
that at liftoff we will continue to target a range 
for the funds rate that is 25 basis points wide and 
set the IOER and ON RRP rates at the upper and lower bounds of the funds rate target range, 

respectively. 
If we find that adjustments are necessary to keep the funds rate in the target range, 
we must 
depart from these plans in one way or another.  Presumably, this can better be handled 
if, at the time of liftoff
, we acknowledge to the public that technical adjustments to the two rates 
might be necessary and that
, as we proceed with liftoff and normaliz
ation
, the Board of 
             
       
    
                
     
 Governors and FOMC have delegated authority to the Chair to make those adjustments, and 
also 
that any technical adjustments would not constitute a change in policy.  Thank you, Madam 

Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE
 CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable 
prescheduling the staff briefings during the first few weeks following liftoff.  They can be 

canceled if they are not needed
Šall is working smoothly, for example, and the federal funds rate 
is tr
ading within 
its
 target rangeŠor they could be converted to 
joint 
FOMC
Board 
meetings 
if 
adjustments to the overnight RRP and IOER rates are needed to keep the federal funds rate in its 

target range.  Obviously, we have to retain some flexibility about how 
long this period lasts
, depending on what our experience is. 
Turning to the governance approach beyond this initial period, I very much favor 
distinguishing between changes that are tactical, such as small shifts in the overnight RRP rate 
and the IOER rat
e to achieve the federal funds rate target selected by the Committee 
and changes 
in policy, which 
are 
shifts in the target federal funds rate
Šthis 
goes to President George™s 
question. 
I think there is a long history that tactical changes needed to implement the monetary 
policy stance that has been selected by the Committee can and should be delegated either to the 
Chair or to the Desk.  If you consider how policy was implemented prior to the crisis, the Desk, 

in close consultation with Board staff, decided 
how much 
in reserves to add or drain each day in 
order to keep the federal funds rate close to its target.  For many years, presumably as a 

governance measure, there was also one FOMC member on the call
, essentially to keep an eye 
on the proceedings. 
             
               
  
        
         
          
     The d
ecision on the amount of intervention and the means of intervention was left during 
normal times to the staff, the New York Desk, and the Division of 
Monetary Affairs at the 
Board.  In unusual circumstancesŠfor example, August 2007Š
the staff consulted clos
ely with 
the Chair in making those reserve adjustment decisions.  The issue in my mind is whether 

changes in the overnight RRP and the IOER rates that are small and designed to keep the federal 

funds rate in its target range meet this tactical criteria, an
d I think they do. 
The changes contemplated would be to implement the monetary policy stance that had 
already been mandated by the Committee.  
So t
his argues for delegation.  One could even argue 
for delegation to the Desk and the Division of Monetary Affairs staff, but I don™t see any reason 

to go this far.  I would favor delegating it to the C
hair to make clear that it is receiving the 
attention it deserves by senior policymakers.
  Also, delegation to the Chair might be more 
appropriate in this particular 
case
, because such 
decisions are about the level of interest rates 
offered 
on our facilities rather than
 as in the past, on the amount of reserves we might add or 
drain. 
To implement this after the initial period, I would give the C
hair the discretion to 
move 
the overnight RRP rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points, so a range of 20 basis points, 

and the IOER rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points 
as needed to keep the funds rate 
within its target range.  The adjustments could either be in tandem to maintain a constant spread, 

or the spread could be widened or narrowed subject to those criteria. 
In contrast to the delegation of modest IOER and overnight RRP rate changes to the 
Chair, I think any other changesŠ
such as implementing 
the time depo
sit facilit
y and things like 
that or changing the size of the cap on 
the overnight RRP facility
Šshould be left to the full 
Committee. With respect to the overnight RRP 
cap, this is pretty consequential because it will 
                 
      
     
                 
         
affect
 the composition of money market flows, and also it is unlikely that changes in the 
overnight RRP cap are going to be needed on a day-by-
day basis. 
So having the Committee 
make
 these changes is not going to be particularly arduous
; they
 will probably be made on a 
much more irregular ba
sis, if at all.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Yes, I™m comfortable scheduling a bunch of 
briefings that can be converted at short notice to meetings.  I think that adjustment of the IOER 

or the overnight RRP rates 
in the first few weeks following liftoff should clearly require an 
FOMC meeting. 
I would point out that it took us almost a year to figure out how we wanted to set the 
IOER and the overnight RRP rates relative to the funds rate.  Committee members brought 

different considerations to the tradeoffs involved, and the initial settings involve a co
mpromise 
among different views about those tradeoffs.  New information about performance of thos
e settings after liftoff is likely to inform Committee members™ views about those tradeoffs and 

likely require recalibration of that compromise. 
For me
, it™s hard to imagine a routine adjustment. 
The analogy has been drawn to the 
Desk™s draining and adding reserves through open market operations
. I™d point out that it has 
taken decades for those to become as routine as they 
did.  A
nd at times 
when 
the FOMC has 
changed its operational regime, those things have been tricky at first, 
and the Committee has 

likely
, in many of those instances, been very involved.  I™m thinking about the early 1980s and 
times in the 
1970s, 
when
 the instructions to the D
esk were very different.  
It™s going to take a 
while for changes to the IOER or overnight RRP rates to be seen as routine or technical rather 

than something 
like: 
ﬁAll right, we™ve set up a new regime, w
e™re trying to calibrate the settings 
          
       
  
     
  
                        
   of these things,
ﬂ and
 the Committee needs to be involved.  W
hat I™d advocate is that we 
plan to 
make all the decisions at meetings until the first meeting at which a decision 
that is made 
appears
, in hindsight, 
to have been 
clearly 
routine; from then on we 
can delegate th
e routine of 
changing 
it. I don™t think routine changes are likely
, to my mind.  If you think about it, what™s at stake 
here is the spread
: the 
arbitra
ge margin between the funds market and 
the 
IOER 
rate
.  It seems 
like 20 basis points, 15 basis points, somewhere in there.  That doesn™t seem like something 
that™s likely to fluctuate the way the need for adding or draining reserves fluctuated on a daily 

basis.
  If it fluctuates, that™s big news if it goes to 30 or 40 basis points.  I™d be kind of surprised 
about that, and I think we™d want to get to the bottom of it.  I don™t think we have an 

understanding of those markets in which it looks like, 
yes
, they should routinely fluctuate by 10 
or 20 basis points.  I™d urge us just to plan on making these decisions at meetings.  I™m happy to 

delegate if it comes to pass that these turn out to be routine decisions that the Committee feels 
like 
delegating.  Let™s go and make one of those decisions at a time like that and then delegate 
thereafter. 
I also wanted to talk about the discount rate spread.  The discount rate spread is 50 basis 
points, and it™s irrelevant to monetary policy right now in the sense that it doesn™t limit spikes in 
the federal funds rate when reserve supply is unexpectedly shortened.  It™s not going to be 

relevant to monetary policy implementation in that sense until
Š2020, I think
, is the latest staff 
projection.  I
ts relevance now is basically for small banks that come 
up short on reserves due to 
poor planning or some unforeseeable contingency t
hat they could claim is outside their control 
but probably isn™t.  Now, large banks have 
a ton 
of reserves 
that i
nsulate them against shocks, 
and they don™t come to the window.  Right now, in our current situation of 
large reserve 
             
             
      
     
         
  
     balances, this is basical
ly about giving the incentive to small banks to manage their accounts 
sensibly. 
I think our old normal spread of 100 basis points would provide a more appropriate 
incentive, given the amounts of money involved if you actually do the overnight calculation.  
I think we should move back to 100 when we lift off.  I would favor that.  It was there.  We set 

that in 2002. We did some analysis.  There was some thought given to the tradeoff involved.  I 

think it makes sense. 
It would also signal normalization in a 
way that would be useful.   
When you talk about discount window borrowing, the word ﬁstigmaﬂ inevitably comes 
up, and the idea is advanced that, well, keeping 
the primary credit rate 
low helps reduce stigma.  
That is certainly true in the only model we have of stigma and discount window lending, but the 

survey research we™ve done as part of the a group looking at discount window issuesŠthey did 

some survey work on stigma, and what they found is that it is not a relevant consideration for 

small banks. Small banks don™t feel stigmatized. Maybe they feel stigmatized already, but they 
don™t feel as if stigma inhibits their borrowing from the window.  It™s just a big bank or 
a too-
big-
to-fail 
bank 
kind of issue, and large banks don™t borrow now.  In the 
last 
crisis
, we lowered 
the primary credit rate
 when it looked as if there was a rationale for big banks borrowing at the 
window.  It turned out they were getting all of the money they needed from 
Federal Home Loan 
Banks anyway, s
o it didn™t seem to be particularly relevant to large banks either. I don™t think 
stigma is a reason to keep the discount rate spread at 50 basis point rather than 100.  That™s the 

import of that.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank
 you.  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My reaction to the questions posed is that 
they™re really matters of pragmatism.  I agree that planning for daily briefings with the option of 
                  
          
            
         
  
         
   invoking an FOMC meeting is sensible and 
worka
ble.  I™m certainly fine with that. 
I™m a
lso 
comfortable with the approach that you laid out
, with
 the Committee and Board making the 
decisions 
the first two weeks
, and then after that
, the delegation of small adjustments. 
So I™m comfortable in both 
cases
.  There are some details yet to be worked out, and under certain 
scenarios
, we may have time to work them out.  We could hear a second version of this possibly 
down the road. 
I haven™t given a lot of thought to the discount rate question, but I™m gla
d that President 
Lacker raised it and talked about it a little bit. 
With regard to
 trying to figure out what that 
spread should be, I want to throw out one thought, 
and that is a recollection that during the crisis, 

the Federal Home Loan Banks became a so
rt of surrogate discount window.  And the 
relationship of our setting of the rates to their operations and their settings may be relevant for us 

to consider. Those are my thoughts.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
First Vice President P
richard
. MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m entirely comfortable with the 
approach described by 
the
 staff and yourself to be used for informing the FOMC on the 
effectiveness of policy implementation during the initial period after liftoff.  
I™m al
so entirely 
comfortable with the approach 
described as that
 to be used for delegating authority to the C
hair 
on tactical matters once we have declared victory on a successful liftoff. 
As it concerns the spread between 
the 
IOER 
rate 
and the discount rate, I think it™s 
actually probably best to 
quiesce 
and minimize the variability at
, and immediately after
, liftoff. 
My preference would be to stay with the 50 basis point spread until we have some separation of 

these events.
  I think the number of moving parts 
at the 
time of liftoff could work against us, 
            
   
      
           
          
       
        especially as we try to understand all of the different things that could be happening, and one 
more change, I think, that isn™t 
necessary might best be saved for later. 
I will add to the earlier discussion on 
the median and midpointŠ
a behavioral issue that I 
would just like 
the staff to consider to the extent that we talk about changing the definition of the 
fed
eral
 funds rate.  I don™t know what the behavioral reaction to that would be
.  It seems like 
when we 
whisper
, people think we shout.  I just don™t know whether people would make more of 
that than is needed, again, at the time of liftoff.  I understand we™re not contemplating the 

definitional change then, but even announcing the plan of a change could have a behavioral 

effect.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  F
irst
, with respect to the meetings and 
briefings, I guess I™m having trouble seeing what the utility of daily briefings for a couple of 

weeks would be in the circumstance 
that 
we think is likely to obtain, which is that 
there™s a 
reasonably successful liftoff. 
It seems to me more likely that 
we would want a briefing or a 
meeting on the Friday following liftoff.  T
hereafter
, I™m just not sure how much there will be to 
say unless things are going wrong, in which case, as everybody says, we™re going to actually 

need meetings and not just briefings.  
But I just note that in passing.  I know this Committee can 

fill up virtually any
 meeting that is set with questions and conversation, but I™m just not sure how 
much there will be to say other than getting emails from Simon and Lorie telling us what has 

happened on day three. 
With respect to governance, like everybody, I think, who™s spoken on this point, I favor 
giving discretion to the Chair, but actually I think I would go further than the staff though.  

Indeed, I™m going to disagree with the Chair in the interest of giving her more discretion than she 
         
   
     
                     
      
     
          
  asked for.  I guess I don™t quite understand why we wouldn™t give her discretion for this kind of 
modest change in the IOER 
rate 
or the 
ON RRP 
rate
 or both, even in the immediate post-
liftoff 
period.  It is new, but we have spent most of the p
ast year talking about how important it is to 
have a smooth and credible liftoff.  And, notwithstanding my substantial uneasiness with the 

potential medium-
term effects of a large ON
 RRP facility, I™ve joined the consensus that our 
dominant goal should be that smooth and credible liftoff, and presumably that smoothness and 

credibility are going to be most importa
nt in the immediate post
-liftoff period, which is to say the 
first couple of days.  I
t seems to me that if we regard the adjustments as 
fine
-tuning 
in pursuit of 
a particular federal funds target rate range, it would be useful to give her the discretion in that 

first couple of days to make such adjustments in an effort to get, as Loretta says, to at least the 

bottom of that range. 
If there™s a major pro
blem with liftoff, we™re going to need another full FOMC meeting.  
But suppose, for example, there™s a little bit of softness in the floor on the first day or two after 
the announced liftoff, and that softness might be firmed by a modest adjustment in the 
IOER 
rate. 
A quick action of that sort might actually buttress the credibility of our tools and intentions 
right from the outset and thereby make the whole process smoother.  
I don™t think
, in any case, 
it represents a policy change, 
because we can talk a
bout it beforehand.  Now, it™s possible that 
markets might read such a quick adjustment as indicating that we lack confidence in the efficacy 
of the decision we had just made a day or two before.  But that™s a judgment that the Chair could 

make in consultation with those best able to discern what market sentiment and intentions may 

be. 
Just by indicating that nimbleness is a 
desideratum
, I think I™ve already explained 
why an 
FOMC decisionmaking process 
won™t 
do the trick.  I just think the logic of what we™re talking 
            
    
    
                 
           
              
     
     about here argues for giving the C
hair this kind of very limited discretion to adjust those two 
rates that we™ve been talking about and 
we will set at the time of liftoff in the period 
in which 
they might be most efficacious in changing or shaping perceptions of how this whole process is 
going to go. 
As to communication, it does seem to me proper to indicate in advance that small, 
operational adjustments might be made in the IOER and ON 
RRP rates between meetings. 
Characterizing those as op
erational adjustments beforehand and contemplating them
, I think
, helps reinforce the sense 
that 
these are technical changes rather than policy changes. 
The 
suggestion that any actual changes be noted by the D
esk, as opposed to 
the Chair or 
the 
Committee 
as a whole, also seems to me a good idea since it would reinforce the fact that these 
rates are more or less operational changes rather than policy changes. 
On the primary credit rate spread, I thought 
President Lacker
™s comments were very 
interesting.  No
twithstanding the fact that they are interesting and we should think about them, 
particularly this difference between 
small
 and large bank stigma when we do discuss this, I 
personally would prefer to wait until the staff thinking about stigma effects and perhaps other 
elements of the discount window are done and maybe a more fulsome memo 
has been 
produced 
and circulated so 
that 
we can have a discussion of that.  It seems to me we™ve got plenty on our 

plate right now, and we might usefully put that conversation off just a bit. 
I want to end by saying I hadn™t thought about it this way, but I fully endorse what 
Loretta said about the criteria for success in how we regard the meeting of the target range post
-liftoff, and I think if we all subscribe to that, it 
would be useful for us, through appropriate 

mechanisms
, to get that expectation out as well so that we™re being evaluated by commentators 
and markets in a manner consistent with what our actual intentions and aims are.
  Like 
President 
      
                    
       
  
      
          
       
    Mester
, again, this is another reason why I think 
these little adjustments even right after liftoff 
are fine for the 
Chair to make
.  And, 
like 
President Mester
, I think using any of the other tools is 
something that should involve the entire Committee.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Did I see a two
-hander?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Like Governor Tarullo, I came to the 
meeting prepared to support delegation in the first two weeks.  I interpreted your earlier 
suggestion as, 
one, respect for governance in a critical period and, 
two
, maybe a desire to have 
more of a group decision than an individual decision.  Could you maybe speak more for another 

moment or two on what your thinking is regarding that? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I feel 
that 
in the days after liftoff, if things are not going exactly as 
we intend, and the funds rate is drifting outside the range, I do really think it™s appropriate for the 

entire Committee to meet, discuss what is happening, try to get 
to the bottom of what the 
problem is, and decide on what the approach is. 
Now, we 
could make the decision 
that
 this is no big deal, the funds rate 
is just fluctuating 
around relative to the target range 
by 
more than we had anticipated and this is the ﬁnew normal.ﬂ 
If we 
want
ed 
to address it 
not by moving the band or changing the spread, but by moving one or 
more rates around to deal with this when we see persistent movements outside the range, and 

early on the Committee says, ﬁLet™s just do this. It™s not that big 
of 
a deal
.  That™s the way to 
address this
ﬂŠand at that point you regard those adjustments as essentially routine, and 
it™s early
, and then you want to delegate it along the lines of what Governor Tarullo said, 
I am 
perfectly comfortable with that, and
, of course, 
that makes life easier.  But I think the Committee 
needs to feel comfortable that we have established procedures that have been determined by the 

Committee that we think are workable and appropriate. First Vice President Holcomb. 
             
        
       
                
MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the staff briefings issue, I say by all 
means they should be useful and perhaps important.  If it should turn out that between the 
regularly scheduled FOMC meetings the funds rate begins to trade frequently below the 

overnight reverse repo r
ate for a reasonably sized ON RRP facility, I support the 
Chair having 
limited discretionary authority to restore 
funds rate control by raising both the IOER and the ON 
RRP rates while maintaining the spread between the two rates.  I agree with Governor Ta
rullo 
that this could be within the first days as well. 
That these rate changes are not to be subject to a 
vote would signal that they are technical adjustments designed simply to implement previously-

agreed
-upon policy.  The main focus would stay on the 
target band for the federal funds rate set 
by the FOMC. 
The simplicity of a system in which the IOER and the ON RRP rates are set equal to the 
top and bottom of the target funds rate band, respectively, is appealing and easily communicated.  

Deviations from that simple system should be temporary with 
reserve
-draining tools
, like term 
deposits and term RRPs, being brought to bear 
whe
n systematically greater interest rate control 
is required. 
I understand that we are entering uncharted territory and may need to act nimbly.  
Therefore, a good solution is for the FOMC and the Board to give the C
hair discretionary 
authority to adjust the IOER
ŒON RRP band relative to the funds rate target range between 
meetings while maintaining the width of the band at 25 basis points.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The staff has laid out a perfectly reasonable 
plan for prescheduled briefings during 
the first two weeks after liftoff.  I expect the process will 

go smoothly and these will end up like routine morning calls.  
If problems arise, I am 
                             
      
          
   
              comfortable with turning the briefings into formal teleconference meetings to handle any policy 
decisions we may have to make. 
After the initial burn
-in period
Šperhaps two weeksŠI also favor the Board and the 
Committee delegating a
uthority to the 
Chair to adjust the IOER and ON RRP rates by up to 5 to 
10 basis points, if necessary, to keep the funds rate within the target range.  I am comfortable 

delegating this authority as early as you™d like.  Even at the outset would be all righ
t with me. 
Basically, these are efficient ways to tweak the dials as necessary, and I see a communications 
advantage to this approach, 
as it reduces the odds of small technical adjustments to 
the 
IOER or 
the ON RRP 
rates being misread as changes in the st
ance of policy.  I completely trust that if any 
major issues arise
, the Chair will not hesitate to bring us in on the decisionmaking process. 
I did have a question.  I can™t remember if this was in the documents or other people have 
mentioned this, but at the time of the first liftoff, would we be comfortable preannouncing that 

we have no intention of adjusting the stance of monetary policy before the next policy meeting 
so that any intermeeting adjustments would be seen as nimble adjustments, just technica
lly to get 
the funds rate in the range? I mean, I can™t imagine that we would really think that we are going 
to have to have a policy tightening in between the first and the second meeting.  But it would be 

unusual, I understand that. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Certainly
, we should make clear that we have an intended target 
range that reflects policy and stand prepared to make adjustments in the administered rates
, and 

that we 
may need to do that. 
MR. EVANS. 
You can say that in your press conference rather than 
it finding its way 
into the statement. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
           
   
              
    
                   
     
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m not entirely comfortable 
with the 
pre
-commitment
 approach that President Evans outlined.  As the Vice Ch
air
man
 talked 
about in some of the remarks he made 
publicly in the intermeeting period, we don™t know 
exactly what is going to happen to financial market conditions necessarily at the time of liftoff.  

If we saw a 
very abrupt tightening in broader financial market conditions, there might be a 
reason for the Committee to think about retracing the steps they have taken, even 
within
 the 
intermeeting period.
  I thought it was an interesting idea, but I, myself, wouldn™t be comfortable 
with that.
  Thanks. 
CHAIR 
YELLEN.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would be happy to set my calendar for 
prescheduled staff briefings during the first two weeks to offer some insight, and I would be 

equally happy to remove them [laughter] 
if the staff judg
es that everything is going smoothly and 
there is nothing to report.  I am also comfortable delegating to the Chair a degree of authority to 
make technical adjustments, and I think we will know whether those are technical or more 
substantive as we go along
. On the issue of the 
discount rate spread, my comments here really are along the lines of 
President Lacker™s
ŠI think this issue doesn™t have much effect right now on overall financial 

market conditions.  But we did make changes to the discount rate during 
the crisis to narrow the 
spread and then widened it to its current 50 basis points.  
Smaller banks do regularly use this 

facility, and Boards of D
irectors 
of the 
Federal 
Reserve 
Banks 
are required to make 
recommendations about the rate. 
It seems worthwhi
le to me to clarify how this rate is going to 
work as we contemplate normalization so that we minimize confusion and perhaps even mixed 

signals at the time of liftoff. 
Thank you. 
              
           
       
       
    
       CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank 
you, Madam Chair.  I appreciate the thoughtful 
analysis and the memos that discuss the intermeeting governance of the IOER 
rate
, ON RRP 
rate, and other policy tools during the early weeks of liftoff.  I thought that the approach 

described of scheduling dai
ly staff 
briefings during those first few weeks is prudent and should 
meet our needs initially, given that we could convert them to official meetings as needed. 
One thing I would note is that it might not always be clear what it would mean to ﬁ
settle 
down,ﬂ so if liftoff takes place, say, in mid-
June or mid
-September, things might settle down 
after the passage of 
quarter-end and then you might have this issue of whether that is really 
settling down from the point of view of being able to deal with quarter-e
nd.
  You might want to 
have staff briefings, again, scheduled for the end of the following quarter, which I guess, 
if we 

raised in September, would be at the end of December.  
I think just the passage of time is not 

necessarily going to tell you 
that this 
is going to be working and working fine.  I think that is 
something to keep in mind as we go forward. 
The staff memo noted that there are quorum rules for the Committee.  Those might be 
useful in the context of these staff briefings.  Not everyone needs to be here for every meeting, 

and the Committee still can operate. 
That might come up in this situation.  I didn™t say this at the 
very beginning, but I should say that I am very confident that this is all about contingency 

planning.  
I am confident the too
ls are going to work.  I think these 
meetings 
are going to 
become
 boring very quickly.  It is going to be like the call.  Not to say that™s boring, butŠ 
[laughter]Š
I misspoke.  But it will become routine
, at least
.  T
hat™s our base
line 
scenario, but I 
do think it™s useful to engage in this contingency planning. 
      
                 
   
      
            
              
   
  I think I am going to be in the minority on my next point, which is, can we trans
ition 
to a 
situation 
in which 
we simply delegate so
-called technical decisions to the 
Chair? 
Here I am not 
supportive of that delegation, and my answer there is shaped by three considerations. First, when 
my staff and I thought about the context in which increases in the ON RRP rate would be 

considered, we weren™t sure that those situations would be that technical 
per se 
or tactical.  It 
seemed like those would be situations 
in which the effective fed
eral
 funds rate would be below 
the bottom of the target range, and that seemed likely to occur in conjunction with the cap on the 

ON RRP volume being binding.  Then there would be some interaction, 
at least
, in your 
discussion about raising the ON RRP rate, and also discussion about raising the cap.  Now, the 

cap is a big deal.  We have talked about that at length.  The Committee certainly has strong 

views about that.  I
t just 
immediately seemed to bring substantive issues into play. 
The second con
sideration is that, a
s I listen to people talk about analogies with the past, if 
we were talking about delegating to the staff, I would almost be more comfortable 
with that 
than 
delegating to the C
hair.  
[Laughter] 
I say that because 
I think 
if 
it is routine enough to be 
delegated to staff, we can delegate it to the staff.  This is clearly not routine enough to delegate to 

the 
staff.
  This is about the Committee deciding tha
t a decision
, which is not sufficiently routine 
to delegate to the staff
, is being delegated to the Chair instead.  T
hat is not something I feel as 
comfortable with. 
Third, basically, there is an issue here of precedent.  This is not about this C
hair.  I f
eel 
perfectly comfortable with you, Madam Chair, and your 
discretion in this matter.  But future 
Committees may not have that level of comfort with future 
Chair
s in related situations.
  Getting 
together for meetings is hard and challenging.  It is always easy to delegate, and I think we want 
             
    
    
                      to fight that tendency, especially in view of how easy modern technology makes it to pull 
together a quorum of the Committee for substantive discussion and deliberations. 
For these reasons, Madam Chair, I recommend that 
the Committee not delegate authority 
for intermeeting adjustments to the 
Chair.  Again, this is all about contingency planning, but I 
think the Committee could make contingency plans to vote, as needed, between scheduled 

meetings, be it by telephone, vide
oconference, telepresence, secure lines
Šall of the other 
suggestions that are out there. 
A quick comment on the primary credit spread.  I thought the idea of doing more research 
and work on this was a very interesting one.  At liftoff, especially if we are going to be doing 

liftoff in the near term, 
the JuneŒ
September 
time frame
, I would favor keeping the 50 basis point 
primary credit spread at that time, then continuing 
to do work on the issue before we decide.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President 
Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I just want to mention 
that 
there has been some loose talk about 
comparing the timing of th
ese briefings
 to the morning call, and I am not in favor of tying them 

to the morning call.  Let me be clear on that. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Notice 
when I was faced with that
, I devised a way to end the 
requirement thatŠ 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I call that leadership by
Š CHAIR YELLEN. 
Thank you.  [Laughter] 
MR. EVANS.  So it can be done?  That™s what you™re saying? 

CHAIR YELLEN.  It can be done.  It only took 50 years, butŠ 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It can be done. 
       
    
                
          
  
  
        CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Generally speaking, I™m comfortable with 
the 
prescheduled
 staff meetings.  Based on the discussion here, I™m wondering whether we need 
one every day.  Maybe twice a week
ŠI™m picking up on some of the comments of Governor 
Tarullo.  I™m not sure how much information you™re going to get from Tuesday to Wednesday.  

You could probably review this a couple of times a week. 
Also, picking up a little bit on themes 
Vice Chairman 
Dudley was talking about, could 
you do this with a subcommittee of the FOMC? Do you really have to have the entire 

Committee reviewing what is s
upposed to be a technical issue?  You could bring the whole 
Committee in
, if necessary, but if everything™s going okay, 
it seems that it
 could be done by 
subcommittee.  That™s something to think about. 
On the governance approach, the 
first part 
was
, should 
we have a vote of the FOMC to 
adjust ranges
? I view this as pretty cumbersome for something that™s supposed to be a technical 
issue.  It sounds nontechnical
. It makes it sound like it™s a policy change regardless of what we 
say, and so I see that
 as a difficult way to go. 
Now, for the C
hair™s authority o
f 5 
or 10 basis points, first of all, I think that moving 
these ranges should be subject to a high bar.  That™s one of my main comments.  
You 
really don™t 
want to do this unless you really have to 
because of
 the communications issues that we™re going 
to encounter.  The payoff to doing this is ultimately pretty low.  
For instance
, maybe the 
fed
eral 
funds 
rate is trading a few basis points below the range
, and now you make this move.  Now the 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate 
moves into the bottom part of the range.  So you™ve 
gained a few basis points, 
but at the expense of markets asking, ﬁWhat are you guys doing?  Are you changing policy?ﬂ 
      
             
  
    
         
     
      
  
   
   
                
 Another question I have that has not come up yet is the authority to go 5 to 10 
basis 
points over what time horizon.  Would you be able to go 5 basis points and then the next week 
another 5 
basis points
, and the next week another 5 basis points? 
I don™t think that™s the intent, 
but that™s something you™ve got to think about here.  And if you went the full 10 basis points and 

it didn™t work
, then I guess the whole Committee would have to come in at that point. 
I see a core problem here
, which we™ve talked about before in our discussions.  The 
Committee insists o
n saying that the f
ederal funds rate is the policy rate, but relatively few trades 
are occurring at that particular rate. 
According to the Committee, 
the IOER rate 
is not the policy 
rate, but, on the other hand
, that is the rate that affects the largest banks in the country
, and it 
affects their funding costs.  And, in other contexts, we have said IOER is our workhorse rate. 
And then you™ve got overnight RRP, which we™re also saying is not a policy rate, but 
which 
is for a market that 
has many traders and 
that 
is potentially 
large at the time of liftoff.  So 
we might say that the 
policy rate is the federal funds rate, but what does 
that 
mean to markets? 
It™s really the markets that are saying what the policy rate is, and if they think moving these other 

rates is more importa
nt than where the fed
eral 
fund
s rate is trading, then we
™ve changed 
policy in 
a macroeconomic sense. 
So, I think this is a conflict, but that is part of the situation we™re in
, given the way we™ve 
decided to do this.  I think it does have potential to sound like a policy move to people inside 

financial markets even though we™re saying, well, the federal funds rate range has not changed 

and so we haven™t done anything different.  The bottom line is 
that I am worried about 
communications issues. Because of t
hat, I don™t think you want to do this unless it™s absolutely 
necessary.  You know, overall I would say 5 to 10 basis points 
per inter
meeting period is okay 
             
             
                           
  
 with me.
  I would agree with President Rosengren that 
it might be premature to decide on this 
today.  You could make the delegation decision later around the time of liftoff, 
if necessary. 
Let me finish with one story that 
old-
timers
 here around the Fed
eral Reserve 
will 
remember from the early 1990s.  I am going to mention ﬁHe-Who-Must-Not-Be-N
amed
,ﬂ who 
is 
former Chairman Alan Greenspan.  At the time, 
it was considered that the 
Chair
man
 had 25 basis 
points on the federal funds rate target and that the 
Chair
man
 could make that adjustment during 
an inter
meeting period without consulting the Committee.  And the Chair
man 
at that time made a 
bunch of those moves and then came into the meeting and said, ﬁNow that I™ve made the move, 
now we don™t have to move at the meeting.ﬂ  This was extremely hot and divisive on the 

Committee in the early 1990s.  We don™t want to get into any kind of situation like that, and I 

know that™s not your intention, but it is a bit of a slippery slope:  What™s going to be delegated? 

Who™s agreed to it?  How much have you agreed to?  Under what circumstances? 
It is a very 
tricky issue
, and it has been a situation in the past on this Committee that has been problematic 
from a collegiality perspective. 
I know we™re not really thinking about anything like that, but I think 
it is a bit of a 
slippery slope.  You™ve got this issu
e about what rates really matter versus what rates 
we are 
calling the policy rate, and you™ve got this precedent in the past 
whe
n it didn™t go so well.
  Thank 
you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 
MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Cha
ir.  I™m comfortable with the governance 
approach in the first two weeks of scheduling daily staff briefings, but I assume that we™ll 

quickly work out whether we need them every day and we can probably unschedule a few of 

them within a day or two.  S
o I th
ink there™s some flexibility the
re.                 
          
           
    
   
  With regard to the governance approach for technical adjustments in the IOER or ON 
RRP rate
s, I don™t know about previous Chair
men
.  I™ve only had one Chair in my life on the 
Board, and my experience with th
at Chair is t
hat if there is going to be any question about a need 
for discussion, she will call for it.  I haven™t detected her trying to get around the FOMC or the 
Board, and I think we can rely on that.  So I™d be perfectly willing to give the C
hair 
an 
adjustment up to 10 basis points.  I agree that 
we need to specify that 
the discretion would be 
granted 
between meetings. 
I™m not sure about the wisdom of constraining the gap between the 
ON RRP and IOER 
rates to 25 basis points. We may find reasons 
why
 we need to move one without moving the 
other, and my general approach is, don™t constrain yourself if there™s no need to constrain 

yourself, because the law of unintended consequences is very powerful. 
On the primary credit rate, I agree with those who think we should t
ry to minimize the 
number of adjustments we make at the time of liftoff, and that this issue is sufficiently important 
for banks to which we give a lot more 
attention than their size would imply.  I™m not sure why 
we would want to start by raising the cost of borrowing by 50 basis points for the smaller banks 
who do borrow at that rate, and we™d need to look at what would happen when we raise the rate.  

And so, for both reasons, 
I favor examining that after liftoff. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  T
hank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m very well aligned with the 
Chair™s 
original comments and additional comments and response to Governor Tarullo™s and 
President 
Lockhart™s points, and with many others around the table as 
well. 
As for the briefings, I think it is fine to schedule them, and if we have them I™ll attend 
them, but I think the only case in which we would actually want to have them is if things are 
         
    
      
              
                 
    
    really not going well.  A
nd I don™t expect that that is likely at
 all in a world in which 
we have 
taken the cap off the overnight RRP or, for that matter, put a very high cap on. 
As far as delegation is concerned, if 
the test is adjustments that are 
routine or 
technical 
in nature
, I completely trust the 
Chair™s instincts on that. I will say that 
if what we™re dealing with 
is a very difficult and failed liftoff situation, I don™t think
, in real time
, that™s going to feel either 
routine or technical.  I think it™s going to feel like something that all of us ought to be involved in 
and accountable for.  I also would not constrain ourselves by holding this space between the 

IOER and 
the 
ON RRP rates
 at 25 basis points.  It might make sense to do something different, 
again, in real time. 
So, for all of that
, I think it™s essentially impossible to anticipate all of these 
things, and I would just say 
that 
I will do what is reasonable at the time. 
In terms of the primary credit facility, it is 
an interesting subject on which 
we can have a 
lot of debate.  I would
n™t touch it until well after liftoff. 
In my view, it™s just not a complication 
that we
, in my view
, need to be taking on right now.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 

MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
the proposal. I think it™s very 
important for us as Committee members to take responsibility for actively being engaged in 

assessing the effectiveness of monetary control and the relative roles of the IOER and the ON 

RRP rates 
in maintaining the federal 
funds rate in the target range for some initial period.  The 
length of that period, I think, should be determined by events.  My guess is 
that 
if the decision to 
lift off is made coincident with a meeting with 
a press conference, as seems very likely, I wo
uld 
expect that period of active involvement to span that quarter-end, but beyond that, 
I think it 
would be unwise to be too prescriptive at this point. 
         
   
  
             
                 
  
    
   
  
  
       
                                                         
  
 When market functioning has settled down, it will be appropriate to delegate to the C
hair 
the authority 
to make the necessary changes to the levels of the IOER and the ON 
RRP 
rates
, or possibly to the spread between them, 
in order to maintain effective monetary control.  I think the 
Committee can make that decision once it judges that the frequent briefings
 and meetings no 

long serve 
the
ir purpose, along with the parameters of the delegation.  
It™s very important that we 
carefully manage communications 
regarding the heightened vigilance and possible activity of the 

Committee and the Board during those initial weeks so that 
our 
communications bolster 
confidence in the normalization process and contribute to smooth market functioning. 
With regard to the appropriate level of the primary credit spread, I would be open to a 
recommendation from the 
staff as to retu
rning it to 
pre-
crisis levels
.  But like many others around 
the table, I would want to put some distance between the timing of liftoff and the 
timing of 
possibly changing that spread so as not to further complicate our 
already challenging 
communications around the time of liftoff.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
I think this has been a very useful discussion.  Let me 
say the Board meeting is now adjourned.  We™re ready to go on to item 3, and I suggest 
we have 
the economic briefings and then 
we™ll 
take a coffee break before going into our round.  L
et me 
turn things over to Bill Wascher
. MR. WASCHER.
3  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll be referring to the top exhibit 
on your pile, which is labeled ﬁMaterial for the U.S. Outlook.ﬂ  The data on spending, 
production, and hiring that we received since the March Tealbook were all weaker 

than we expected.  On the spending side, the February PCE data and March retail 

sales report led us to make a sizable reduction in our estimate of first
-quarter real 
PCE growth.  This downward revision to consumer spending accounts for much of 

the downward revision to first-quarter real GDP growth shown in panel 1 of your 

forecast summary exhibit.  In addition, a number of other categories of spendingŠ 

particularly business investment and residential construction
Šhave also surprised us 
to the downside in recent months, as have the incoming data on factory output.  I 

would note that after the April Tealbook was closed, 
we received the advance report 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
         
        
     
     
   
              
   
  
                
          on capital goods orders and shipments for March, which was also weak but broadly in 

line with our expectations. 
One of the crucial questions that we faced
Šand that you face as well
Šwas how 
to interpret this batch of disappointing news, and wheth
er, in particular, it is best seen 

as just another 
hicc
up in a recovery that fundamentally remains on track toward 
achievement of your policy objectives, or the leading edge of a more serious 

slackening in the pace of recovery.  For the most part, we have 
leaned toward the 
former interpretation.  Accordingly, our projection calls for near-
term real GDP 
growth to return to a pace that is not too different from our March forecast.  In 

particular, although it is difficult to quantify their influence precisely, 
we believe that 
several transitory special factors
Šincluding unusually severe winter weather and 

production disruptions related to labor disputes at West Coast portsŠ
were a small 

drag on first-quarter real activity.  In addition, we think that measured fi
rst
-quarter 
GDP growth will be held down a bit by seasonal adjustment issues that affected 

estimates of state and local construction spending and by a distortion in the BEA™s 

translation of retail sales to PCE associated with the steep decline in gasoline prices 

and the increased share of gasoline sales at large retail establishments such as Wal
-Mart.  We do not judge any of these factors to be exerting a large influence on their 

own, but as a group, our 
back
-of-the-envelope calculations 
put the effect at a
bout ¾ percentage point. 
That said, we have not completely discounted the weaker-
than
-expected incoming 
data.  Specifically, we trimmed our estimate of consumption growth in the second 

quarter a bit as a result of the weaker
-than-
expected March retail sale
s report, and we 
made a noticeable downward revision to our projection 
of 
near
-term residential 
construction activity in response to the lack of a significant pickup in starts and 
permits in March.  We also lowered our forecast for nonresidential structures 
spending, as the latest data on drilling activity suggest that the recent drop in oil 

prices is having a larger effect on drilling and mining investment than we had 

previously anticipated.  Because we believe that the fundamentals underpinning 

household spending remain solid, we continue to expect that real GDP will rise at a 

pace that exceeds our estimate of potential output growth over the remainder of the 

year.  Even so, the 
level 
of real output at the end of this year is almost ½ 
percent 
lower than in our March forecast. 
As a way of providing another perspective on the near-term outlook, panel 2 
presents the results from the Board staff™s dynamic factor model.  This model uses the 

information from a large number of activity and price indi
cators to generate forecasts 

of near-term real GDP growth, and it was among the specifications we showed you in 

the April Tealbook box on nowcasting models.  As you can see, using the data that 

we had available when the April Tealbook was closed, the model 
also predicts a very 
low GDP growth figure for the first quarter followed by a modest pickup in the 

current quarter.  Of course, the model does not know about any of the special factors 

that we think will unwind and provide an additional boost to growth this quarter.  And 

I would note that the range of predictions for first-quarter growth coming from the 
                  
      
              
              
           
         various nowcasting efforts across the System is quite wide, underscoring the 

uncertainty surrounding the interpretation of the pace of activity last quart
er. 
To wrap up the discussion of the near-term spending data, I would remind you 
that we will receive the BEA™s advance estimate of first
-quarter real GDP tomorrow 
morning.  Given how low our current point estimate isŠ
and in light of the relatively 

large degree of uncertainty that surrounds these estimates
, even on the eve of a 

release
Šit would not be especially surprising from a statistical point of view if we 

were to see either a small decline tomorrow or a noticeably stronger increase than we 

have pencil
ed in.  And, of course, the BEA™s initial estimate is itself subject to 
substantial revision over time. 
Moving to the middle panels, the labor market has continued to improve, but here, 
too, the data point to somewhat less momentum than we had anticipated in our 

previous forecast.  In the establishment survey, March total nonfarm payroll 

employment growth was considerably weaker than the very strong pace that we had 

expected
.  I
ncorporating revisions to previous months, the average monthly change in 
payroll employment over the first quarter now stands at about 200,000, which is 

70,000 less than we had written down in the March Tealbook.  The news from the 

household survey also came in a little weaker than we had anticipated:  The 

unemployment rate held steady at 5.5 
percent in March
Šwe had expected it to tick 
down one-
tenth
Šwhile the participation rate, which we had expected to hold steady, 
edged lower. 
To summarize the information from the various pieces of labor market data that 
we have received, panel 3 shows our labor market conditions index, or LMCI.  As 

you can see from the inset box, the LMCI was basically flat last month
.  For the first 
quarter as a wholeŠthe rightmost 
bar in the main chart
Šthe index did increase, but 
at a slower pace than what we have seen in recent quarters.  Just as we did with the 

spending data, we took a modest signal from the incoming labor market news and 

reduced our projected pace of monthly payroll job growth by about 40,000 over the 

current quarter.  We also nudged up our forecast for the unemployment rate in 

coming months. 
Over the remainder of the medium term, our projection 
of 
real GDP growth is 
little revised 
from
 March.  The main conditioning factors that we built into the 
baseline forecast this round
Šparticularly
, the low
er projected path for the exchange 
value of the dollarŠare, on net, expected to be slightly more supportive of real 

activity.  By the end of the medium term, the effects of these changes offset roughly 

half of the downward revisions we put through to the near term, leaving the level of 

real GDP just a little lower relative to our March projection. 
Although it had only a small effect on our projection regarding 
real activity, I 
would point out that we now assume that the federal funds rate will lift off from 
its effective lower bound in September, one quarter later than in our previous forecast.  

Our revised liftoff assumption is broadly consistent with both the ﬁflashﬂ primary 

dealer survey that was taken after the March FOMC meeting and the latest dealer 
        
   
    
  
     
                     
                                      
                                                           
 survey, and 
it is more consistent with the timing suggested by financial markets. In 
addition, as best we can tell, a September liftoff date does not appear to be sharply at 

odds with FOMC participants™ March SEP submissions, in which the median 

participant 
pointed to the third quarter as the most likely quarter for liftoff.  After 
liftoff
Šand consistent with our usual practiceŠthe projected path for the funds rate 
is set by mechanically applying an inertial version of the Taylor (1999) 
policy rule. 
Panel
 4 gives our projected path for the unemployment rate.  With the level of real 
GDP at the end of the medium term only a little lower relative to March
Šand with no 
change to our supply-side assumptions this roundŠthe unemployment rate is 

expected to be 5.1
 percent at the end of 2017.  T
his is 
one-
tenth 
higher than its level 
in the March Tealbook and one-
tenth 
below our estimate of its natural rate.  The slow 
pace of decline in the unemployment rate reflects both the modest pace of GDP 

growth projected over the medium term and our assumption that the strengthening 

labor market will draw more individuals back into the labor force. 
Panels
 5 and 6 summarize the inflation outlook.  The incoming data on price 
inflation have been a touch above our expectations and supp
ort our projection that 
both total and core inflation will step up in the second quarter.  Further out, the 

inflation projection is little revised
.  A
s in previous Tealbooks, we expect 
that 
inflation 
will 
gradually move higher as resource slack diminishes, 
energy prices rise, 
and prices for imported goods turn up again. 
Finally, I wanted to call 
your attention to a change we 
made this round to how we 
characterize forecast uncertainty 
in the Tealbook.
 Specifically, we have revamped 
the methodology that we use to compute confidence intervals 
based on our historical 
projection errors and have also reworked our presentation of these intervals to include 

a comparison with the historical 
range of key forecast variables.  The new intervals 
are typically a little w
ider than the ones we reported previously, and they tend to 
show 
more asymmetry, which is most notice
able in the prediction 
interval 
surrounding the unemployment forecast.  When we 
miss big on unemployment, it 
tends to be because unemployment turns out to have been much higher 
than expected, 
not much lower.  Additional details 
on this new 
methodology were presented in a box 
and associated technical 
appendix in 
the Risks and Uncertainty section of the 
Tealbook and in Jeremy Nalewaik™s pre
-FOMC briefing.  The
se new intervals 
complement our other methodology of using stochastic simulations from the FRB/US 

model to produce confidence intervals around our projection, and we intend to show 

both sets of 
uncertainty measures in future Tealbooks.  I would note 
that 
the 
confidence 
bands shown in my exhibit today continue 
to use the FRB/US 
measures, 
but our intention is 
to eventually extend the new 
methodology to compute confidence 
intervals 
around our quarterly forecasts as well.  Steve will continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.
4  Thank you, Bill.  The harsh weather we endured last winter left 
many potholes in U.S. roads and, as Bill 
Wascher has described, helped create one 
large pothole in U.S. GDP growth.  Interestingly, as shown in panel 1 
of my 
4 The materials used by Mr. Kamin are appended to this transcript (append
ix 4). 
                
    
        
         
          
  
    
                      
    presentation on the international outlook, a pothole also appears in the path of foreign 

growth in the first quarter.  Incoming data have been surprisingly weak in countries as 

diverse as Canada, which shared our harsh winter
; China, which was 
actually 
warmer 
than usual
; and Malaysia, which arguably has no winter at all.  As shown in panel 2, 
the downturn was also evident in global trade, suggesting some underlying malaise 

that was sweeping the globe. 
As indicated by the yellow bars in panels 1 and 2, we faced a very similar p
icture 
exactly a year ago, with U.S. growth, foreign growth, and global trade all turning 

down in the first quarter of 2014.  Accordingly, I went back and looked at my 

remarks for the April 2014 FOMC meeting for lessons that we might apply here.  

First, I 
found that I used the same tired pothole metaphor a year ago.  [Laughter] 
Second, at that time, I also predicted that foreign economic activity would clamber 

out of its pothole and resume moving along the path to recovery, just as Bill 
Wascher 
did for the United States.  Unusually enough, we both turned out to be right, and we 

are making the same call today. 
Certainly, the fundamentals favor a return to solid growth abroad:  Monetary 
policy is generally very accommodative, oil prices remain low, and most c
urrencies 
have weakened considerably against the dollar since last summer.  Moreover, many 

of the factors that pushed down global growth in the first quarter appear to be 

transitory.  Canada™s economy is estimated to have flatlined on account of unusually 

harsh winter weather and a step
-down in oil investment, but with oil prices bottoming 
out, growth should bounce back in the coming quarters.  Mexican output is estimated 

to have decelerated sharply in the first quarter along with U.S. manufacturing, and we 

anticipate that the projected rebound in U.S. activity will boost growth in Mexico as 

well. 
China also accounts for some of the pothole in foreign growth, but its situation is 
more complicated.  As shown in panel 3, GDP growth fell from 7 percent in the 

fourth quarter to only 5.3 percent in the first, well below expectations, as exports and 

industrial production dropped sharply.  It is difficult to parse out how much of the 

first
-quarter shortfall reflects reduced external demand, how much reflects the 
ongoing correction in the property sector, and how much reflects longer-
term 
developments such as the rebalancing of the economy and decline in potential output 

growth.  In any event, the authorities had been easing monetary policy even before 

the weak GDP 
reading
, and they
 have now stepped up this stimulus, including 
reducing the required reserve ratio 100 basis points.  In our projection, the 

combination of heightened policy stimulus and rising external demand pushes growth 

back up to over 7 percent later th
is year before it edges down thereafter. Like the 

booming Chinese stock market, however, this forecast is somewhat speculative, and 

we have revised down our projection a bit in response to the recent weakness. 
Ironically, nearly the only bright spot in the global economy has been the euro 
area, 
for which strengthening industrial production, retail sales, and PMIs point to a 
rise in first
-quarter GDP growth to 1¾ percent (panel 4).  Notably, financial 

conditions are becoming more of a positive for the econo
my, in part reflecting the 
                        
                          
  
  
     
                     ECB™s asset purchase program.  Bank lending standards are loosening, credit to 

nonfinancial corporations is finally picking up 
a bit
, interest rates are extremely low, 
and the real trade
-weighted euro is at its weakest level sinc
e 2001.  Accordingly, we 
see euro
-area growth firming to 2¼ percent in the next few years, provided that 
spillovers from Greece™s crisis remain contained, as we assume in our baseline. 
That, however, is a big ﬁ
if.
ﬂ  The Greek government is struggling in it
s efforts to 
negotiate additional financial assistance from European authorities and the IMF, even 

as it is running arrears to suppliers and raiding the accounts of local governments in 

order to stay afloat.  More than •10 billion in payments on its medium- and long-
term 
debt are coming due in the next four months.  Although the Greeks have reshuffled 

their negotiating team in an apparent effort to ease tensions with their creditors and 

strike a deal, there is still a good chance that the government could miss one or more 

of these payments.  Such an event could trigger a run on Greek banks, and unless the 

ECB stepped up its liquidity support by a substantial margin, the government would 

have to declare a bank holiday and impose capital controls, with a much-heightened 

chance of Greece eventually exiting the euro area altogether. Had such developments 

occurred at the height of the euro crisis in 2012, spillovers to the rest of the euro area 

would have been very destructive.  However, as Simon noted, the regio
n™s financial, 

institutional, and policy framework has strengthened in recent years.  Accordingly, 

we are building into our euro-
area forecast only a small drag 
due to 
spillovers from 
Greece™s intensifying crisis.  Nevertheless, we recognize that, as descr
ibed in the 
Tealbook, far more dire scenarios are possible, not just for the euro area but for the 

global economy more generally. 
While the pace of economic activity abroad remains quite unsettled, two key 
external drivers of U.S. economic prospects have been a bit more quiescent of late. 
First, oil markets have not yielded any big surprises.  To be sure, spot prices, shown 
in panel 5, are up more than $8 per barrel since the time of the March Tealbook, as 

falling rig counts and other signs of declining in
vestment have led markets to expect 
lower U.S. oil production.  However, prices for futures contracts further out on the 

curve are up by less, so that our projected path for Brent prices has been raised just a 

bit and remains well below 
levels prevailing l
ast summer. 
Second, for the first time since last July, the dollar has come down over the 
intermeeting period, as shown in panel 6.  This depreciation likely reflected weak 

data and the fall in expected policy rates here in the United States.  However, I would 

like to remind you that, starting with the March Tealbook, we decided to deviate from 

our standard random-
walk
-oriented model and project
ed a further rise in the dollar
.  That also must have contributed to the dollar™s subsequent decline.  [Laughter] 
In the 
event, from its lower starting point, we assume the broad real dollar will still move up 

some 2
¼ percent between now and the end of the year as the U.S. economy bounces 
back and markets refocus on the policy divergen
ces among major central banks. 
Your next exhibit puts movements in the dollar and their implications for 
economic growth into broader perspective.  As shown by the black solid line in 

panel 1, even at its projected peak early next year, the broad real dollar would be well 
                           
     
                                                                                                
 below its previous two peaks.  The black solid line in panel 2 shows the contribution 

of net exports to real U.S. 
GDP growth
.  We project it at negative ¾ percentage point 
this year and next.  This is the largest drag on growth since the early 2000s, and it 

almost entirely reflects the appreciation of the dollar.  It may seem strange that the 

dollar should depress the net export contribution to such an extent when it remains so 

far below its previous peaks.  However, what matters for the contribution of net 

exports to GDP
 growth is not the level of the dollar but how much it moves, and the 
dollar has appreciated sharply since last summer.  Additionally, the share of trade in 

the U.S. economy has grown over time, amplifying the effects of dollar movements 

on net exports and growth. 
Were the dollar to rise further than we are currently projecting, it would exert 
even stronger effects on the economy.  Returning to panel 1, the dashed line shows 

the 10 percent rise in the dollar described in the ﬁStronger D
ollar
ﬂ scenario in the 
Tealbook.  As shown below, the contribution of net exports to GDP would fall to its 

lowest level since the early 1980s.  Additionally, as indicated in panel 3, core 

inflation would fall below 1 percent on a four-quarter basis before rebounding.  Josh 

wil
l now continue our presentation. 
MR. GALLIN.
5  Thank you.  My material 
is titled ﬁFinancial Stability 
Developments.ﬂ 
My remarks draw on the recent QS financial stability report.  In sum, valuation 
pressures in asset markets have increased since the January assessment and remain 

notable.  In addition, vulnerabilities related to maturity and liquidity transformation 

remain moderate, but leverage in both the financial and the nonfinancial sectors, 

overall, remains relatively low.  Taken together, we think that 
conditions in the 
financial sector are moder
ately prone to amplify shocks. 
I begin with valuations in fixed-income markets.  The yield on the 10-
year 
Treasury noteŠ
the blue line 
in the upper-
left panel
Šand 
term premium measures
Š the red and black lines
Šhav
e remained quite low since the January 
financial 
stability 
briefing.  The possibility that term premiums will move up sharply remains a focus of 

staff analysis
.  I will return to this issue
 near the end of the briefing. 
In corporate bond markets, yield spr
eads to comparable Treasury securities have 
moved down a bit in recent months.  As shown by the red line in the panel to the 

right, the far
-term forward spread for high-yield corporate bondsŠone measure of 
risk premiumsŠ
remains near the middle of its histo
rical range, which suggests that 
valuations are reasonableŠ
relative, that is, to seemingly richly valued Treasury 

securities.  In addition, as shown by the light blue bars in the middle-left panel, 

issuance of high
-yield bonds, a nonprice measure of hot ma
rkets and thus valuation 
pressures, remained robust through the first quarter of the year.  Somewhat in 

contrast, issuance of leveraged loans
Šthe dark blue portion of the barsŠ
has 
declined
, on net, in recent quarters.  Although supervisory analysis of completed 
5 The materials used by Mr. Gallin are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
              
    
       
               
          
      
   
      
   
 deals suggests a modest improvement in underwriting quality, fairly lax nonprice 

terms were reportedly still prevalent in recent deals. 
Moving to the stock market, the expected real return on 
corporate equities
Šthe 
black line in the middle-right panelŠ
has fallen significantly since the 
previous 
stability briefing, as stock prices have advanced and expectations of corporate 

earnings have been revised down
.  The low expected return suggests that valuations 
are quite high.  The equity risk premium, which is the difference between the 

expected return on stocks and the expected real yield on the 10
-year Treasury note, 
shown in teal, has also moved down sharply, though it remains closer to the middle 
of 
its 30
-year range.  Our overall assessment is that equity valuations are somewhat 
more stretched now than they were just a few months ago. 
A variety of changes in the structure of fixed-income markets may add to the 
volatility of interest rates, and, perhaps, to the volatility of volatility.  FirstŠand I™m 

not referring to any panel quite yetŠ
increased electronification of the Treasury 
market could contribute to occasional and surprising spikes in volatility, such as that 

which occurred on October 15 of last year.  In addition, the continued decline in 

intermediation by dealersŠas illustrated by gross and net dealer borrowing, shown in 

the lower-left panelŠis consistent with anecdotes that new regulations have made 

dealers less willing to provide market
making liquidity, even in normal times.  A bond 

market selloff could also be temporarily amplified if investors in bond mutual funds 

rush for the exits, forcing funds to sell into an illiquid market.  The rapid growth in 

assets under management at such fun
dsŠshown in the lower-right panelŠincluding 
funds that hold less-
liquid assets, suggests that the scope for such an amplification has 
increased in recent years. 
The first panel of the next exhibit shows an estimate of the level of ﬁrunnableﬂ 
private money-
like instruments.  This measure of maturity and liquidity 
transformation includes cross
-holdings of money 
market instruments, such as when a 
money fund holds repo.  It is therefore an indicator of the vulnerability of the 

financial system through intermedi
ation chains that rely
Šat one link or more
Šon short-term funding.  The level of these runnables has been fairly stable at a relatively 

high level during the past two years, as growth in uninsured depositsŠ
the light blue 
regionŠ
has offset a decline in repo
Šin red
Šwhich suggests that the financial 
system remains moderately vulnerable to runs. 
A fairly bright
Šor should I say, 
green
Šspot on the financial-
stability map is 
leverage in the banking system.  As can be seen in the upper-
right panel, capital 
cushions at bank holding companies, as measured by both the Tier 1 common equity 

ratio
Šin blackŠ
and the leverage ratio
Šin red
Šhave increased notably.  This 
reflects both Basel III requirements and the resilience required in annual stress tests. 

As you know, no CCA
R bank fell below the stress test™s quantitative benchmarks in 
the most recent round, although three firms had to adjust their 
planned capital 
distributions. 
                  
    
    
      
        
    
                        
    As far as we can tell
Šwhich
, admittedly
, is not very farŠ
leverage in the 
nonbank financial sector continues to be a vulnerability.  As summarized in the 

middle-left panel, overall margin credit has moved down in recent months but 

remains quite elevated, and hedge funds appear to be using a fairly large amount of 

portfolio margining from prime brokerages to lever up in equity markets.  In addition, 

responses to the March SCOOS provided some evidence that counterparties have 

been demanding more leverage to fund non-agency RMBS, high-yield corporate 

bonds, and securitized CRE loans.  Unfortunately, leverage embedded in derivatives 

is hard to measure, so it remains difficult to assess the overall leverage of hedge 

funds, mutual funds, and other investment vehicles. 
Moving to the private nonfinancial sector, the middle
-right panel provides the big 
picture for
 households: Modest increases in household debt continue to be driven 

mostly by prime borrowersŠ
the orange line
Šthough debt of subprime borrowersŠ 
the black line
Šticked up in the fourth quarter.  Student loans and subprime auto 
lending have remained rapid 
even as 
delinquencies on these kinds of debt have 

moved up.  Although we do not currently consider student and subprime auto debt to 

be direct vulnerabilities for the financial system, we are alert for potential spillovers 

to other debt markets. 
As can be seen in the lower
-left panel, the debt
-to-assets ratio for all nonfinancial 
corporate businesses
Šthe black line
Šand for high-yield and unrated firmsŠthe red 
line
Šmoved up further in the fourth quarter, which suggests a continued buildup of 
the vu
lnerability of this sector. 
The lower-right panel provides a very brief roundup of the potential shocks to the 
financial system
 that appear most proximate.  A sharp rise in term premiums could 
precipitate a sudden drop in a variety of asset prices, especia
lly for those with 
stretched valuations.  Moreover, for reasons mentioned 
previously
, these shocks 
could be temporarily amplified if liquidity were to deteriorate just when it is needed 

most or if bond mutual funds were to experience large and disruptive outflows.  That 

said, the risk of a sustained amplification is mitigated by the apparently modest 

amount of leverage in the financial system.  We are also attuned to the possibility of 

damaging spillovers from a rate spike here to emerging market economies. 
As we 
concluded in a special memo, although blowback to the U
nited States 
through 
financial connections would likely be limited, a significant EME recession and a 

presumed increase in risk aversion would damage the U.S. 
economy as well. It is 

worth noting also that term premiums could, instead, stay low for longer than 

anticipated.  Such an outcome would be a shock to investors who have positioned 

themselves for rising yields and could also lead to a further buildup of vulnerabilities 

if investors are dr
iven to 
ﬁreach for yield
.ﬂ  Other potential shocks of note that have 
been around for 
a while
 include a disorderly Greek exit from the euro zone, 
significant geopolitical disruptions, or distress 
at a large global financial firm brought 
about by, say, 
legal penalties. 
I will conclude my prepared remarks by noting a few policy initiatives that the 
staff are pursuing related to specific financial vulnerabilities
, which appear at the top 
         
           
                       
      
       
     
    
    
       of the final exhibit.  
With regard to interest 
rate risk, 
the 
staff 
are in
dependently 
measuring the risks at banks and working with those banks to manage their 

exposures.  On market liquidity, the 
staff are undertaking a variety of projects to 
better understand changes in the structure of bond markets, including increased 

electr
onification, and are working with other agencies to prepare a public report on 
the Treasury market.
  Regarding 
asset managers, 
the staff have begun evaluating the 
potential for 
the growth of 
managers™ activities, perhaps through the use of leverage 
and 
liquidity transformation, to contribute meaningfully to systemic risk and 
whether 
reforms are needed. 
Finally, on leveraged loans, supervisors continue their 
monitoring efforts and will begin a more comprehensive Shared National Credit 

review in May.  
Tha
nks.  That concludes my remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.
  Questions for any of our presenters? 
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m look
ing 
at 
exhibit 2, 
ﬁAlternative 
Scenario
:  Stronger D
ollar.
ﬂ  What are the confidence bounds around these dotted lines? 
MR. KAMIN. Well, the simulations come from a DSGE model, but it™s not an estimated 
model.  So we don™t compute those, although I assure you that an estimated version of 
SIGMA 
that would allow us to compute those is on our long-
ter
m work agenda. 
The most tenuous thing is whether or not you will actually get a 10 percent additional rise 
in the dollar
.  As you can tell from the chart, that™s not a common occurrence.  That™s something 
that, broadly speaking, we think 
there 
might be a 1 in 10 chance of for a couple of years.  So that, 
in some sense
, is the most tenuous. 
In terms of thinking about the 
effects
 on net exports and then on U.S. 
real 
GDP, that™s 
actually a little bit more straightforward in the 
sense that the results from SIGM
AŠ
particularly 
for what I™m showing here, which is the 
net export 
contribution
Šare broadly consistent with our 
estimated trade models, and those don™t give you very different results.  So the 
effect 
of a higher 
dollar on exports and on imports is relatively straightforward, and obviously there are errors, but 
they™re probably not subject to huge errors. 
A larger area of uncertainty comes in 
when 
translating the effect of the change in net 
exports into GDP
, because there is some uncertainty there about the m
ultipliers
.  And there™s 
           
                       
   
          also some uncertainty about to what extent you want to build in a monetary policy response and 
what 
impact
 that has.  
So, for
 the net export contribution itself, I would guess that, 
relatively 
speaking, 
is 
not a huge confidence error.  The confidence errors would rise as you then translate 
that through 
to 
real 
GDP growth. 
MR. BULLARD.   Let me follow up with a 
slightly
 different question.  Over the p
ast 
25 years
, firms have become more globalized and 
have learned how to handle 
global currency 
fluctuations.  They adopt hedging strategies, and they put production in various countries and 

switch production in response to currency movements.  In light of those changes, should we be 

estimating effects of real exchange rate movements 
using 
data 
for the 1980s and 1990s? 
MR. KAMIN. Well, that™s an excellent question.  Let™s just say we periodically do revise 
our import equations, and we do look for signs of parameter instability.  So we™re alert to that 

issue, and we haven™t found any s
trong evidence of these changes in coefficients. There are 
other 
factor
s that, of course, are naturally parsed in.  They kind of correlate with what you 
mentioned, which is that, over time, 
the share of trad
e in the U.S. economy has grown, and that is 
ful
ly taken into account in our estimations because our models do incorporate the fact that, 
as the 
dollar changes exports and imports, those have a larger 
effect 
on GDP. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.
  Any other questions?  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you.  I have a question for Bill 
Wascher 
related to the Tealbook 
inflation outlook.  I think in your presentation you mentioned that the inflation outlook is 

trending up 
because
ŠI think you saidŠenergy prices are going to be going up, res
ource slack 
will be diminishing, and maybe imported goods pricesŠ
I can™t recall the entire list. 
Could you 
                
   
   
                       
      refresh my memory on the contribution of changes in longer-
term inflation expectations for 
delivering that increase in inflation? 
MR. WASCHER.  So
, over the medium-
term forecast
, our view is that the underlying 
rate of inflation is 1.8 percent, and that 
serves as an attractor for the inflation rate. 
MR. EVANS.  Inflation expectations, is thatŠ 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  We call it underlying inflation, but in some sense you may think 
of it as inflation expectations over the medium term. 
Over the longer run, 
that drifts up to 
2 percent because the FOMC says the target is 
2 percent, and 
because 
tightness in the labor 
market 
is pushing inflation up.  
So it doe
s serve as an attractor
, as one reason inflation moves 
back up toward 1.8 percent in the medium term and toward 2 percent in the longer run.  
But
, in 
addition, these other factors are important in getting there over the medium term. 
MR. EVANS.  All right. That™s helpful.  That is different 
from 
the way I was 
remembering it.  I thought that underlying inflation was pegged to your assessment of longer-
term inflation expectations
, and that they were still about 
1¾ percent
, but you™ve got aŠ 
MR. WASCHER.  That
™s right. I think that™s right.
  But maybe I™m not quite getting 
your question.  Over the longer run, we have those inflation expectations 
drifting
 up from 1¾ 
percent 
to 2 
percent. 
MR. EVANS.
    Right.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Yes, I want to compliment the staff on the new charts on uncertainty.  I 
think they are very helpful in thinking about the uncertainty 
associated with the forecast. 
Now, 
going on from what President Evans 
was asking
, maybe, the PCE inflation in Tealbook A, page 
69Šif I look at that, it looks, 
from
 the way the errors look on that forecast, 
like 
the staff has been 
                        
             
      
      underestimating PCE inflation.  Should I interpret this as being that we have upside risk to the 
staff™s inflation forecast? 
MR. WASC
HER. 
Which chart are you looking at?  The top one? 
MS. MESTER.  I™m looking at PCE inflation. 

MR. WASCHER.  That™s largely because of the energy price run-up in the mid-2000s.  I 
think we didn™t 
projec
t that, and I think that™s why the solid line, 
the median
, is above the data 
there. 
MS. MESTER.  But even the distribution looks likeŠ 

MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  Again, I think that™s because of the energy price shock.  
This is a 
relatively short sample with which 
we calculate standard errors around for PCE inflatio
n, for two 
reasons.  One is
, we don™t have data going back a long way, and two is, 
we think that this is 
a period over which inflation had different propertiesŠ
it was more stable recently 
than in previous 
periods.  
So, because of that, I think the influence of energy prices is more prominent here than 
it might be in the longer run. 
MR. ENGEN.  If I could add just one thing that amplifies that point, if you look in the 
middle right at core PCE, the median and the 
projected
 paths are virtually on top of each other, 
which is another way of showing that the total is being influenced by the run-up in energy prices 

and how it feeds into total inflation. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERL
AKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to follow up on 
President Evans™
s line of questioning.  During the 
intermeeting
 period, President Rosengren 
suggested the possibility 
of rais
ing 
the inflation target. 
If the FOMC were to introduce a new 
                 
           
       
              
     
  
        infla
tion target that was higher, would that have a higher gravitational pull 
in the staff™s model 
that we™d 
be pull
ed back to that higher target? 
MR. WASCHER.  In terms of modeling and the way we do it in 
the 
FRB
/US model, 
I think the answer 
is 
ﬁyes,ﬂ 
because we do have a small term that reflects the FOMC
™s stated target 
relative to current underlying inflation.  I think it would be gradual, but I think in 
the FRB
/US model, it would be a stronger attractor than a 
2 percent target. 
Also, i
f I used the Taylor ru
le, 
I think it would imply a much easier 
policy as well. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That™s true, 
a different
 reaction function.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Okay.  I suggest we take a break 
for 
15 minutes 
to get some 
coffee. 
When we return, we have a few 
people who would like to comment on financial 
stability
, and 
then we™ll go to the economic round. 
[Coffee break
] CHAIR YELLEN.  We now have an opportunity for people to comment on financial 
stability, and 
three
 people have indicated they would like to.  
President Rosengren, do you want 
to start 
us off? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank yo
u, Madam Chair. When I talk to asset managers in 
Boston, the biggest concern raised is the problem of liquidity in the secondary market 
for 
corporate bonds.  They worry that when we b
egin to raise rates
, a rush to sell positions in 
corporate bonds will occur, and a crowded exit with few buyers could lead to a rapid increase in 

the yield on corporate bonds.  At least some elements of this concern probably deserve greater 

attention. 
Firs
t, the average size of trades in corporate bonds has fallen significantly relative to the 
average size of trades prior to the financial crisis.  This may reflect an actual or perceived 
          
                            
   difficulty in transacting large trades 
due to
 weakened liquidity in the 
market.  This raises the 
concern that if a significant portfolio rebalancing were to occur, it may be difficult to sell large 
positions in a timely manner. 
Second, there has been a significant decline in the corporate bond holdings of broker-
dealers.  Acc
ording to the 
SEC™s FOCUS reports
, while J.P. Morgan held $29.5 billion in 
corporate securities in 2007, those holdings had plummeted to only $11.3 billion by the end of 

2014. Similarly, Credit Suisse held 
$30 billion in corporate securities in 2007, and their holdings 
collapsed to only 
$4.4 billion by the end of 2014.  
Such sizable declines in corporate securities 
holdings among these key liquidity providers lends some credence to the concern about potential 

liquidity problems in this market. 
Third, 
bond mutual funds
Šwhich were shown in the earlier charts on financial 
stability
Šand bond exchange-traded funds have grown significantly since the financial crisis.  
The exchange-traded funds pose a particular problem if investors view them as highly liquid.  
At the end of 2008, assets under management at exchange-traded bond funds totaled $57 billion.  
By the end of February this year, 
assets under management at 
exchange-traded bond funds had 
soared to $320 billion.  I
f investors assume that the corporate b
ond market is liquid and, more 
specifically, that their exchange
-traded fund shares will always be liquid
, and if they choose to 
sell as we tighten
, they may be surprised at the price at which they transact. 
In summary, the concerns with corporate bond market liquidity as we approach liftoff 
bear
 watching.  The degree of movement out of bonds is likely to be highly sensitive to the 
projected pace of tightening as well as 
to the timing of tightening.  An oversized reaction in this 
market could result in a bumpy exit from the zero lower bound.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you
.                   
  
        
     
           
   
          MR. TARULLO.  May I ask Eric a question? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sure. 

MR. TARULLO.  Eric, can you take it a step further and 
say what the implications of 
your concerns 
are 
for policy? Is it for monetary policy?  Are you advocating a relaxation of 
capital requirements? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  No, I am not advocating a relaxation of capital requirements.   

MR. TARULLO.  I didn™t think so. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I think it highlights that how we communicate around the time of 
liftoff actually is critically important for whether people decide that this is something they need 

to doŠ
to rebalance their 
portfolios quite quickly.  
I think the way that fi
nancial stability interacts 
with monetary policy is, 
it highlights 
that the communication issues become pretty important. 
MR. TARULLO.  That™s helpful.  Thanks. 

MR. LACKER.  Also, 
if it happens, we can say we talked about it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  All right.  Pre
sident Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to thank the staff for the 
excellent assessment of financial stability.  It™s my reading 
that 
the assessment again indicates 
that current policy has not produced any material signs 
of 
financial instability.
  Indeed, it appears 
that the main 
financial
-instability consideration for monetary policy at the moment is 
that a 
near
-term increase in the target range for the fed
eral
 funds rate could lead to financial instability.  
As the report says, 
ﬁTerm premiums
 in benchmark U.S. and other advanced economy bond yields 
are again near historical lows reached 
before the taper tantrum, raising the risk of similarly 
outsized market reactions at liftoff.
ﬂ             
                  
                        The s
taff also identified 
a vulnerability that could propagate this shock from the increase 
in rates.  Specifically
, page 4 of the assessment notes that changes in the structure of the 
Treasury market could amplify the effects of an initial rate move and lead to sudden swings in 
prices 
and liquidity. 
Now, how can we best mitigate this risk?  President Rosengren, I think, highlight
ed one way to think about this
, which
 is through communication, but I have a slightly different 
perspective on the answer to this question.  To answer this question, I think we have to 

understand why long
-term rates might rise dramatically in response to a small increase in short
-term rates. And here I believe that a key consideration is the policy signal associated with such a 

move in the near term.  Raising t
he fed
eral 
funds rate in the near term would mean 
they™re 
initiating liftoff when inflation is far below target and the growth outlook has been weakening.  

Liftoff in such an environment would indicate 
that the FOMC is considerably less willing to 
provide accommodation to respond to adverse shocks than financial market participants currently 
anticipate. 
As a result, they would expect less accommodation in general but especially so in bad 
times, and this expectation of higher interest rates and lower bond p
rices in bad times translates 
directly into higher term 
premiums
. Now, 
it™s tempting 
to conclude that we can somehow mitigate this potential financial 
instability only through 
reassuring verbal communication at the time of liftoff, but I think it™s 
difficu
lt for words to trump the communication content of our actions.  
So, in my view, 
we can 
best mitigate this financial stability risk by ensuring that our actions are always clearly connected 

to our pursued, 
declared objectives. 
In the current context, that
 would mean deferring liftoff 
until the economic data clearly indicate that raising interest rates is necessary for the FOMC to 

achieve its declared objectives of 
2 percent inflation and maximum employment over the 
       
  
                
    
       
               
  medium 
term. I™ll sa
y more about what this conclusion means for our policy deliberations 
tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I™m going to pick up on the same topic that President Rosengren 
introduced and President Kocherlakota discussed.  However, I will not be expressing my views 

on monetary policy at this time.  [Laughter] 
I think Governor Tarullo asked a great question:  
What do you do with this information? I™m going to go a slightly different direction based on 

something Josh said, which I found very interesting. 
I was struck by two sentences on page 17 of the QS report.  
The
y are 
right 
after each 
other.  O
ne is
 that large banks™ liquidity ratios continue to improve.  The next sentence is 
basically that there is less liqui
dity in markets.
  These two sentences are 
right next to each other, 
and immediately
, when I read this
, I said, ﬁWhat™s the connection here?  To what extent is the 
liquidity requirements or the capital requirements, for that matter, affecting the willingnes
s of 
broker-
dealers to basically make markets and provide market liquidity, especially in 
a stressed 
environment?ﬂ  But it also led me to what Josh pointed out, which 
is that this 
is apparently a 
longer-
term research project 
about market liquidity and understanding what™s happening there, 
and how much amplification we may see
, whether it™s in corporate bond or Treasury bond 

markets
, in response to shocks. 
My comment is that I think this is a really important subject not just for thinking about 
our policy decisions or policy communication, but more generally, to understand what™s 

happening in those markets and understand to what extent it is changes in regulation, changes in 

technology, 
or other things.
  Really
, my comment is wanting to see more on that sooner, 
because 
I think this is a key issue, 
as others have mentioned.
  Thank you. 
                   
         
                    CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Does anyone else want to comment?
  [No response]  Seeing 
no hands, let us begin the economic go-round 
with 
President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Fourth District economy continues to 
expand.  In April, the diffusion index of business contacts reporting better versus worse 
conditions was 23 percent, up from 18 percent in March.  Retail freight and both residential and 

commercial construct
ion firms reported improved conditions.  All manufacturers and energy 
firms reported worse conditions. 
Anecdotal reports suggest some slowing in the pace of growth in the first quarter.  
Factors cited by contacts reporting slower growth earlier this year i
nclude the harsh winter 
weather, spillovers from the 
West Coast port strikes, declining energy prices, and the 
appreciation of the dollar. 
The effects of weather and the strike are transitory.  Almost all of our contacts reported 
that the 
effects
 of the wi
nter weather 
have now passed, although I should note that it snowed in 
Cleveland last week
.  The effects of the port strike are expected to dissipate by the fourth quarter. 
The fall in oil prices continues to challenge firms engaged in energy development or 
extraction as well as their suppliers, like steel producers.  Suppliers of raw materials that use 

petroleum
-based products report a 
falloff
 in orders as customers run down 
their inventories in 
anticipation of further price reductions.  
My business contacts believe that oil prices have likely 

bottomed out, and that the effects of lower oil prices are likely to be temporary for most exposed 

sectors.  Of course
, that remains t
o be seen. 
Conditions in 
District 
labor markets continue 
to follow national trends.  The D
istrict™s 
unemployment rate, at 5.2 percent, 
is below the national rate 
of 5
½ percent and below the 
5.7 percent 
District average over 
the 2001Œ07 expansion.  Contacts 
in all 
sectors except energy 
                    
          
     
   
  
       reported increasing staffing in the previous six to eight weeks, although, except for construction, 
the additions were somewhat smaller than previously reported.  So far, 
wage pressures remain 

limited to occupations such as tr
ucking, skilled construction trades, and quantitative white collar 
jobs.  Prices of finished goods continue to be stable despite more businesses reporting declining 

costs for 
nonlabor inputs. 
Turning to the national economy, we have received a number of disappointing data 
reports since our previous 
meeting across several sectors, including manufacturing, business 
fixed investment, and consumer spending, and including the employment report for March.  
As 
was the case last year, there was very harsh winter we
ather, but this year we also had the port 

strike, the sharp drop in oil prices, and the sharp appreciation of the dollar.  Similar to last year, 

we have seen a growth slowdown in the first quarter, and we are trying to extract the signal about 

future growt
h from the incoming data.  This is difficult to do in real time. 
A good case can be made that this is a temporary setback
, just as it was last year
, and 
that 
is forecast in the Tealbook.  The effects of bad weather and the 
West Coast port strike are 
transi
tory.  Using a Bayesian VAR model augmented to include weather indicators, my staff 

estimates that the unusually cold weather reduced GDP growth by 0.9 percentage point, and 

there will be some rebound in the next couple of quarters. 
We have seen the negative effects of lower oil prices on energy
-related firms but not 
much positive effect on consumer spending, although that is likely to come, and oil prices appear 

to be stabilizing.  Dollar appreciation has been a drag on exports and the profitability of fir
ms with multinational operations.  But as the rate of appreciation slows, the drag can be expected to 

diminish as well.
  The slower growth seen in our trading partners might be a reflection of the 
slower growth in the United States
.  If our growth picks up
, it could be that theirs will as well. 
                     
             
            
      
    In addition, not all of the incoming data were negative.  The rate of job openings reached 
another cyclical high, and initial claims are very low, just below the trough reached in the last 
economic expansion.  
These 
indicators suggest that the weakness in payroll jobs in March could 

be temporary.  Although the Conference Board™s 
consumer confidence measure was down in 
April, consumer sentiment came in high, and underlying fundamentals for consumer spending, 

including improved balance sheets, remain quite good. 
The news on inflation was also a bit better over the intermeeting period. Core inflation is 
modestly firming.  Both headline CPI and core CPI increased 0.2 percent in March for the 

second month in a row, and core CPI inflation edged up to 1.8 percent on a year-
over
-year basis. 
The Cleveland Fed™s median CPI measure, which helps predict headline inflation over the 

medium term, has remained near 2
¼ percent since April of last year.  The Federal Reserve Bank 
ofCleveland™s measure of the 
10-year expected inflation rate was essentially unchanged in April. 
So t
his is the positive view of things.  Of course, there is also the possibility that the 
slower growth will be more persistent and inflation developments will 
worsen.  I don™t believe 

we have enough information right now to reach a firm conclusion today, and we don™t have to.  

We can remain agnostic until we see more data over the next couple of months.  Incoming data 

will help us determine whether the slowdown 
in the first quarter is proving to be temporary, like 

it was last year, or whether it is pointing to something more fundamental. In particular, we are 

going to get two employment reports before our June meeting.  These are going to be quite 

important in m
y own thinking about the economic outlook.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Recent economic data have had a 
distinctly weaker tone since our 
previous 
meeting.  The March emplo
yment report indicated little 
              
       
                      overall improvement in labor markets, the unemployment rate was unchanged, and payroll 
employment growth was surprisingly weak.  Similarly, wage and price data have yet to show a 

clear trend toward our 2 percent inflation goal
. While some of the weakness can be attributed to 
the severe weather in some parts of the country, many of the higher-frequency data before and 

after the harsh winter weather have also been on the soft side. 
As a result, in my view, neither of the conditi
ons for liftoff articulated in the March 
FOMC statement 
has 
been sufficiently met at this time.  The March 
Summary of 
Economic 
Projections reflected some significant changes in longer-
run variables.  The central tendency of 
the longer-run unemployment rate has slipped from a range of 5.2 to 6 percent in June 2012 

down to 5 to 5.2 percent in March.  
Similarly, participant estimates of the long
-run equilibrium 
federal funds rate have declined.  The central tendency in June 2012 ranged from 4 to 

4½ percent, bu
t now it is down to only 3½ to 3¾ 
percent.  Our assessment of these key variables 

has changed significantly, which, 
in retrospect
, is not surprising, 
considering changes in 
demographics and productivity since the financial crisis. 
While I and many other participants have lowered our estimates of one of our dual 
mandate goalsŠthe natural rate of unemploymentŠwe have not engaged in any comprehensive 
discussion of our other goal, the inflation target.  That target has remained unchanged at 

2 percent since it w
as adopted in 2012. 
We have learned a great deal about conducting monetary policy in a low-
inflation 
environment since 2012.  I am fully aware that we should have a high threshold for changing our 

inflation target, 
as frequent changes would undermine its usefulness.  But the accumulated 
weight of economic experience suggests, in my view, that a reexamination of our inflation target 

is warranted for several reasons. 
                          
     
                
         First, the choice of an inflation target was largely b
ased on research both here and abroad, 
indicating that the likelihood of reaching the zero lower bound and the cost of being at the zero 
lower bound was small.  This research suggested a relatively low probability of reaching the zero 

lower bound, typically below 5 percent, and relatively brief spells at the lower bound once 

reached, usually a couple of quarters. 
In part, this optimistic read could have been based on faith 
in the efficiency of alternative monetary policy tools.  However, the experience of 
the past 
decade has been less favorable.  Today most major developed countries are at the zero lower 

bound, and, despite employing alternative policy tools, none has yet exited, even though we are 

now more than six years past the financial crisis. 
In shor
t, the research on the expected cost of 
hitting the zero lower bound has not been consistent with the economic outcomes we have 

observed. 
Second, we have revised our assessment of variables that should affect 
the probability of 
hitting the zero lower bound.  The most obvious example is the lowering of the equilibrium 
federal funds rate.  With the same inflation target, a decline in the equilibrium federal funds rate 
should 
increase
 the probability of hitting the zero lower bound.  
The most recent SEP 
submissions, for example, report a decline in the equilibrium real rate of more than 50 basis 

points, a
nd this assessment is echoed among private forecasters and market participants.  If one 
of the rationales for setting a positive inflation target is to reduce 
the frequency of hitting the 
zero lower bound, a lower equilibrium real rate implies the need for a higher inflation target to 

reduce this probability. 
On a practical note, the fact that Japan, the 
United Kingdom, Europe, 
and the United States have each h
it the zero lower bound and have remained there for a very long 
time should make us wonder whether the global convergence to a value of 2 percent for the 

inflation target was misguided. 
       
  
              
                
      Third, we have learned more about the cost of being at the zero lower bound.  After more 
than six years, we have still not returned to the 5 to 5.2 percent unemployment rate range that the 
SEP central tendency currently indicates is consistent with longer
-run unemployment rates.  
While the new tools of quantitative easingŠpurchasing mortgage-
backed securities and 
lengthening the maturity of our holdingsŠhave resulted in growth faster than we otherwise 

would have experienced, we have missed both elements of our mandate for more than 
six years 

now. 
This is not an acceptable outcome.  The consequences of not being able to exit the zero 
lower bound more quickly have been a long period of underutilized resources and 
below
-target 
inflation that risks eroding the credibility of the central bank.  A higher inflation target would 

surel
y have given us more room to lower real interest rates 
using
 our conventional policy tools, 
likely saving hundreds of thousands of jobs. 
Despite our willingness to alter other variables, we have not recently had a 
comprehensive review of our choice for the 
inflation target.  In light of the accumulating 
evidence that inflation targets globally may have been set too low, this choice may have resulted 

in a great cost to the global economy in terms of lost economic output and employment.  Thus, 

we should have a fuller discussion of our choice for the inflation target before we set our longer-

run strategies at the beginning of next year. 
In addition to the longer-run implications of the inflation goal for monetary policy, a 
higher inflation goal would have more 
immediate policy implications.  Entertaining a higher 
inflation target would imply an even larger inflation shortfall, compelling us to wait even longer 

before lifting off. 
A weaker version of this proposition suggests both that we should delay liftoff 
until we see clear evidence that inflation is increasing, and that we should be willing to entertain 
      
          
      
       
             
      an inflation rate that exceeds our current target. This strategy would
, of course
, be akin to price-
level targeting, a notion that President Evans and other
s have previously discussed. 
In summary, we should recognize that the economy™s performance over the previous six 
years has a bearing not only on our estimates of full employment and the equilibrium federal 
funds rate, which many of us have adjusted in the SEP, but also on the inflation target.  I 

understand the concern with shifting an inflation target that we set after years of deliberation and 

following years of success in bringing inflation down.  
But our failure to hit either of our 

mandated goals for six years and running demonstrates the potential cost of an inflation target 

that is too low.  Recognizing the many complications that a change in the target would entail, I 

believe we should have a more fulsome discussion about what the 
previous 
decade of
 economic 
history has taught us about the optimal inflation rate.  Should we be willing to entertain an 

increase in the inflation goal, this would, of course, 
have implications for the timing of liftoff, 

which we will be discussing tomorrow.  Thank you, Ma
dam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would 
like
 to ask President Rosengren a question.  You 
are implying that the only margin for adjustment is on the inflation target rate.  Presumably there 

is another margin for adjustment, t
aking a lot of steps to make a future financial crisis of the type 
that we experienced in 2007, 2008, and 2009 less likely, right?  Because you could argue that 

one reason why we are in this position is because we had a really, really bad financial crisis.
  So, 
in principle, one could take steps to make the probability of a financial crisis l
ower
, and that 
would presumably lessen the need to change the inflation target.  How do you think about that? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If you think you can significantly change 
the probability or 
amplitude of those shocks, then you are right.  But the equilibrium federal funds rate has come 
              
            
    
   
      
         
         
   down quite a bit.  Our own internal estimates of what that implies for how frequently we will hit 
the zero lower bound are that it is substantially higher given that most of the time the equilibrium 

federal funds rate that many of those models were estimated on was 4
½ percent.  We are now at 
3½ percent
ŠI actually think you could make an argument that it is lower than 3½ percent.  
So if 
you have 
an equilibrium federal funds rate that is lower, the implication is that 
you hit the zero 
lower bound more frequently unless you think you can dramatically alter either the frequency or 

severity of having the kind of shocks that we experienced. 
CHAIR YELL
EN.  Isn™t it the case that some of the steps we would take to reduce the 
odds of a financial crisisŠ
strengthening capital and liquidity
Šmay actually
, by raising the cost 
of intermediation
, lower 
the 
equilibrium real rate? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, I 
think that™s right.  But my point is just that the 
room you need depends on the size of the shocks that you are dealing with.  And if you do other 

things and reduce the size of shocks, that also should be a factor.  
I don™t really disagree with 
a lot of th
e points that you made, but it seems to me that that™s not the only potential marginŠ 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I™d just raise one other countervailing argument 
that
, certainly
, the experience around October 15 of the very sharp movement in financial markets a
t a 
time when no real economic news was 
occurring makes me wonder
ŠI am not convinced yet that 
all of the actions we have taken have necessarily
, dramatically changed the probability or likely 
severity of shocks 
in the future from 
what we experienced before
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
In that shock, though, implications for the real economy 
were 
trivial. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  In that case. 

MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair? 
              
    
                
       
      
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  I appreciate you
r bringing this up, President Rosengren.  Just one 
comment
 about your rhetoric on this.  Missing the inflation target over six yearsŠif you look at 
headline inflation year over year, it was above target in 2011 and 2012, and it came back down.  

I know you like to think in terms of core inflation, but I think this is an issue for that piece of the 

puzzle.  When you 
evaluat
e the Committee over that kind of a 
time 
frame
, I think you have got 
to look at headline. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I would say 
that 
hitting an inflation target temporarily 
because 
of an oil price shock is a P
yrrhic victory.  You care more about the underlying rate of 
inflation. 
MR. BULLARD.  These are the prices people pay. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  No doubt we will return to this.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART. 
Moving right along.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the 
intermeeting
 cycle, my staff conducted 56 interviews separate from our board 
meetings. We 
focused the interviews on any indications in their businesses that would confirm the weakness 

indicated by first
-quarter data and, more to the point, suggest 
that 
first
-quarter weakness might 
persist. 
We found that overall business sentiment remains quite positive, somewhat at odds with 
our reading of the incoming data.  On balance, our contacts and directors portrayed demand a
s continuing to improve at a steady pace.  We noted, however, that compared 
with
 the previous 
cycle, their optimism is accompanied by a hint of caution.  We heard more reports of negative 

effects of the dollar.  Exporters, port operators, and firms with significant foreign operations all 

noted market or other challenges that they attributed to the 
dollar. 
         
  
            
           
           
        
   As expected, we heard reports 
of investment 
pullback and layoffs in oil and gas 
exploration and production firms as well as in 
oil services companies.  That drag is being 
partially offset by greater investment activity in business sectors benefiti
ng from low energy 

prices. 
We also continued to hear reports that firms are trying to hold on 
to margin improvement 
coming from fuel and other commodity cost declines. 
Declines in gasoline prices have yet to translate into a meaningful boost in consumer 
spending.  A director with knowledge of consumer markets commented that product categories 

that historically have been leading indicators of stronger consumer activity
Što wit, apparel, 
eating outside the home, and moviesŠhave not yet signaled an upturn. 
We received positive reports on real estate investment activity, both commercial and 
residential. Architects and contractors indicated improved pipelines.
  Our banking contacts 
report that new mortgage and investment activity is strong. 
Regarding employment, we heard continued concern about turnover and retention.  At the 
same time, we detected little change in reports this round regard
ing wage inflation.  On that 
subject, although most data indicate that the trend in nominal 
wage growth remains flat, a 
measu
re constructed by my staff from the C
urrent 
Population Survey 
does show an acceleration 
in 
year
-over-
year
 wage growth in the first quarter.  Wage growth increased to a 3 
percent pace in 
the first quarter, up from 2.8 percent in the fourth quarter and up fr
om 2.4 percent a year earlier. 
Continuing on employment, I™ll mention something we heard for the first time from three 
large employers in quite different businesses.  All said they have begun shifting their work forces 

away from part time toward full time.
  They all cited the high managerial and logistical cost and 
quality challenges of a large, part-
time workforce. 
              
               
                
             
  We™ve been struggling to reconcile these generally positive anecdotal reports with the 
hard data on the first quarter and early indications of 
second
-quarter performance.  Our tracking 
estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth is just marginally above zero, at the low end of the 
spectrum presented in the Tealbook. 
Our tracking model is a straight statistical model with no 
judgmental overrides.  We wo
uld not claim it™s the most accurate read of the first quarter, but it™s 
what the raw data are telling us, and we™ll have an official reading soon enoughŠtomorrow 

morning.  
At this point
, I™m holding to the view that weather and other factors played a 

sign
ificant role in first
-quarter weakness, and that significant payback can be anticipated in the 
current quarter. 
We also observed
Šand this is nothing more than an observationŠthat weak 
first
-quarter growth has been a pattern during the recovery, normally giving way to a stronger 

rest of the year. 
We™ve made a small adjustment to our full
-year GDP growth forecast to reflect a weaker 
first quarter, but otherwise 
we have kept our forecast for growth and inflation unchanged from 
the March meeting.  We made no m
aterial change to our outlook.  We have growth resuming a 
run rate between 
2½ and 3 
percent
, with second-quarter growth above 3 
percent. 
A strengthening of consumer activity from the first quarter is a key factor in our outlook.   
We currently judge the risk to our growth and inflation outlooks as tilted to the downside.  
With the greater uncertainty I perceive at this juncture, the Tealbook alternative scenario titled 

ﬁPersistent 
Slowdown in 
Economic A
ctivityﬂ captures my concern that my outlook may be 
overly optimistic.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As many have already noted, the recent 
data have been disappointing, but it is worth noting, 
as Preside
nt Lockhart just did, that over the 
                      
               
   
      
past four years, 
first
-quarter GDP growth has averaged more than 2 percentage points lower than 
growth during the rest of the year, and there is no single smoking gun that can explain this string 

of seasonal aberrations
. E
ach year
, the winter slowdowns have proved to be temporary. 
So, if past is prologue, I expect the same pattern will occur this year
, with an anemic Q1 
followed by above-trend growth for the rest of 2015.  
I™m confident that the underlying 

momentum in th
e economy once again will be more apparent as the first quarter fades in our 
rearview mirror. 
This is consistent with what I™ve been hearing from my business contacts.  In particular, 
the fundamentals of the economy remain quite positive.  Solid job growth should lift income and 

consumer confidence further, helping to pave the way for continued consumption growth.  In 

addition, highly accommodative monetary policy will continue to boost spending, and these 

factors are very evident in my 
District.  In fact, 
some sectors of the economy, 
the 12
th District 
economy, are red hot.  An executive in the tech sector recently mentioned that to retain talent, 
some tech firms are now offering 20 percent or more pay raises. 
And if that wasn™t enough, 
they™re also throwin
g in housing for good measure, and in the Bay Area, housing is something 
that is very hard to come by and obviously very dear.  The other thing that we heard was that you 

can be vested
 in stock options 
after 
one month.  So this is an amazing time in the Silicon Valley 
economy, and about half of my staff ran off to apply for jobs. 
In addition, I will mention that some of my contacts in different sectors, including 
commercial real estate
, have emphasized the abundance of financing that can be obtained at very 

generous terms.  It™s an issue that I noticed
 was highlighted in both the S
LOOS
 and the QS 
reports, and we™re hearing about that in our D
istrict, too.
  Of course, continued low inflation 
remains a key issue.  I view the recent low inflation readings as being consistent with an 
                                 
              economy still operating below potential and facing temporary disinflationary factors.  Important 
questions remain.
  In the remainder of my remarks, I™ll focus on two of these issues.  
The first 
is, what signal should we be taking from the market-
implied measures of inflation compensation
?  And, second, what™s the empirical relationship between wage growth and inflation? 
The softness 
in inflation of late would be a lot more troublesome to me if it was also 
accompanied by a clear decline in inflation expectations.  This kind of scenario is discussed in 

the Tealbook alternative scenario simulation.  But so far, the weight of evidence sug
gests that 
this isn™t happening.  Long-run survey expectations from households and professional forecasters 

remain well anchored. 
In addition, as I pointed out in the past, long-run inflation expectations 
implied by a Phillips curve model estimated over the past 15 years, a period during which our 

credibility was firmly established, were also 
well anchored 
at 2 percent. 
Now, of course, the one discordant note comes from the market
-implied measures of 
inflation compensation.  Inflation compensation has fall
en significantly since the middle of last 
year, and while much of the focus has been on longer-
horizon measures
, there™s also a question 
about what signal we should take about the nearer-term inflation outlook. 
My staff looked at this question, and they conducted a forecasting comparison between 
measures of inflation compensation and five other competing forecasts, among them a random 

walk forecast and also the survey from the Survey of Professional Forecasters.
  We wanted to 
avoid liquidity issues that are 
associated with shorter
-term TIPS
, so they looked at inflation 
compensation derived from inflation swap rates
.  T
hese typically move very closely together 
with inflation compensation derived from the 
Treasur
y market, but 
are 
based o
n trading in a 
deeper market.
  Here we™re looking at one- and 
two
-year
-ahead inflation forecasts 
for 
headline 
CPI inflation. 
             
       
  
  
               
    
  
      
         
The striking result, which is very robust in all of their experiments
, is that forecasts based 
on inflation compensation were the worst performers of all 
the measures.  Basically
, inflation 
compensation did not give useful information about where inflation was going relative to survey 
forecasts. 
So, 
really
, looking at inflation compensation for insights into the future path of 
inflation 
is not supported by 
the data. 
One problem with our analysis is 
that 
data limitations preclude doing a similar exercise 
for long-term inflation expectations.  I™m going to go out on a limb here 
and say 
that the results 
we have for one- and two-year inflation compensation not being a useful predictor for future 

inflation will apply 
also to
 longer-term inflation. We don™t have that much data right now, but in 
five years when the transcript come
s out, we™ll see whether I was right or wrong. We™ll wait for 
that. 
Again
, President Kocherlakota has highlighted the factŠin a memo that he co
-authoredŠ
that 
inflation compensation 
is not a 
reliable forecast for inflation because it reflects 
other aspects of risk associated with different inflation outcomes. 
But I want to mention another 
interesting 
finding in our work 
about inflation compensation, and that is that these one
- and two-
year
-ahead inflation compensation measures are 
very highly correlated with recent past inflation, 
especially with pa
st inflation associated with movements in oil prices.
  That 
puts into 
question 
how to interpret this. It is a very similar result that we™ve found in the past when we looked at 

household surveys.  Household surveys of inflation expectations tend to be ver
y sensitive to 
lagged inflation, especially with regard to oil price movements, and for this reason we have 

tended to discount movements in household inflation expectations when the movements are 

driven by energy prices.  M
y staff suggests using a similar 
caution when trying to interpret 
inflation compensation measures as an indicator of people™s views on future inflation. 
      
    
                     
          
       The second issue I™ll discuss briefly is that of 
nominal wage growth.  A
s has already been 
mentioned, wage growth has been stuck around 2 percent for most of the recovery.  And, 
as economic theory would tell us, employee compensation makes up a huge fraction of a firm™s 

cost
s.  Y
ou would expect 
there
 to be a pretty tight relationship between nominal 
wage 
growth 
and price inflation, b
ut thi
s connection has been remarkably hard to find.  Many papers and 

research projects have looked at this, and
, basically, if you look back at the history of the 
literature, in every business cycle there™s a whole bunch of papers written about the relationship 

of nominal 
wage 
growth and price inflation.  T
he consistent finding through this literature is that 
it™s really hard to find any relationship between nominal 
wage 
growth and future price inflation.  

Recent research by Jim Stock and Mark Watson, and also some really nice work done at the 

Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland and elsewhere
, has shown that the additional information on 
wages or labor compensation has 
done little to improve the accuracy of standard inflation 

forecast models.
  My understandin
g is that 
the 
staff™s inflation forecasting models tend to be 
these 

price Phillips curve 
model
s or models that don™t really emphasize 
nominal 
wage 
growth. 
The lack of a close empirical link between 
nominal wage growth and future inflation 
likely refl
ects several factors that have affected labor markets in recent decades
Šsome of which 

I™ve talked about in the past.  
One is that 
nominal 
wage 
growth is probably being held down by 
rigidities in wage setting
 that kept wages from falling during the downturn and have 
been 
restraining wage growth as the economy improvesŠ
that is, there is 
downward nominal wage 
rigidity. 
The second is 
that 
globalization
, changes 
in unionization, and 
changes in technology 
have affected the share of productivity gains that are go
ing to workers, and 
that distorts the 
            
      
   
      
      
      
     
  
      
       relationship between wage growth and price inflation.  Put another way, the labor share 
of 
income 
has fallen dramatically since the 1980s. 
To summarize, based on the evidence accumulated over the past several decades
 of extensive research on this topic, there™s little or no information 
to suggest that 
aggregate wage 
data should inform our medium-term inflation outlook.  Now I™m going to break my rule that I 
stated earlier
ŠI do not view a 
rise in 
nominal wage growth as a necessary condition to be 
confident in the return of inflation to 2 
percent. 
All told, our current low inflation rates, I think, 
are pretty easy to understand in the context of transitory factorsŠ
import prices, energy prices
Š and the fact that there is st
ill some considerabl
e slack in the labor market.  As the labor market 
moves back to maximum employment, and 
as these transitory factors dissipate, I expect inflation 

to move back to 2 
percent. 
President Bullard mentioned 2011.  I think we should learn a lesson from that.  We did 
see inflation rise quite a bit 
as a result of a rise in some special factors.  We were experiencing 
high inflationary pressures due to 
large increases 
in the price of oil and other import prices, and 
what we did then, 
I think
, is the right thing.  We looked past the transitory effects of those and 
looked more broadly 
at the long-term inflation outlook, and that is how I am viewing it, too.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank
 you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask an information question? 
The 
research 
that 
you mention
ed is 
very interesting, but 
I am not sure I followed the details.
  The inflation compensation measures 
were one-
to two
-year horizon expectation
sŠa
nd you also 
had survey measures of inflation 
expectations. 
       
    
  
        
                          
             
          MR. WILLIAMS.  The horse race 
was 
basically 
this:  W
e aligned the inflation swap rate 
one year ahead with 
the swaps of month
s 13 to 24 aheadŠo
ne year ahead
 with one year ahead.  
And then we looked at the 
Survey of Professional Forecasters 
and Blue Chip 
for each year. 
MR. EVANS.  At the same horizons? 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Same horizons. 

MR. EVANS.  I see, and those were helpful? Because
, if I understand some of the Board 
work, they use 
these 
long
-term inflation
 expectations for their modeling because, 
as attractive as 
it is theoretically to use a short
-term expectation, nobody can find a good measure of short-
term 
inflation expectation
s.  
Isn™t that right, Bill? 
MR. WASCHER. 
We use the longer
-term inflation exp
ectations in our models.  That™s 
right. 
MR. WILLIAMS. 
Yes
, but the question I™m asking is:  What do you think inflation is 
going to be over the next four quarters? 
The 
SPF is actually a very good forecast.  This is 
roughly as good as the Tealbook.  I
t™s
 asking what 
inflation 
is going to be over the nextŠ 
MR. EVANS.  Well, but the Tealbook won™t use any short-
term inflation 
measures, 
that™s 
my understanding. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  No, no, no.  I™m just looking at the forecast itself. 

MR. EVANS.  Oh, yes, but thos
e forecasts are lousy.  They might be better than the other 
ones, but they™re all lousy.  
MR. WILLIAMS. Well, I think the research says that the Tealbook is maybe a little bit 
better than the SPF and Blue Chip over the next year or twoŠ 
MR. WASCHER. 
Just 
in terms of forecasting? 
There™s probably not much difference. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  So it™s basically the same. 
                           
   
   
       
           MR. EVANS.  The
 Tealbook does something which is not in line with theory, to use 
long-term inflation expectations for a one-
year
-ahead inflation because, well, it kind of works, 
right? 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes
, we view the anchoring of inflation expectations as best 
approximat
ed by long-
term survey measures of inflation
 expectations. 
MR. 
EVANS
.  Yes
, that™s why I was asking the 
question about 
whether I understood you 
right, you™ve currently got it anchored at 1¾ percent and are hoping to goes up to 2 percent. 
MR. WASCHER.  Right. 
MR. 
EVANS
.  But at any rate, I™m done.  
Well, I mean, it™s interesting. I appreciate that. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Please proceed. 

MR. EVA
NS.  Okay.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  For the most part, my directors and 
business contacts expect that the recent spate of soft economic readings will be short
-lived.  The 
one report that seems to sum it up the best came from the 
chairman of Manpower who, when 
talking about soft first
-quarter numbers, said none of his clients are getting depressed about it.  
The view seems to be that there is enough momentum from last year that growth should pick up 
soon. 
Separately, I didn™t hear of any meaningful reports 
of wage or price pressures from my 
contacts.  My own outlook for the real economy continues to be for 
real 
GDP growth to run 
between 2
½ and 3 percent over the remainder of this year and next.  Our assumptions for 
potential output growth are somewhat strong
er than 
in the Tealbook, so our GDP path translates 
into a very similar reduction in resource gaps as the Tealbook™s.  By the end of 2016, we have 

the unemployment rate down to around 5 percent, which is my current assessment of the natural 

rate. 
           
      
               
                  
 My inflation forecast has not changed.  Like the Tealbook, I do not see inflation reaching 
target until sometime in 2018 or 2019.  I should again point out that my assessment of 
appropriate monetary policy underlying this forecast has lower rates than most people around the 

table. 
Now, I want to spend some time today talking about why this outlook leads me to favor a 
whites
-of-
their
-eyes approach for our policy response to rising inflation.  I have talked about risk 
management many times before.  Today I want to art
iculate three additional reasons the data lead 
me to prefer a cautious approach to raising rates. 
First, forecasting inflation is inherently 
difficult, and that™s the discussion that we were just having.  This implies a high burden of proof 

to say we are 
sufficiently confident that our currently low core inflation will move back to 

2 percent in a reasonable period of time. 
Second, despite near-
zero nominal rates and a large 
balance sheet, I am not convinced our current policy stance is all that accommodat
ive to begin 
with.  And, third, I actually see benefits to risking a modest overshooting of our 2 percent 
inflation target. 
Let me start with why it should take strong evidence to have confidence in an outlook of 
low inflation rising back to 2 percent.  Anyone who has looked at the forecasting performance of 
statistical inflation models knows that everyone™s abilities in this area are limited.  Indeed, there 

is a body of research that shows it is not that easy to be a random walk forecast
.  Even the best-
performing models seldom forecast a rapid change in inflation, and they always imply substantial 

forecast uncertainty.  That said, we do have many analytical reasons to think our current low 

inflation will rise at some point. 
Most of the commentary I hear at this table centers 
on the 
economy regaining traction, resource gaps closing, and the upward gravitational pull of high and 

stable inflation expectations, like in the Tealbook forecast. I also suspect that simple mean 
            
      
                 
  
       
   
          
         reversion probably plays a role in 
these forecasts as well. I agree that these forces will 
eventually deliver.  The question is, when?  Taking until 2019 to reach our target is not 

acceptable to me. 
Given all of these difficulties in forecasting inflation, my own preferred dashboard of 
indicators is mostly a list of factors coincident with rising inflation
.  While measures of labor 
market slack are important, I would not rely on them alone, 
as it is possible something has 

changed in the structure of the economy that makes those historical benchmarks less trustworthy.  

In addition, I will continue to look for increasing core inflation, faster wage growth, and firmer 

market
-based measures of inflation compensation to provide corroborating evidence of stronger 
inflationary pressures. 
As I sai
d, the absence of statistically strong leading indicators 
suggests 
that 
these observations are likely to be more coincident than predictive. But at least once we see 
them, we can have more confidence that inflation is moving up persistently.  Until then, 
I remain 

wary. 
Now, my second pointŠthat current policy is not as accommodative as we might thinkŠ 
comes out of the model analysis.  
A fundamental benchmark for thinking about the level of 
monetary accommodation and inflation pressures is the difference bet
ween the actual real rate of 
interest and the equilibrium
, or Wicks
ellian
, real rate of interest.
  As Milton Friedman said, low 
interest rates alone do not mean monetary policy is accommodat
ive.  The relevant question is 
whether, after adjusting for inflation, our current real federal funds rate is far enough below the 

equilibrium real rate to achieve our policy objectives in a reasonable amount of timeŠ
that is, for 

inflation to actually get up to 2 percent, 
as the forecasts embody. 
I think the answer to th
at question is ﬁno.ﬂ  There are a number of simple observations 
that suggest that the current equilibrium rate is quite low.  Namely, even with our interest rate 
         
        
       
     
  
    
    
       
      
         
and balance sheet policies in place, we still see the continued existence of resource gaps, a lack 
of any meaningful upward movement in inflation, and relatively low levels of capital spending 

despite piles of cash on corporate balance sheets. These cash stockpiles are an indication that 

expected real returns on physical investment are not very hi
gh. 
To put a number out, the Tealbook-
consistent equilibrium real rate shown in 
Book 
B, as 
circulated over the weekend, 
is negative 0.1 percent.  Some might look at the current real funds 
rate of minus 1.18 percent, as reported in the Tealbook, Book B, and 
say we have adequate 

accommodation in place.  I don™t agree.  
Recall that the Tealbook™s equilibrium real rate is 

calibrated to close the output gap in 12 quarters.  It says nothing about inflation.  In the Tealbook 

baseline, the inflation gap is still wi
th us until 2019.  That would mean that inflation would have 

to run below target for more than a decade 
and, t
o me
, that is simply too long to be considered 
the result of appropriate policy. 
I want to mention that President Bullard 
referred to the fact 
tha
t PCE 
inflation rose to 
2 percent in 2011 and 2012 on the strength of commodity price increases.  I think the reason we 

focus on core 
inflation is
 that 
core is a better indicator of what inflation is likely to be next year, 
because th
e shocks in headline PCE often are transitory.  T
he real test
, I would say
, is, when did 
the Tealbook ever forecast inflation two years out as being at 2 percent or above?  I think that 

has 
not been the case for quite some time. 
While we can 
all 
lament the 
fact that there are large uncertainties regarding the value of 
the equilibrium real rate of interest, uncertainty over inflation forecasting and the stance of 

monetary policy accommodation go hand in hand.  Logically, because the equilibrium rate has a 

str
ong bearing on the inflation outlook, uncertainty over it ought to translate into comparable 
uncertainty over inflation itself.
  In other words, how can we declare we are confident that 
         
      
    
   
                   current low inflation is headed back up to 2 percent unless we are also confident that our policy 
setting relative to 
the 
equilibrium real rate is able to return inflation to target
? This brings me to the third reason my outlook is premised on a whites-of-
their
-eyes 
policy approach.  I recognize that the usual policy lags mi
ght mean that a delay in tightening 
could cause inflation to modestly overshoot 2 percent sometime down the road.  But so what?  Is 

that such a big cost?
  No.  On the contrary, it could be a benefit.  Considering how long inflation 

has been below target, adopting a policy that allows the possibility of such an overshoot actually 

seems necessary to support the credibility of our symmetric inflation objective.  If we find 

ourselves with the federal funds rate at 1 percent or a little bit above that while infl
ation is still 
too low, we could easily regret the conservative credibility that we
™ve built up. 
I would 
also 
say that if we are not willing to allow an overshoot of our inflation objective, 
then I think we should definitely 
be having the conversation that
 President Rosengren was 
suggesting we have in terms of the appropriateness of the level of the inflation objective, if it is 
something that we are not allowed to overshoot with any reasonability.  I think that™s important.  
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR Y
ELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb. 

MS. HOLCOMB.  And now for something completely different.  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  The Texas economy has decelerated since I last reported to the Committee.  Continued 

low oil prices, the strong dollar, and a weaker national economy pushed state employment down 

by almost 12,000 jobs in March, the first decline in 40 months.  Over the first three months of the 

year, combined job growth averaged a positive but still dismal 0.7 percent, down from 4.2 

percent d
uring the fall of 2014.  Our forecast for December-over-December job growth, which is 
      
           
                           derived from the Texas Leading Index, now stands at 0.5 percent.  That™
s down from a forecast 
of 1 to 2 percent growth six months ago. 
Besides oil and gas, the manufacturing sector has seen the greatest slowing.  Companies 
in the computer and electronics industry say that they are losing opportunities as the appreciating 
dollar pushes up the relative price of U.S.-made capital equipment.  Chemical producers report 

lower se
lling prices and margins and lower exports.  Producers of primary metals have noted 

increasing import competition, too.  Companies in the professional and business services 

industry have been indirectly affected by both low energy prices and the strong dol
lar, 
particularly those with a significant fraction of their clientele in the energy and manufacturing 

sectors.  There have been some reports of adverse spillovers from energy to financial services as 

well. 
Our most up-
to-date information comes from our Te
xas 
Manufacturing and S
ervice 
Sector 
Outlook Surveys.  The latest manufacturing survey results, 
released only yesterday
, show 
production declining in April for the second straight monthŠ
the first consecutive two
-month 
decline since the recession. 
The 
New 
Orders 
Index, too, has registered its worst two-month 
performance since the recession, posting readings of minus 16.1 and minus 14.0 in March and 

April, respectively.  In contrast, our latest service sector survey 
results
, released this morning
, show the headline revenue index rising to 14.6 in April from 10.7 in March.  April™s reading is 

the highest reported so far this year, but 
it is considerably lower than levels reported through 
most of 2014. 
Despite slower job growth, the Texas unemploymen
t rat
e continues to fall, and at 
4.2 percent in March
, it reached its lowest level since July 2007. We have anecdotal reports of 
laid
-off energy workers shifting into construction, especially along the Gulf Coast, 
where skilled 
         
             
  
   
    
          
      
  
    construction workers remain
 in short supply.  The wage and benefit ind
exes from our 
manufacturing and service sector surveys indicate that upward wage pressures are somewhat less 
intense than they were last year.  Looking ahead, health-
care contacts are concerned about losing 
experienced workers in a coming wave of retirements.  In finance, our bankers report flat 

demand and unchanged standards across all major loan categories. 
Oil prices have moved irregularly upward since last month™s FOMC meeting, with WTI 
closing some of the gap 
with 
Brent.  Y
ear-to-date volatility has been driven by conflicting supply 
developments, including unexpected increases in OPEC output
Šname
ly, Saudi Arabia™s 
production was up 4 percent in MarchŠinventory buildups in the U
nited 
States
, and reports of 
slowe
r growth in U.S. oil production.  If the Iran negotiations successfully conclude in June, that 
country could ramp up its output by more than 700,000 barrels per dayŠ0.7 percentage point 
of 
world supplyŠby the end of 2016, which would be enough to lower the 
price of crude between 
$5 and $15 per barrel in 2016, all else staying constant.  The conflict in Yemen is another source 
of uncertainty.  Yemen itself is a negligible producer of crude oil.  However, the threat of wider 
conflict between Saudi Arabia and 
Iran
, and Yemen™s proximity to the fourth-
busiest ch
okepoint 
for crude oil flows in the world, have created fears of supply disruptions. 
Our energy industry contacts tell us that the number of drilled but uncompleted wells, or 
DUCs, has increased between 33 and 50 percent since the end of last year. These are wells that 

have been drilled but are kept out of production.  They are underground inventory.  
New capital 

projects are difficult to initiate, but spending continues on existing contracts.  U.S. oil production 

is expected to peak within the next two to three months.  We are also likely to hit above-ground 

storage constraints within that time 
frame.  Drilling costs are down 20 percent, partly as a result 
of real efficiency gains and partly as a result o
f cheaper labor and equipment.  
There is cautious 
                                       optimism that the worst is over, coupled with recognition that we
™re unlikely to see a return to 
$100-per-
barrel oil any
 time soon.  Repercussions and adjustments in the broader Texas 
economy are ongoing. 
We are a bit more sanguine about the national economic outlook today than we were a 
couple of meetings ago.  It appears considerably less likely now that we will blow through full 
employment at full throttle.  That revised assessment is based on predictions from a small suite 

of models we use to forecast real activity two to four quarters out.  Although each model relies 

on its own set of financial and policy indicators, all are now telling a consistent story
:  solid if 
unspectacular GDP growth, on average, in the second and third quarters of 2015 and a gradual 

deceleration in employment growth over the course of the year, with the unemployment rate 

leveling off in the neighborhood of 5 percent heading into 2016.  
We expect 
trimmed 
mean PCE 
inflation, our measure of the underlying trend in headline inflation, to average about 1¾ 
percent 

over the next four quarters.  As compared with the Tealbook, we are more optimistic on both 
halves of the dual mandate, b
ut we
™re certainly not only
 in the same ballpark as the Tealbook, 
but in the same outfield.  Hopefully, it™
s not left field. 
Although we are looking forward to tomorrow™s GDP report, we don™t expect to take a 
strong signal from it, whatever the number turns out to be.  The first est
imate relies on a lot of 
guesswork, and in any case, 
GDP growth is volatile from quarter to quarter.  As a result, we
™ve 
not found real-
time estimates of lag
ged GDP growth to be especially helpful for forecasting at 
the horizons that are of interest to us.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Data on economic conditions in the Eighth 
District have improved notably during the 
intermeeting
 period.  The pace of job creation was 
           
           
   
   
     
        revised up for 2014, and preliminary data for 2015 has generally been positive.  
The 
District 
unemployment rate continues to decline and stands at 5.7 percent today, according to the most 
recent reading
Šonly slightly higher than the national rate. 
According to the revised BLS d
ata, 
District job creation occurred at about twice the pace 
in 2014 as compared 
with
 2013, which was itself revised higher.  One of the largest revisions 
was in the Louisville MSA which was revised from an
 original estimated value of 2.3 percent 
growth to an updated value of 3.8 percent.  By sector, notable upward revisions occurred in 

transportation, manufacturing
, and professional and business services.
  Correspondingly, 
Louisville™s average hourly earnings growth is significantly faster than the national 
average. 
On the downside, one of the most notable developments in the local labor market was the 
announcement by U.S. Steel that they would temporarily idle their Granite City, Illinois, 
plant
, laying off over 2,000 employees effective in May.  Media repo
rts suggest that the layoffs are 

due, in part, 
to a rise in imports of relatively inexpensive Chinese steel
Šsteel that
, evidently, the 
Chinese do not need in their home market. 
On this dimension, 
my recent intermeeting visit to China
, combined with discussions 
with CEOs and my interpretation of some hard data, has suggested to me that trend growth in 

China may be notably slower than commonly appreciated.  I think this goes beyond the relatively 

weak reported growth rate 
in the first quarter 
to a trend rate 
of growth as low as 4½ percent.  
Chinese GDP statistics are notably opaque
Ša topic of macroeconomic discussion for the 
past 15 

years or moreŠbut corroborating data and anecdotes now seem to be diverging more sharply 

from official reports, suggesting that a 
Chin
ese slowdown is to be taken far more seriously this 
time.
  The proximate cause of the slowdown is likely the ongoing anticorruption campaign, 
                 
                       
       
     which is reportedly casting a very wide net and is likely creating a chilling effect on new 
business formatio
n and business expansion. 
Turning to the national outlook, I have five main areas for comments on the current 
narrative for the U
nited S
tates, 
as reported in the Tealbook, 
FOMC speeches
, and popular 
commentary.  The comments are in the following areas:
  one, potential over
-interpretation of the 
Q1 slowdown; two, an unemployment forecast that I think is not credible; 
three, assumptions 
about 
r* that may be suspect; four, over-interpretation of the likely effects of the value of the 
dollar on U.S. growth pros
pects;
 and, five, underappreciation of the risks of asset price bubbles 
during the next two to three years as rates remain exceptionally low.
  I™m going to comment on 
the first three of these today.  I™m not commenting directly on inflation because I think
 the 
situation in that dimension has not changed greatly during the inter
meet
ing period.  I continue to 
expect inflation to return to target and eventually overshoot 2 percent in 2016. 
On the first issue, potential over-interpretation of the Q1 slowdown, d
ata 
are 
clearly 
weaker on a tracking basis since our 
previous meeting.  GDP will be reported tomorrow 
morning, and the s
taff has penciled in an estimate close to zero. But suppose we take the median 
of the nowcasting table reported in the Tealbook, which 
is 
an 
approximately 1½ percent annual 

growth rate of GDP in the first quarter.  On that basis
, the year
-over-year growth rate would be 
3.3 percent.  I think this number gives a better sense of the underlying pace of growth in the U.S. 

economy and provides 
a better point of reference 
for 
shaping GDP expectations for the 
remainder of this year. 
In addition
, I think that seasonal factors for Q1 are being called into 
question.  We considered Q1 GDP growth averages versus averages for Q2 through Q4 over 

differe
nt time periods
, excluding recessions
, since the mid
-1990s.  Average Q1 real GDP growth 
        
                           has been notably lower in these subperiods.  This broad-
brush analysis suggest
s that low Q1 
growth rates are not occurring by accident, and that Q1 seasonals may need revamping. 
The second issue is unemployment projections balancing out at about 5 percent over the 
forecast horizon despite easy monetary policy
, by conventional definition.  I do not think that 
such a forecast is credible, and I continue to disagree with th
e labor force participation 
assumption behind it.  A key 
paper in the 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
Šby Aaronson 
and others
, published 
in 
2014Šsuggests that labor force participation has been dropping 
according to demographic factors since 2000, 
and, furthermore, that this downward trend will 
continue through the forecast horizon.  This suggests that, on balance, there will be no sustained 

upward improvement in labor force participation and, therefore, that unemployment will 

continue to drop into 
the 
4½ to 4 percent range over the forecast horizon, barring any major 

disruption in the U.S. economy.  This dynamic would be very similar to what was observed 

during the 1990s expansion and again during the 2000 expansion.  On both of those occasions, 
unemployment moved into the low 4 
percent range. 
Previous staff predictions in this area have emphasized increases in labor force 
participation but have turned out to be wrong.  Indeed, the predictions given in the S
ummary of 
Economic P
rojections have also re
lied
, in part, on this story and have also been wrong.  
The 
median SEP forecast as of September 2012 for unemployment at the end of 2014 was too high 
by more than 1 percentage point.  The same was true of the median SEP September 2013 

forecast for unemploy
ment. 
So what™s the bottom line?  We™re charting a course for very low interest rate monetary 
policy based on an unrealistic assessment of future labor market performance, and this will harm 

FOMC policymaking in the quarters and years ahead.  
We can, of co
urse, cite other labor market 
                         
  
   
  
    
        
         
         indicators and thereby bring to bear more information on overall labor market performance.  The 
Board of Governors™ l
abor 
market 
conditions index does exactly this, conveniently summarizing 
information on many different dimensions of labor market performance.  
The 
Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis calculated that the value of this index is comfortably above its long-run 

average since 1986.  This indicat
es that
, based on the totality of available information, labor 
markets are n
ot weak but instead are relatively strong viewed in historical perspective. 
I like this 
index because it brings all information
 together in one place and avoids cherry-
picking particular 
indicators that may or may not be indicative of overall labor market 
performance. 
The third issue is 
r*.  Some commentary has suggested that 
an r* parameter in a 
Taylor 
rule is 
low based on estimates of 
Laubach 
and Williams, which
, combined with relatively small 
inflation and unemployment gaps, would suggest, through a Taylor-
rule
-type calculation
, that 
current policy is approximately the policy recommended by the rule.  This argument could 

rationalize current policy settings, although it would suggest that polic
y is 
perhaps not as 
accommodative as people woul
d intuitively think. 
One comment is that the value of 
r* is highly 
uncertain
, either from a theoretical perspective or a measurement perspective.  Time
-varying 
r* Taylor rules are relatively untested and do not represent the empirical tradition behind Taylor 

rule estimation and recommended policy outcomes. For this reason
, I am skeptical of using 
time
-varying 
r* as a rationale for current policy settings. 
The value of 
r* from a broader perspective should represent the 
Wicksellian 
natural rate 
of interest
, which one might view as governed by the real rate of interest that would prevail in 
an economy without frictions and without monetary policy influence.  
In a wide class of models, we 

know what the 
real rate of interest would be.  It would be the sum of the rate of productivity 
growth and the rate of labor force growth.  These factors alone would drive the real output 
      
   
            
       
    
             
  growth rate in this class of models.  
My staff calculated an 
r* value based on such a view.  It 
turned out to be 2 percent today, and this seems like a good benchmark for 
r* from which to 
calibrate Taylor rule policy recommendations.  Such recommendations would suggest that policy 
is indeed accommodative today, which would match most people™s intuition about current policy 

settings. Interestin
gly, this value of 
r* has historically been somewhat lower than the 
Laubach
-Williams measure
.  It
 has been near zero in recent years, but as of today has moved above 
zero to 
a value of about 2 
percent. 
The bottom line is that there are many ways to look at this value of 
r*, but a sensible 
guess is that 
r* is 
2 percent or higher, meaning policy today is accommodative, 
as intuition 
suggests.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you. 

MR. TARULLO.  M
adam Chair, if I couldŠ
President Bullard
, I was a little bit confused 
by what you were saying about labor force participation, 
and particularly the staff™s assessment 
of it.  My understanding of what the staff has been saying is that while they project a downward 
trend in labor force participation because of demographics, they also assess the decline in the 

immediate post
-crisis years to have been substantially steeper than that
.  And what they were 
predicting
Šand continue, I think, to predict, 
unless Bill 
corrects me
Šis a less steep decline or a 
flattening
-out of current labor force participation
, which eventually has their projected 
demographic trendŒbased participation rate converging with the actual participation rate.  And 

that, I think, is what™s been
 happening over the p
ast year and a half or so
, during which, 
with a 
little bit of fluctuation up and down, 
the labor force participation rate 
has been 
roughly stable, 
which I think is bearing out the staff™s expectation of the convergence of their projected trend 

with actual labor force participation. 
       
        
         
                 
      MR. WASCHER.  Yes, I think that™s how I interpret it as well.  I don™t think what we 
have in the forecast is at all at odds with the 
Aaronson and others paper of 2014.  The gap we 
have in there is roughly what we estimated in that paper, and as Governor Tarullo indicated, we 
expect the downtrend in the participation rate to continue 
and the actual participation rate to 
close the gap by falling less than the downtrend we have. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  First Vice Presiden
t Prichard. 
MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Economic activity in the Third District 
slowed during the first quarter.  While still expanding, the rate of expansion has been below 

expectations.  However, it appears that the recent slowdown may be tem
porary, and that 
sentiment is widely held among contacts in our region.  Unemployment in the region ticked up to 

5.7percent in March
, with Pennsylvania experiencing a significant decline in employment, 
enough that the first-
quarter job growth in the state 
was actually negative.
  However, both our 
April 
Manufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey 
and 
Nonmanufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey 
indicate that the manufacturing and service sectors expanded employment in April and point to 

further job growth and capital expenditures over the second half of the year.  One prominent 

manufacturer in the region indicated that his businesses are poised to grow rather more robustly 

in the second half of the year once they have worked through the necessary inventory correction.  

Although he doesn™t anticipate 2015 to be as strong as last year, the second half of the year 

should see solid growth. 
In response to a special survey question on the effect of the dollar™s appreciation on the
ir manufacturing activity, respondents who ha
ve exchange rate exposure indicated that the 
appreciation negatively affected their operations. 
However, our District does not overly engage 
in foreign trade, 
with exports
 accounting for only 10 
percent of revenues and imports 
         
   
              
            representing about 5 
percent
 of nonlabor costs.  
Thus, the overall effect of the dollar™s rise was 
fairly small 
for 
Third District manufacturers. 
Both nonresidential and residential construction weakened in March.  We are also seeing 
a softening in multifamily housing.  Reflecting th
e overall weaknesses in this sector, house price 
appreciation is also slower than in the 
nation as a whole, 
with prices
 growing in the 3 
to 3½ percent range.
  Retailers in the region have been report
ing healthy sales over the inter
me
eting 
period and modera
te year
-over-
year sales growth. 
Contacts report th
at sales are starting to be 
bolstered by lower gasoline prices, and consumers in the region remain highly confident.  They 

are also paying down post-holiday debt, and debit and credit card lines are declining.  Bankers in 

the region indicate that the growth in the commercial loan segment of their portfolios has picked 

up substantially, while other loan activity has remained fairly flat. 
Thus, our D
istrict reflects 
fairly well what might be transpiring in ot
her regions 
nationally
Ša bit of a step back in labor markets, 
a falloff in manufacturing activity
, and a lack of 
any significant improvement in residential investment.  This slowdown is well reflected in one of 

the series we produce in our real
-time resear
ch center, the 
Aruoba-Diebold-
Scotti Business 
Conditions Index.  The ADS uses six high-frequency data series to construct an index of current 

economic activity.  Those series include
, one, initial jobless claims through the week ending 

April 11 of this year; two, payroll employment through March; t
hree, industrial production 
through March; four, real personal income through February; five, real manufacturing and trade 

sales through January; 
and, six, real GDP through the 
fourth quarter of last year.
  The index is 
centered on zero, which indicates normal growth rates, and the index has recently turned 

negative.  However, we are receiving indications that the somewhat slower growth we have 
              
      
       
   
   
             
  wit
nessed is a temporary phenomenon, and that economic activity is expected to bounce back to 
trend growth rates. 
As mentioned by President Bullard, we also find that, 
historically
, first
-quarter GDP 
growth may not be adequately adjusted for seasonal variation.  Over the past 30 years, 
seasonally 
adjusted growth 
in first
-quarter GDP has averaged significantly less than growth over the 
remaining three quarters
Š1.8 percent as opposed to 2.7 percent.  Additionally, if one examines 
the timing of the 10 
weakest qua
rters over that span, six occurred in the first quarter and
, 50 percent of the time
, the weakest quarter 
was the first quarter of the year.
  Observations like 
these may point us to placing more weight on GDIŠ
gross domestic income
Šor on GDPplus, 
which incorporates the income side of GDP, in interpreting current economic activity.  GDPplus 

has the advantage that, unlike GDI, it is available with the same timing as expenditure
-side data. 
With that as background, we continue to project that overall economic act
ivity will 
accelerate modestly
, that utilization gaps will continue to progressively narrow
, and that inflation 
will continue to firm. With 
a substantial amount of data forthcoming before our June meeting, I 
expect that we™ll have a clearer view of the em
erging trends and confirmationŠor notŠ
that 
first
-quarter economic performance was, indeed, a poor harbinger of the year to come.  Thank 

you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  
President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming national data suggest that the 
economy hit a soft patch in the first quarter, which is consistent with the recent information on 

economic activity in the Fifth Federal Reserve District. 
At the same time, our reports indicate 
that the weakness is widel
y viewed as temporary.  Our diffusion index of manufacturing activity, 
released this morning
, was slightly negative in April, and that followed a reading of negative 8 
            
  
                       
       
   for March
.  B
ut our index of expected shipments six months ahead was a robust plus 38, a 
level 
that has not been exceeded since 2011.  
Similarly, our 
index 
for nonretail service
-sector activity 
was also slightly negative in April, but the index of expected demand six months ahead held 
steady at a pretty positive rate.  And the indexes for employment remain positive across all 

sectors. Retail revenue rose 
5 points to plus 17. 
More broadly, commentary from our directors and industry roundtable participants was 
more positive this month than last, and we™ve heard numerous reports about transitory factors 

having affected recent activity.  An executive at an engineering firm in West Vir
ginia said that 
ﬁweather has been the primary factor in our business slowdown.ﬂ 
Several other reports cited 
production slowdowns attributable to the West Coast port strike.  For example, a manufacturer of 

industrial safety products stated that production 
was interrupted by delays in receiving shipments 
of just one critical part manufactured in China.  These reports suggest that it™s quite reasonable to 

expect a rebound in growth in Q2. 
As usual, any discussion of labor markets these days turns quickly to the subject of 
shortages of skilled workers.  It does seem as if these shortages are having noticeable effects. 

For example, the CEO of a large building materials company told of a trucking company 

refusing outgoing shipments due to a lack of drivers.  
We also continue to hear about markets 
experiencing wage pressures
, and, while not universal at this point, the scope of these 

observations appears to have broadened of late.  This was most apparent in the reports from 

representatives of several staffing firm
s, both national and regional, who serve on our 
roundtables, including a regional representative from Manpower.  
One large staffing firm is 

telling clients to expect upward wage pressure ﬁin all skill levelsﬂ later this year.  Two grocers in 

Richmond recently announced double-
digit starting
-wage increases, perhaps 
in response to Wal
-         
     
       
     
  
                 
    Mart™s announcement.  A large auto manufacturer plans to raise starting wages for assembly line 
workers at a plant in our District from $13.17 an hour to $15.85 an hourŠabout 20 
percent. 
A lumber company in West Virginia has responded to a shortage by bringing in entry-
level workers 
from Puerto Rico, renting houses for them, and hiring an interpreter, all of which raise the cost of 
labor by 10 to 15 percent.  
These reports suggest that broader wage pressures may be about to 

emerge, although I recognize that wage acceleration is not yet apparent in the monthly figures for 

average hourly earnings. 
Turning to the national economy, as I said, we™
ve clearly hit a soft patch recently. 
Some 
of that softness was due to well
-known temporary factors.  Combined, these transitory factors 
could well explain a large part, if not all, of the first
-quarter slowdown.  
Moreover, this wouldn™t 

be, as many have noted, the first flat quarter we™
ve se
en during this expansion.  So the question 
is how rapidly economic activity picks up again from here as the effect of these transitory factors 

fade. I share th
is Tealbook™s optimism on consumer spending, and that™s based on robust 
income growth, solid consumer sentiment readings, and continued improvement in labor market 

conditions.  The rebound in car sales last month was an important piece of evidence that 

consumers have the confidence to boost spending in the months ahead. 
Turning to inflation, the late
st readings have been a bit firmer than expected.  Core CPI 
inflation averaged 2.3 percent at an annual rate from December to March.  The staff™s translation 

into core PCE inflation is 1.4 percent over the same three months, and that implies that Q4 will 

be the low point for core PCE inflation.  Oil prices appear to have bottomed out and the run-up in 

the dollar seems to have lost steam, so the transitory downward pressures on headline inflation 

are waning. Thus, it seems fairly clear to me that we are eme
rging from this inflation dip
, and 
inflation will be moving towards 2 percent in coming quarters. 
                      
         
             Looking ahead, as several of you have mentioned, we will receive more than the usual 
amount of data over the upcoming intermeeting period, including, importan
tly,
 two employment 
reports and two reports on personal income and consumption.  
If the data come in consistent with 
the Tealbook forecast, we would have solid evidence in hand at our June meeting that consumer 

spending growth had rebounded and that inflation was moving up.  If so, I believe the case for 

raising rates would be strong, s
o it seems premature to make any statements at this meeting or in 
the days immediately ahead, I believe, that could be interpreted as taking June off the table.  

Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Unemployment in the 
Tenth 
District remains 
very low at 4.2 percent, and recent employment growth has been modest but is mixed across 

states and industries.  Several 
District 
states are seeing sizable oil and gas layoffs, and negative 
spillovers are showing up in regional factory and transportation activity as well as in consumer 
spending 
areas 
and 
those that are 
energy dependent.  
Through the first quarter of this year, 
District energy jobs were down 4½ 
percent
, and firms in our latest energy survey expect 
their 
employment to fall by 12 percent this year.  District manufacturing is also feeling the 
effect, as 
the last time our manufacturing survey composite was lower than 
its April reading was in early 
2009. Firms responding to our energy survey, however, note 
that 
breakeven oil prices have 
fallen considerably as services costs have dropped, providing some encouragement for future 

activity as oil prices edge higher.  On the other hand, D
istrict states with virtually no oil and gas 
activity have seen a solid start to 2015.  Colorado, in particular, continues to grow rapidly, driven 

by strong tourism and construction activity.  
As a result, total employment in the region is up 
       
      
       
         
  
     
              slightly this year, and overall services activity in the District continues to grow despite the 
energy layoffs.  In agriculture, drought has worsened, although winter wheat production is 

shaping up to be similar to its recent five-
year average, and corn a
nd soybean planting intentions 
are generally strong.  Still, persistently low crop prices and elevated input costs continue to 

increase farmers™ short
-term financing needs. 
For the national economy, my outlook for growth over the medium term is little chan
ged
.  I assume that 
the softness in first
-quarter GDP proves transitory, as it has for the past several 
years.  Weather effects and the sharp decline in energy investment look to be important factors 

holding down first-quarter growth.  However, more persis
tent factors 
producing softer export 
growth and a broader slowing in new investment bear watching.  
Alternatively, personal 

consumption appears to have some upside potential, 
as there is yet to be a significant boost to 

spending from lower gasoline prices. 
March™s payroll numbers were clearly below expectations, though the labor market 
continues to improve in several aspects.  The services sector continues to perform well.  In the 

first quarter of this year, services added
, on average, 
179,000 additional jo
bs per month.  This is 
better than the 134,000 
average in the first quarter 
of 
last year.
  Overall, I expect average 
monthly payroll growth to drift down from the rapid pace of 260,000 per month last year to 

200,000 this year before settling down to a pace 
of around 150,000 next year as the labor market 
continues to tighten and growth moves to its trend level. 
Research by my staff also indicates improving labor market conditions, 
as reflected by 
the number of workers moving from lower-
to higher
-paying sect
ors
Šthat is, the extent of 
cyclical upgrading.  Their analysis shows that the rise in the quits rate over the past two years is 

primarily due to a higher quits rate in sectors with lower pay, like wholesale/retail trade and 
           
        
               
  
      
   
      
      leisure/hospitality.
  Tracking individual workers in these sectors using C
urrent 
Population 
Survey data shows 
that 
they have recently been moving into higher-
paying sectors, like 
education and health services, at rates similar to those before the recession. 
Turning to inflation, I expect
 inflation to remain somewhat below target due to lagged 
effects from low energy prices and a stronger dollar.  Inflation in some sectors, such as health 
care, have also notably slowed.  In addition, 
because of some of the current factors affecting 

inflation, year-over-year core could drift lower as stronger readings from a year agoŠ
core PCE 
readings from March to June of last year were 
running at a solid 2 
percent pace
Šdrop out of the 
12-month window.  
Such base effects have not affected 
my overall confidence regarding the 
medium
-term outlook for inflation, assuming 
there are 
continued improvement in the labor 

market and stable longer-
term expectations.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  I will start with a few observations 
about the Ninth District economy.  It™s generally robust, but the decline in oil prices is certainly 

creating challenges in some areas.  I will then turn to the national economy, 
where I see 

continued shortfall
s in aggregate demand relative to supply. 
Labor markets are tight in many parts of the Ninth District, 
with contacts reporting 
significant swaths of unfilled openings.  There are signs of growing wage pressures in some 

economic sectors and geographical are
as.  However, overall, wage pressures remain muted. 
Importantly, many businesses report having little or no ability to pass on wage increases to 

consumers in the form of price increases.  So this is actually a flip side of the argument that 

President Will
iams 
offered
Šhe indicated that he didn™t need to see wage increases to feel 
confident in the 
return 
of 
inflation to 2 percent. 
The flip side of this is that we might see wage 
      
       
             
   
    
           
   increases happening and still not see inflation
, because the question is whether those businesses 
experiencing the wage increases have 
the pricing power to pass that on.  The contacts 
that 
we talk
ed to in the intermeeting period suggested they do not. 
Contacts at businesses with an international footprint expressed concern during 
the 
intermeeting period about how the high value of the dollar would affect the demand for their 

products, especially in light of overall softness in global demand conditions.  And so
me of
 the 
comments that 
President Bullard
 offered about China echo things we heard from our contacts 
during the intermeeting period. 
Not surprisingly, economic activity has slowed greatly in the oil-producing areas of 
North Dakota.  However, overall confidence in the B
akken region remains high.  Many, if not 
most, of our contacts r
eport seeing the currently low level of economic activity as a welcome 
opportunity to shore up critical infrastructure needs in the western part of North Dakota. 
Let me turn to the national economy.  Both real and nominal variables are telling us a 
similar story, I believe:  
There is insufficient aggregate demand to use available resources in an 
effective fashion.  In terms of real activity, if we look back over the past five years since the end 

of 2009, real GDP growth has averaged 2.3 percent.  T
here is l
ittle sign of this pace 
quickeningŠl
ast year
, real GDP growth was only 2.4 percent.  H
ere I
™m using annual averages 
to get away from some of the seasonal adjustment factors that have been highlighted in previous 

interventions.  
This year
 now looks like it may be even worse than this weak average 
performance.  In the wake of the data that we
™ve 
received from the first quarter, Tealbook
, Book 
A, has downgraded its outlook for 2015 economic activity, and it now projects growth in this 

calend
ar year to be less than 2 percent.  We will get more information
, of course
, tomorrow 
morning along these lines. 
            
          
            
                      
  The persistence of these patterns has led some to conclude that they reflect a permanent 
downward shift in the productive capabilities of the United States.  I think we should be very 
cautious before accepting these claims. We saw significant improvement in all labor market 

metrics in 2014.  This improvement seems to have had 
little 
effect
 on the excess supply of 
human resources in the economy. 
We saw little upward pressure on compensation or on the 
inflation outlook.  This conjunction of low price pressures and strong employment growth 

suggests 
that the 
ﬁRoom to Growﬂ 
scenario i
n Tealbook, Book A, might be quite relevant.  And 
if you look at th
e implications of that scenario, the weakness of aggregate demand relative to 

supply creates concerns with respect to nominal variables. 
The outlook for inflation in 
Tealbook, Book A, 
is 
that it will be below target until 2019, well over four years from n
ow. 
Just to follow up on some of the discussion we heard earlier about inflation over the past 
few years, headline 
inflation 
did go above 2 percent in 2011, but I think if you go back over 
2008, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013, and 2014, in all of those years, 
it was below 2 percent.  In 2011, it 
was above 2 percent.  On average, over that time frame since the end of 2007, 
it™s been
 about 
1.3 percent. Market
-based longer-
term inflation expectations remain low. 
I want to
 say something about the prediction issue.  It™
s absolutely true
, I think
, that if 
you do horse 
races of th
e kind 
that President Williams talked about
, market-
based measures 
don™t really fare that well. I think it
™s actually because they™re 
of value to policymakers, not just 
to statistical 
forecasters, because we
™re interested in a different loss function.  We
™re not 
interested in just minimizing mean square
d error
, we™
re actually interested in trying to mitigate 
low inflation, especially when it
™s going to be costly to households.  And I th
ink that 
monitoring 
these market
-based measures of inflation expectations 
is helpful along those lines. 
         
             
   
    
  
    
          
     
       
     Tealbook, Book A, notes that we™
ve seen some slippage in Michigan survey measures as 
well
ŠI don™t want to put too much weight on that at this stage, but 
it™s something to watch.
 I think there are signs in these data that we may be facing a prolonged period of inflation running 
substantially below our target.  Now, why should we care about a possible downward slippage in 

inflation and inflation expectatio
ns? 
This builds on some of the remarks that 
President 
Rosengren already made, that p
ersistently lower inflation expectations translate to lower nominal 

interest rates.  Lower nominal interest rates translate into little recession
-fighting capacity for the 
central bank.  And such a reduction 
in policy capacity would be especially troubling because it 
would build on the policy capacity associated with a significant decline in the neutral real 

interest rate noted by President Rosengren.  
So this decline in inflation expectations really 

creates a first
-order loss in terms of what we are trying to accomplish 
because it increases the 
probability of hitting up against the zero lower bound. 
As President Rosengren 
suggested, the decline in the neutral rate of intere
st should lead 
us to consider raising the inflation target.  I see a great deal of possible merit in this
 suggestion.  
More generally, I think that it would be useful to have discussions about the long-
run goals that 
we have established.  We learn 
more 
over time
, and it™
s useful to take 
that
 on board.  
We d
on™t 
want to do it every year, certainly, but I think at intervals we should be taking on information and 

reevaluating the long
er-run goal statement.  
The 
Bank of Canada does this on a five-
year basis
.  Every five years they go back and relook 
at their framework and what they™
ve learned
, and 
I think there
™s something to be gained from that kind of systematic reevaluation of our framework.  
So I would be very supportive of further discussion of President Rosengren™s suggestion. 
With that said, first things first.  We actually need to forestall a possible decline in 
inflation expectations 
today 
generated by a failure to hit the current low target. 
During the 
               
          
           
         
  
  intermeeting period, Governor Haruhiko Ku
roda of 
the Bank of Japan visited Minnesota 
and 
gave an excellent speech.  He described the aggressive efforts of the Bank of Japan to stimulate 
an increase 
in inflation expectations.  As I listened to him, I was reminded yet again of how we 
need to do all that we can to avoid leaving our successors with the kind of tough situation that 

Governor 
Kuroda now faces. 
I don™t see that determination reflected in 
alternative B, but I won™t 
talk about that until tomorrow.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
  In terms of the economic 
outlook, I™m of two minds.  On the one hand, I™m more uncertain about the growth outlook and 

more concerned about the potential downside risks to growth.  On the other hand, I think the 

downside risks on the inflation side have lessened considerably.  A
t the last meeting
, I would 
have said that I expected further labor market improvement but was not yet reasonably confident 

that inflation would return to our 
2 percent objective ov
er the medium term.  Now, I would at 
least partly reverse things.  Conditional on further improvement in the labor market, I™m getting 

closer to being reasonably confident that inflation will return to our 2 
percent objective
, but I am 
less confident about when I will see further labor market improvement and how quickly it will 

occur. 
Turning first to the growth side
, it strikes me 
that 
there 
are 
a lot of crosscurrents right 
now, and it™s really difficult to assess the net 
effect
.  To me, this sharp slowing 
in payroll growth 
in March should not be a big surprise, however.  As I noted in my comments at the March 

FOMC meeting
, a big gap had opened up between payroll growth and GDP growth, so unless 
one thought that the productivity growth trend would remain ex
traordinarily poor, it seemed 

reasonable to expect 
either 
GDP growth to pick up or payroll growth to slow down.  A
s it turns 
      
        
           
   
              
            out, GDP growth slowed rather than picked up, s
o that left payroll growth to bear the brunt of the 
adjustment. 
As I assess the firs
t quarter, I do think there are both transitory and more persistent 
factors responsible for the slowdown.  On the transitory side, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of 
New 
York™s staff analysis
 does suggest 
that 
severe winter weather did have a sizable effect
. We 
put the 
impact
 at about 1½ 
percent on 
the
 annualized growth rate, slightly less than last year.  Having 
said that, I wouldn™t take that point estimate too literally. 
Also
, I do think the West Coast port 
slowdown did disrupt economic activity.  We had a small business advisory group meeting, and I 
was surprised that two out of the eight or nine businesses that attended referenced the port 

slowdown as hurting their businesses 
in the first quarter
Šthis is 
around upstate New York and 
New Jersey, and that™s not really where I would expect 
the 
port slowdown to actually manifest 
itself
, so I thought that was meaningful. 
There 
are
 also some more long-
lasting components as well. As Steve Kamin made clear, 
the dollar™s sharp appreciation has led to a deterioration in U.S. net exports, and the 
Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York staff estimates that a 15 percent appreciation of the broad rea
l trade
-weighted 
dollar, which is a little bit m
ore than we have right now in hand, would cut about 0.6 
percentage point from the level of real GDP after one year, and I think that™s pretty consistent 

with the Tealbook estimates.
  And I think it™
s important because that™s just the partial 
equilibrium effect.  If you have a trade drag, it also drains real income from the economy, so 

there™s also the risk of second-
order effects. 
Now, the second thing 
is that 
oil and gas investment is plunging.  I™m not sure how 
severe the knock
-on 
effects will be, but I d
on™t think we™re done yet.  Firms have been protected, 
in part, this year by hedging their future forward production by selling oil forward, and they™
ll           
        
       
                      
       
     
   
become more exposed to the current oil prices as time passes
, so I expect a downward trend in 
investmen
t to continue.  As Helen Holcomb pointed out in her comments about the Texas 
economy, the effect does seem to be quite a bit larger, I think, than expected.  
Richard Fisher 

said
Šin January, I 
believe it was
Šat th
at time he thought that employment growth in 
Texas, 
which was well above average compared 
with 
the country, would slow down to the national 
average.
  But if you look at the payroll data in March for states on a seasonally adjusted basis, 
payrolls in Texas fell by 25,400 people, which is pretty sizab
le for Texas. 
And it™s interesting 
that Oklahoma was the state with the second
-largest decline in payroll. So
, clearly
, the fall 
in oil 
and gas investment is having a significant 
effect
.  It™s rippling through to incomes
, and i
t™s rippling through into c
ommercial real estate construction
, so I think it actually has a more sizable 
effect than just looking at oil and gas investment itself. 
Third, I think the inventory accumulation, which I don™t think anyone has mentioned, 
looks to me like it™s poised to be a drag on growth.  If you look at the inventory-
to-sales ratios, 
they have been drifting up, and if you look at the rate of inventory accumulation in the first 

quarterŠ
well, we™ll see what we get tomorrow
, but it looks to be on the high side in terms of 
what™s sustainable over the medium term.
  So if you had to ask yourself, 
ﬁAre inventories going 
to contribute positively to growth or negatively to growth over the next year
?ﬂ 
They are 
almost 
certain to be a drag on growth.  In the face of 
all 
of these cro
sscurrents, I think the next few 
months of data are really important.  I™m really looking at what April and May look like.  And 

even if we get strong April and May data, I™m not really sure what to make of itŠi
s this just a 
bounce after first
-quarter weakn
ess, or is this the new trend? 
In contrast to the growth side, I am getting more comfortable that inflation is starting to 
stabilize and is likely to start dri
fting back up toward our 2 percent objective.  When I look at the 
         
                  
  
      
    
     inflation data and all the other factors that feed into the inflation outlook, I think most suggest 
that inflation
Šdespite a stronger dollar, lower energy prices, and still-
sizable slack in the labor 
market
Šactually seems to be stabiliz
ing.  So let me run through the evidence very q
uickly.  If 
you look at the three-month change in the core CPI, it™s now above 2 percent compared 
with 
a 12-month change of 1.8 percent.  Inflation compensation, 
as measured by the five
-by-
five 
forward TIPS versus nominal Treasury has moved up a bit.  
Surv
ey measures of inflation 
expectations are generally stable, and I would argue that wage compensation growth trends are 

stable to slightly higher. 
So the fears I had of inflation getting unanchored to the downside seem to have 
diminished.  I could imagine that things could have worked out quite differently.  We™d have 

lower headline inflation feeding through into core inflation
.  T
hat, 
in turn
, would 
depress 
nominal 
wage 
growth and cause 
inflation expectations to be anchored 
to the downside.  And the 
fact th
at we haven™t seen that at this point, I think, makes that dynamic much less likely.  So I™m 
much more confident now that inflation will return to our 2 percent objective, subject to having 

sufficient growth to continue to close the output gap.  Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This discussion has appropriately focused on 
the significantly weaker
-than-expected incoming data on first-
quarter economic activity.  The 
staff forecasts a r
eturn to higher growth of around 2 percent or more in the second quarter and 
the second half of the year, and we™ve heard similar forecasts during this round of discussion 

from several of the 
Reserve 
Bank presidents.  The Tealbook forecast is, not surprisingly, 
consistent with what we see in the charts given 
to 
us by Bill Wascher
Šin particular, the two real 
GDP forecasts and their fan charts
.  S
o there™s a fair probability that will happen, but it™s not a 
      
    
               
         
       
    guarantee that we™re going to bounce right back in the coming quarter and there 
have been some 
weak data in April. 
In terms of elementary textbooksŠlooking at C + 
I + G + NXŠthe Tealbook forecast
s expect the bulk of the rebound in the second quarter to come from consumption, which is a 
reasonable forecast i
n light of expectations for employment and real disposable income.  
The 
Tealbook also expects government purchases to rebound significantly, net investment to decline 

more slowly than it did in the first quarter, and net exports to decline at the same rate 
as in the 
first quarter.
  This is all very interesting, but of course, we™re waiting for tomorrow™s first 
estimate of first
-quarter growth to clarify
, perhaps, 
what happened in the first quarter. 
When you focus on recent growth rates, you get a fairly pes
simistic picture of what™s 
happening, and we need to remind ourselves that the overall position of the economy is good.  

Let me start with the labor market.  The unemployment rate remains at 5.5 percent, a level that is 

not that much above many estimates of the natural rate today and is not above estimates of the 
natural rate that we had going into the March meeting.  A year ago we didn™t think we™d reach a 
rate that low until 2016
.  A
nd, importantly, some, though not all, 
of the other labor market 
indicato
rs whose behavior suggested that the U-3 unemployment rate understated the extent of 
labor market problems appear to be returning to pre-
recession levels. 
So, from the policy 
viewpoint, the basic question on output and employment is whether employment wil
l continue to 
grow at a rate sufficient to bring further improvement in the labor market in coming quarters. 
The inflation rate remains below target, and that is a problem.  However, one gets the 
impression that while we are committed to looking through tr
ansitory factors
Šparticularly dollar 
appreciation and the decline in oil prices, 
and gasoline prices in particular
Špopular discussion 
both here and in Europe has not focused on what that means.  It does not mean focusing solely 
      
     
           
          
            on core inflation, because both energy and import prices affect core inflation.  Core PCE 
inflation was 1.3 percent over the 12 months through March.  According to Board staff estimates 

in the Tealbook, increases in the dollar, which are very unlikely to persist indefinitel
y, 
are 
holding down that figure by 0.3 percentage point this year, bringing what could be called 

nontransitory core inflation to something like 1.6 percent.  And current energy price changes are 

reducing core inflation by another 0.1 percentage point, which brings you to a nontransitory core 

inflation rate of 1.7 percent. 
Now, you might be concerned about this if the low core numbers were being reflected in 
declining inflation expectations, but the survey measures seem to be relatively well anchored.  

And a
ll this, again, seems consistent with the data presented in the 
bottom two charts in Bill 
Wascher™s handout
, which show inflation coming back rather quickly to just below 2 
percent. 
I expect that the transitory factors
Šwhich are, fundamentally, 
oil and th
e exchange rate, which 
may or may not turn around reasonably soonŠwill gradually abate and possibly begin to reverse 
themselves.  We only need them to abate.  And labor market slack will continue to diminish, 
putting inflation on a path that, over the medi
um term
, will take us very close to our inflation 
target.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  A lot of people have talked about Q1 and 
have posed the question, 
ﬁWas Q1 an aberration?
ﬂ I certainly
 hope that it was an aberration, and 
I expect that it has been an aberration. 
And I don™t think, personally, that 
we™re going to learn 
that much from the GDP number tomorrow morning.  I
f it
™s kind of low or really low, it may not 
tell us very much because
 we had a really low number in the first quarter of 2014, and that didn™t 

seem to mean very much a quarter or two later. 
       
      
  
           
   
         
    
              
         I actually think the question is not so much 
ﬁWas Q1 an aberration?ﬂ 
but more the 
question that was implicit in some of 
Vice Chairman D
udley
™s analysis a minute ago
: ﬁAre 
there 
things at work in the economy that will give us a growth path for the rest of the year that
™s somewhat lower than what many of us expected toward the end of last year
?ﬂ Not that it will in 
any way resemble Q1, bu
t that somehow there are forces that are restraining growth a little bit 
more than we would have anticipated.  
Vice Chairman Dudley
 suggested one in his presentation.  
Another possible explanation of that phenomenon, should it occur, is the one that 
I think lies 
behind the Tealbook™s alternative scenario of a persistent slowdownŠ
that is, 
that there is a kind 
of confidence problem that™s inhibiting consumer spending despite the extended improvement in 

income fundamentals because of job growth and mayb
e a little bit of wage growth
, as well. 
I think for that reason one has to be a little agnostic right now in awaiting data over the 
next couple of months
Šas President Mester
, Vice Chairman Dudley, and several other people 
have said
.  A
lthough, as someoneŠI 
think it was 
Vice Chairman Dudley
Šalso said
, even then, 
it™s not clear how much some of the questions we™
ve been asking will be clarified because 
there
™s going to be a certain degree of snapback.  So instead of trying to speculate about all of 
that, I wan
ted to put on the table in a little bit more detail something 
Simon had an exhibit on in 
his presentation at the beginning of this meeting and that is the phenomenon of negative interest 

rates on European sovereign debt.  This phenomenon may be relevant to 
an assessment of the 
most likely medium
-term U.S. growth trend because of 
its potential 
effects
 on financial markets 
and the dollar, potential downside risks, andŠ
and I
™m not going to talk about this, but it may be 
relevant to the 
great debate about s
ecul
ar stagnation. 
There have been negative interest rates on some shorter
-term European sovereign debt for 
several years now, but the last six months or so have 
seen a qualitative change in the 
       
     
             
   
       
                    phenomenon in a number of respects.  First, negative rates have m
oved down along the yield 
curve in European countries with the strongest credit reputations to the point that, as in the chart 
that Simon distributed, we now see negative interest rates in a nontrivial portion of 5-
to 7
-year 
debt in the stronger European sovereigns.  Second, yield curves, as he mentioned, are quite flat in 

these countries.  I just checked this morning, and the spread between German 
2-year and 10-
year 
government bonds is about 40 basis points.  That compares to a spread of about 140 basis points 

for U.S. T
reasury securities.
  The 30-
year 
bund is still trading positively but 
at 63 basis points, 
which is a pretty low number for a 30-year.  As everybody knows, the Swiss 10-year sovereign 

issue earlier this month went out at negative rates, and 
I believe that™
s the first time 
in history 
that any sovereign debt of that duration has been priced negatively.  
And 
so, as 
far as Thomas 
Jordan knew, he was setting a precedent, or at least his country™s government was setting a 

precedent. 
Currently, 
as S
imon™s chart shows, more than 35 percent of all euro-zone government 
debt carries a negative interest rate. As recently as two weeks ago
, I think
, it was up over 
40 percent. There
™s been a little bit of an interest rate change since then, which has affec
ted the 
yields in some of those medium
-term tenors.
  Substantial portions of some non-euro-zone 
sovereigns, notably Denmark and Switzerland, also are priced at negative rates, and some 

shorter-duration corporate bonds of the highly rated European firms are 
also priced at negative 
rates now. 
Clearly, this is all related to long
-standing European economic problemsŠand, 
more 
immediately, first the prospect and now the reality of the ECB™s QE program.  It
™s also related
, I guess, 
to the relative scarcity of sov
ereign debt instruments 
issued by countries like Germany 
that continue to run tight fiscal policies and large current account surpluses, notwithstanding 
                                 
  
   
  
           
 economic conditions in the euro zone more generally.  
The unprecedented nature of this 
phenomenon has caused most thoughtful analysts to offer only tentative v
iews of the relative 

importance of various 
stories that explain
 why investors would hold longer-
term sovereigns with 
negative yields.  
Logically, I think the explanations fall into three 
categories. 
First is gloom 
about the long
-term prospects for the countries in question.  Now, it™s true, there™s not a whole 

lot of high optimism to be found about European growth prospects, but almost everybody 

discounts this as a dominant explanationŠ
that is, the idea that there
™s going to be negative 
growth 
or deflation
 for 10 years in Europe. 
The s
econd group of explanations are based on investor inertia, basicallyŠwhether 
forced, as in the case of pension funds and some other institutions, which may be required by 
law 
or regulation to hold certain percentages of extremely low-risk bonds, or unforced, as in the case 

of other investors who are themselves unsure of what all 
of 
this negative rate stuff means and are 
waiting right now to see what happens, and maybe 
chan
ge their investment decision if things 
don™t turn around relatively soon. 
The third set of explanations is that, in an environment that doesn™t offer 
a lot of 
appealing investment options, 
there may be some plays available here.  For example, you may 

get capital gains if yields go even further into negative territory, or you may get exchange rate 

gains whether from short-
term developments that cause quick swings in currencies or from 
longer-term appreciations of currencies with very low inflation or even deflation.  That is, if you 

think that there
™s going to be very low inflation in Switzerland for a long time to come and you 
are a U.S. investor, and you think that there™s going to be inflation in the United States, you 

might actually end up profiting by that play.  
As an example of th
is search for an investment 
play, I took note of one analyst™s advice to his clients that the best play may be in bonds with a 
        
           
  
       
           good bit of convexity so as to m
aximize the chances of catching the wave of large market 
movements when these trends reverse. 
To date, as a very good 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Market
Source 
report 
indicated, there have been relatively few discontinuities observed in European debt markets.  But 
I think this is the point at which Herb Stein™s memorable aphorism comes to mind, because 

unless the medium
-term prospects for Europe are a lot worse than most people think, there™
s going to be a reversal of negative rates at some point.  Even 
if there
™s no near
-term reversal 
resulting from sufficiently enhanced growth prospects or from sufficiently significant policy 

moves, a nontrivial number of investors might, over time, 
overcome their inertia and start 

seeking positive nominal yields elsew
here. 
There are 
a lot of potential outcomes here, some of which are relatively benign.  Others, 
though, are of potentially greater concern.  For example, if enough investors were caught flat
-footed by an unexpected change in ECB policyŠand, paradoxically, an unexpected 
improvement in European economic prospectsŠ
there could be some pretty significant turmoil in 
relevant markets, although there we would have to ask ourselves how much the financial turmoil 

would be offset by the prospect of improvement in the real economy.  I think of 
even greater 
concern to us would be a decision by those investors who did not initially move out of European 

sovereign debt that they couldn™t take the uncertainty or the negative rates any longer.  The 

natural destination for the
se investors is
, of course, U.S. T
reasury securities
, and I think that 
some of the dollar strengthening we™
ve seen this year has been attributable to 
the existence of 
investors
 who have already made such a move.  And it is possible, though very hard to judge 
how likely, that many more could follow.  If they were to do so, the recent modest retracing by 

the dollar could itself be halted and reversed pretty significantly. 
                  
       
      
                  On this last possibility, it™s worth mentioning that, notwithstanding the notable spread
s between 
bunds and T
reasury securit
ies, some European investors have apparently concluded that 
the roughly 80 basis point difference between German and U.S. two-
year 
bond rate
s is 
insufficient to compensate for currency
-hedging costs and other risks.  And 
this calculus is
, I think, what may be contributing to some of the otherwise-
hard
-to-explain changes in the yield 
curves of some of the stronger European sovereigns, since fundamentals are not really changing 
there but you™re seeing some movement in those yield curves, which I take to be everybody 

repositioning
, trying to figure out the best defensive place to be right now.  So investors may be 
moving around within bonds that are either euro-denominated or effectively tied to the euro. 
But if that spread b
etween 
U.S. T
reasury interest rates 
and rates on European sovereigns 
were to widen, either because we raise rates or because QE and other developments in the EU 

drove yields down even further there, then more European investors might be tempted to take the 

Atlantic plunge.  And this, in turn, could cause some market dislocation in Europe, a renewed 
unwelcome strengthening of the dollar, or both.  This is pretty speculative right now, but 
certainly in a context in which the trajectory of U.S. economic perfor
mance is at least in some 
question after the 
past few months, I think this situation is another reason for us not to be in a 
hurry to raise rates, at least not until we
™ve had a chance to see how investors are adapting, and, 
most importantly, what their adaptation means for the dollar. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming data for the first quarter have 
been weaker
, overall, than expected, including data for household and business spending, 
industrial production, and housing starts and permitsŠ
a little bit different but quite similar to the 

first quarter of 2014.  In addition, the initial BLS report on the employment situation for March 
              
   
   
        
      
     
       was also much weaker than expected, and 
that™
s different from last year
, when payroll gains 
continued 
to be 
very strong right through the first quarter.  And the question, of course, is how 
much signal to take.  
One reason to discount these data somewhat are the transitory factors that 
are likel
y to reverse, including bad winter weather and the West Coast port disruption 
as well as 
the technical factors that have been discussed.  Another is that GDP data may eventually be 

significantly revised and is a noisy signal
Šand I thought that the new exhibit in Tealbook, 
Book A, on prediction intervals was interesting and useful on that point.  
In any case, it makes 
sense to me to take some signal from this year™s weak first quarter, both for labor markets and 

for GDP
.  I think the baseline staff forecast 
strikes a reasonable balance for the rest of this year 
by assuming higher GDP growth, but not a significant catch-up quarter like we had in the second 

quarter 
of 
2014. On inflation, I would tentatively say I feel a little better about inflation, which is n
ow 
forecast to run at about 1½ 
percent
 for Q2, well above the Q1 readings.  Survey expectations 
remain stable.  Breakevens have moved up modestly across the curve since the March meeting, 

seemingly driven more by oil prices and liquidity rather than changing expectations.  
In light of 
all of the recent market readings that suggest concerns about low inflation, it™
s an improvement
, for a change, 
to read stories that fixed
-income traders are seeing a greater likelihood of inflation 
getting back to mandate-consistent levels and less risk of very low inflation.  
Of course, we may 

overread these market movements, and it may simply be that TIPS got a little cheap relative to 

nominals, and traders acted on that.  The underlying story of a return to 2 percent inflation over 

the medium term, given GDP and labor market outcomes as forecast, continues to make sense to 

me.  And I look forward to gaining more confidence from the incoming data on that.  I would 
      
  
   
    
                        
   worry more about lower inflation in the case that the economy does slip into a lower gear in 
growth and labor markets. 
Looking forward, the positive narrative is that consumer spending will increase to healthy 
levels supported by low energy prices, high confidence, and much better labor market conditions. 

In fact
, going back to 
Stan
™s basic equation, you could say that the U.S. economy has grown at 
about 2.7 percent over the last two years, with net exports at around zero.  With net exports now 

contributing negative 0.7 to negative 0.8 percentage point, you have to ask, where is growth 

going to come from?  It™s not going to come from government spending
, it™s not going to come 
from housing investment, and it™s not going to come from business investment in a world in 

which
 drilling is being significantly reduced.  So it really has to come from consumption.  And, 
in fact, in the medium
-term forecast
, PCE growth accounts for well more than 100 percent of the 
growth.  That narrative, I have to say, makes sense to me, but it does amount to an airplane 

flying on one engine.  S
o far
, the combination of the weak spending data and high consumer 
confidence says that the consumer, 
in effect
, is now 
ebullien
tly saving. 
In terms of the risks, one, of course, is that PCE growth does disappoint.  Another one, 
frankly, is that
, in a 
world of still
-slow growth, a return to stronger growth here could well lead 
to a tightening in financial conditions not so much through the rate channel as through the dollar 

channelŠi
t may not be a rate tantrum that is really the threat this time.
  We will see
, by the time 
of the June meeting, 
whether there is progress in addressing Greece™s fiscal crisis or whether 

Greece, instead, is headed for control
s on capital flows
, sovereign default, and the like, with 
potential disruption for the U.S. economy.  
We™ll see two more
 employment reports and 
a lot 
more data.  And we™ll know, I think, at that point, something about whether the first quarter™s 
      
               
      
  
  
  
   
         
        
    disappointment is transitory
 and anomalous or, instead, marks some kind of real loss of 
momentum. 
Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to reflect briefly on the quarterly 
assessment of financial stability and then turn to the outlook. 
Although overall risks to financial stability in 
the United States remain moderate, one 
area that 
bears 
heightened scrutiny is the potential for spikes 
in volatility due to changes in 
market liquidity.  In particular, we should be asking whether episodes of severe volatility, 
like 
the wild swings we saw
 in T
reasury 
bond yields on the morning of October 15, 
are likely to 
become the new normal.  Bond inventories held by broker-
dealers have declined
, in some part 
due to regulatory changes.  Separately, and predating the onset of Dodd-Frank, changes in 

marke
t structure may be at least as important in some markets
, for which automated and high-
frequency traders may now account for a majority of the activity.  Coupled with the big run-up 
we™ve seen of investments in bond mutual funds, this raises the specter of amplification of 
volatility and fire
-sale dynamics at times when investors looking to cash out could be surprised 
by lower-
than
-expected liquidity.  Together, 
these changes to the structure of financial markets 
could increase the volatility of asset price 
responses. A modest increase in the average 
level of 
volatility shouldn™t be a concern, particularly if market participants respond with more rigorous 
risk management
.  But a lack of liquidity that leads to large and self
-reinforcing swings in prices 
and market freezes during periods of stress could pose threats to financial stability and would be 

especially concerning in the case of the U.S. T
reasury market, with its traditional benchmark 
status. 
                 
          
               
  
   
     I think it
™s premature to draw conclusions for financial 
stability.  Some of the 
preoccupation with the decline in dealer inventories may, 
in fact
, be misplaced, and I think 
focusing too much attention on the critical role of dealers as reliable providers of liquidity during 
severe stress episodes suggests a ver
y high degree of amnesia.  Moreover, bid-
ask spreads are in 
line with historical norms. 
As we
™re learning from the investigation of October 15, we also do 
not yet fully understand the implications of the growing role of high-
frequency traders in these 
mar
kets. 
With heterogeneity across their size, business models, and trading strategies, some of 
their activities may
, in fact
, contribute to market liquidity, 
while 
some 
may be destabilizing. 
And, finally, it™s unclear how much leverage or high-
quality liqu
idity is embedded in bond 
mutual funds and how vulnerable they might be to liquidity mismatch and fire-
sale dynamics. 
The Dodd-
Frank requirement for mutual funds to undertake stress tests holds some promise, but 
only if deployed rigorously.  In short, I a
m very pleased that we are putting intense focus on this 
issue, and I think it will only rise in importance as the date of liftoff approaches. 
Now let me turn briefly to the outlook in the United States.  The recent data on the labor 
market, aggregate spen
ding, and industrial output have been disappointing.  The key question 
that we are wrestling with around this table is how much of this unanticipated weakness 

represents a slowing in the underlying momentum of activity and how much is due to transitory 

dis
turbances
?  The preliminary conclusion I would draw from the surprises in the recent data is 
that the negative impulse to U.S. aggregate demand from the combined effects of the plunge in 

oil prices and the surge in the dollar seem to be at least as strong as we had expected, while the 

expected positive effects have not materialized so far. 
Turning first to the positive effects, recent shocks were expected to be reflected primarily 
in stronger consumption growth, but the recent data have been disappointing.  Some of the 
               
   
  
  
   
            
      
  preliminary indicators of consumer spending are often substantially revised, so we perhaps 
should not take too much signal from them.  Indeed, auto salesŠamong the most reliable of 

indicators
Šrebounded strongly in March.  Nonetheless, subpar data on retail sales have now 
persisted for four months, suggesting that temporary infl
uences or statistical noise 
are 
not fully to 
blame.  On balance, it™s possible that the forces boosting consumer spending may not be as 

strong as we might have hoped.  
Weaker
-than
-expected consumption would be very unfortunate, 
because strength in other ca
tegories of aggregate demand remains elusive.  The recent data on 
housing starts and permits, for example, suggest that this sector continues to struggle. 
On the negative side of the ledger, the drop in oil prices was expected to curtail business 
investment related to drilling, while the dollar™s rise was anticipated to reduce net exports. A 

broad variety of indicators suggests that these effects are materializing with greater force than 

had been anticipated.  Drilling investment looks to have dropped at an annualized rate of 

50 percent in the first quarter
.  And orders and shipments of capital goods, as well as business 
sentiment, have also been weak and suggest that overall business investment will edge lower 

over the first half of this year.  
A variety o
f indicators also suggest 
that the 
stronger dollar is 
weighing significantly on activity.  Net exports subtracted 1 percentage point from growth in the 

fourth quarter, and the staff estimates 
a contribution of minus 
 percentage point in the first 
quarter.
  The national manufacturing purchasing 
managers™
 diffusion index of new export orders 
has been in contractionary territory for the past three months.  Manufacturing production 

declined at an annual rate of 1 percent, and the outlook for internationally or
iented firms has 
worsened significantly in recent days. 
       
               
  
                
       
      
In parallel, the recent labor market data suggest a slowing in the 
take-up 
of slack. 
Average monthly payroll employment gains were 200,000, down about 60,000 from last year™s 
pace
, and all of the indicators of slack have moved sideways in the last month. 
Of course, there™s a danger in reading too much into this data.  It™s entirely possible we™
ll see the stronger trend in underlying activity that was apparent in the second half of the year 

reassert it
self.  But it
™s important to keep in mind the international context.  On the one hand, we 
have seen some encouraging data from the euro area
Šdata on retail sales and industrial 

production, in particularŠwhich holds out some promise that aggregate demand wi
ll strengthen. 
And the dollar™s sharp ascent seems to have stalled, at least for now.  On the other hand, 

negotiations between Greece and its creditors remain challenging.  And although the macro data 

are
 notoriously unreliable, Chinese GDP growth looks to have slowed noticeably in the first 

quarter.
  On balance, the foreign economic outlook suggests continued weak demand in some 
important advanced foreign economies and signs of faltering growth in some important emerging 
market economies.  In this context
, the threat to price stability from stronger demand growth in 
the United States seems quite limited. 
Let me close by touching briefly on inflation.  Recent data have provided some 
reassurance that underlying inflation is not moving lower.  Oil prices have moved up somewhat 
further since March, and the 
3-month moving average of core PCE inflation has increased from 

the very low level reached in January.
  Even so, current estimates of both the 3- and 12-month 
changes in core PCE prices point to an underlying trend rate of only 1.4 percent.  And while it™
s reassuring that survey
-based measures of inflation expectations are remaining stable
, and there 
has been some improvement in market-
based measures, th
e latter 
are still materially below the 
levels 
that preva
iled
 until the middle of last year. 
The overall picture should suggest at least 
              
     
         
        
                
        
some caution about attributing all of the recent softening to transitory factors and puts a high 
premium on incoming data as we assess the timing of liftoff, which is 
the topi
c for tomorrow™s 
discussion.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, thank you.  Thanks to everyone for another interesting and 
thoughtful round of observations.  As usual, I™
ll try to summarize a couple of main themes and 
add a few remarks of my 
own. 
Starting with real activity 
and 
the labor market, everyone agreed that the news has been 
generally disappointing since our last meeting, although views 
differed 
about its implications. 
With respect to employment, the March employment report show
ed unexpected weakness in 
payroll gains, but many of you emphasized 
that 
one shouldn™t make too much out of one month™s 
report.  And, still, average gains in the first three months of the year are running 
at about 
200,000, which is a respectable pace, especiall
y given how weak output growth looks to have 
been in the first quarter. Other labor market indicators during the intermeeting period were 
mixed but generally, 
I think
, imply little change in resource utilization.  The unemployment rate 
stayed at 5.5 percent.  Broader measures of labor underutilization ticked down one-tenth, but 
the 
labor force participation rate fell 
one-tenth, and the employment-
to-population ratio was 
unchanged.  You noted that 
the JOLTS
 job openings rate ticked up slightly, but there wa
s also a 
slight decline in quits and hires, and 
at least 
the Board™s labor market condition
s index was 
unchanged.  I noted some reports from business contacts about increases in turnover and the fact, 
as President George mentioned, that people who are 
ﬁtur
ning over
ﬂŠwho are quittingŠ
appear 
to be moving to jobs 
in which
 they™
re receiving wage gains. 
On wages, I think everyone agreed that aggregate measures suggest very little pickup in 
wage growth, although some of you suggested that the reports you™
re recei
ving from your 
       
      
    
                  
        
    
  business contacts are beginning to hint at a broader acceleration in wage gains and labor market 
pressures.
  That said, many of you noted that wage pressures are confined to particular regions 
and sectors
, such as high-
tech 
in Silicon Valley
 and San Francisco.  But, 
as President Williams 
noted, the implications of movements in wages for inflation and 
for 
our criterion of wanting to 
have reasonable confidence that inflation will move back 
are 
debatable, and at least in recent 
years it doesn™t 
look like there
™s that much of a close link between 
nominal wages and inflation. 
With respect to spending, everyone remarked on the unexpected weakness we™
ve seen in 
a broad range of spending and production indicators, including retail sales, housing start
s, orders 
and shipments of capital goods, nonresidential construction, drilling, exports, and industrial 

output.  And, of course, tomorrow morning we receive the first-
quarter GDP preliminary 
estimate.
  The underlying cause of the Q1 slowdown and its implications for future growth is 
obviously very important and unclear at this point.  Many of you mentioned, and cited evidence 

from your business contacts, 
of the importance of bad winter weather and the West Coast port 
dispute.  A number of you mentione
d the fact that we have a pattern here
Šover many yearsŠ
of 
Q1 being unusually weak, suggesting some residual seasonality in the GDP figures.  
Views on 
the size of these transitory effects differ, but if they are substantial
, then the prospects for a quick 
return to moderate growth should be good. 
On the other hand, a number of you mentioned that other explanations for weaker growth 
that may be relevant in the first quarter could have implications 
for the remainder of the year.  In 
particular, the dollar rece
ived a good deal of mention.  It looks like the dollar may be having a 
significant negative effect
 and that many of your business contacts mentioned the negative 
effect 
they™re seeing from the stronger dollar.  In addition, the decline in oil prices does seem to be 

having a significant effect
Šmaybe larger than we anticipated on business investment and 
       
      
                       
                
    drilling activity, and we haven™t yet seenŠ
surprisingly
, perhapsŠmuch evidence of a positive 
effect
 on consumer spending.  The anecdotes that you reported fro
m your business contacts were 
somewhat mixed, but I interpreted those as being reasonably positive in terms of not seeing any 
really significant changes in business prospects. 
On the international side, a number of risks 
were mentioned: 
Greece
; China, 
whose growth looks like it slowed more than expected
; geopolitical risks that bear on oil prices
; and 
a very interesting discussion, I thought, of what™s happening in global financial markets, 
with 

negative rates in Europe and the potential for a 
global reshu
ffling of portfolios that could raise 
volatility or could have very significant effects either on the dollar or interest rates and could be 

triggered by a shift in U.S. monetary policy. 
On the inflation front, incoming data came in pretty much as the 
staff
 had expected.  Core 
inflation was a touch higher than expected.  Oil prices were up somewhat since our last meeting, 

and the broad dollar exchange rate actually fell a little bit during the intermeeting period.  S
ome 
of you noted that these are welcome developments from an inflation perspective, as they indicate 

that the downward impetus 
provided by 
oil and the dollar to 
inflation is ebbing and shouldn™t 
continue. We had a nice discussion of measures of inflation expectations, with survey measures 

generally remaining stable and market-based measures of inflation compensation moving up 

slightly, although 
they are 
still bel
ow where they were last summer. 
President Williams™
s discussion about the relevance of these inflation expectations to inflation forecasts was 

interesting.  They don™t seem to be very good forecasts of inflation, and it is interesting 
that 
we have, 
I thin
k, 
repeatedly noticed that these measures are more heavily influenced by oil prices 
and movements in oil prices than, 
it would seem
, is reasonable. 
             
  
            
                   On the other hand, with respect to inflation and the outlook for inflation, a number of you 
suggested
, I thi
nk, that we could be in for a period in which inflation undershoots our objective 
for many, many years to come
 and, crossing over into the policy domain, suggested quite a bit of 
concern that we may be in for a very long period of an inflation undershoot.  That took us to 
some interesting observations on the question of 
what the equilibrium real rate is
; the possibility 
that it may be persistently depressed or not, as some think
; a debate about what
™s happening with 
the equilibrium real rate
; and the possib
ility 
that 
if the equilibrium real rate really is depressed
, what 
that implies for our monetary policy, and particularly for our inflation target, which is 
something that maybe we want to get back to and consider. 
Okay.  Let me just stop there as 
a summary
 of what I heard.  Are there any comments or 
corrections anyone wants to offer?  [No response] 
Then
 I™d like to offer some comments of my 
own, then we can quit and go to dinner.  I, of course, was also disappointed in incoming data on 

employment, spending, and production.  I recognize this may be just another soft spot, akin to 
what we saw last year and in a number of years past
, and I definitely think we should be careful 
not to overreact to what is a few weeks™ worth of news.  I find it reassuring that indicators of 
consumer confidence remain pretty upbeat, and I really haven™t altered my modal outlook for 

employment and output over the medium term.  I guess if I were updating my SEP forecast now, 

I would mark down projected growth this year, but modestly.  That said, I do find the widespread 

nature of the recent negative surprises disconcerting
, and, at a minimum, I am more worried 
about downside risk and 
am 
more uncertain about the outlook. 
In March my concerns focused on the external sector, and now I see question marks 
pertaining to the underlying strength of domestic aggregate demand as well.  I find it particularly 

disturbing that the slowdown in business investment appears to have become more widespread. 
                  
     
    
                In March the weakness appeared concentrated i
n drilling activity, and I think now we are seeing 
outright declines in real equipment outlays and nondrilling, nonresidential construction as well.  
The Tealbook assumes 
that investment in intangibles is still growing at a solid pace, but we 
actually have no idea what
™s happening there because reliable source data won™t be available for 
some time.  The broad weakness in business fixed investment may be partly explained by the 

slowdown in aggregate sale
s and output via an accelerat
or effect, but conceivably other factors 
that may prove to be more persistent may also be at work, and I worry about that. 
I™
m also concerned that we may not see a pickup in residential investment nearly as large 
as the Tealbook forecast
s this year.  Housing starts and permits have been incredibly weak even 
though mortgage rates are low, employment and income are rising, and demographic trends seem 

to call for a faster pace of building.  
According to staff calculations, 
if housi
ng remains weak 
it could shave 
¼ percentage 
point or so off the Tealbook projection of real GDP in the second half 
of this year and in 2016. 
I worry most about retail sales having been soft for several months now.  Savings rates 
moved up 1 
full percentage 
point since the fourth quarter despite large gains in employment, a 

sharp decline in oil prices, record equity prices, 
a solid increase in house prices, and low 
borrowing costs.  I suppose one could explain this by saying that bad winter weather and other 

transitory factors are at work here
.  I suppose supporting such an explanation is 
the fact that 
we did see strong auto sales in March, and consumer sentiment, even though the C
onference 
Board 
number fell today, is still pretty high.
  And I suppose, for tho
se reasons
, the Tealbook forecast 
seems reasonable to me, but I must say my confidence in the Tealbook forecast that projects that 

PCE growth is going to pick up to 4 percent really, 
to me
, is a leap of faith, and I worry that we 
may not see a pickup that™
s that 
large.
  And as several of you have mentioned, at this point the 
                          
         
             
    
  only real source of strength in the economy is consumer spending.  I
f there are question marks 
associated with
 consumer spending, that puts a lot of question marks on the outlook overal
l. I don™t think the risks from the external sector have diminished.  Maybe they have even 
increased to some degree. 
The s
taff has marked down estimates of export growth in the first 
quarter 
appreciably
.  It may well be that the drag 
generated by
 past dol
lar appreciation and slow 
foreign economic growth could be greater than previously assumed.  I also worry about the 
Greek debt situation
.  If Greece were to put in place controls on capital movements 
or, worse, 
exit the euro, 
I think it
™s hard to know what 
effect
 that would have on the dollar.  I™m not sure 
whether it would cause the dollar to appreciate or depreciate
, and 
I think there are reasonable 
stories either way. 
I certainly am hopeful that information between now and June will help us resolve some 
of these uncertainties. We will see
, certainly
, two more employment reports and a range of 
indicators on spending and production that could tell us whether we™ve been through a soft patch 
or if there
™s a more significant loss in momentum.
  But by June, 
the spending data for the second 
quarter will still be incomplete, and we shouldn™t underestimate the possibility that new data will 
confuse rather than clarify our assessments of the state of the economy. 
As for inflation, I don™t really have anything to add to what
™s been said.  Even though 
core CPI inflation came in a touch higher than expected, overall, the incoming data on wages and 

prices has been roughly in line with expectations.  My own outlook is little changed.  Both core 

and headline PCE 
inflation 
rates 
are running well below 2 percent and are likely to do so for the 
rest of the year, barring some major surprise in oil prices or a fall in the dollar.
  And the April 
Tealbook projects that headline inflation will be under 1 percent this year on a Q4-over-Q4 basis, 
                              and th
at core inflation this year is only going to run at 1¼ 
percent.  Those forecasts seem quite 
reasonable. 
Given this inflation outlook, the likelihood that employment and output will expand at 
only a moderate pace in coming quarters, and uncertainties about the global economy, I 
personally think it™s unlikely that the 
conditions we
™ve set out for a firming of policy will be met 
by June, but I have an open mind.  We™ve agreed to be data dependent, and that assessment could 

certainly change 
as we receive additional data on real activity and inflation in coming weeks. 
So let me stop there
.  We should probably break for dinner.  Tomorrow, 
Thomas will 
give his briefing. We may have to make some changes in the statement when we see what
™s in 
the GDP report, but I think we have enough time tomorrow morning to do that.  We™ll begin 
tomorrow 
at 9:00 a.m. 
[Meeting recessed] 
         
   
                       
            
          
   
    
              
  
   
                                                             
  
 April 29 Session 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  I guess 
we should get started
, and 
I™d like 
to first turn to Bill
 Wascher to give us an update on this morning™s GDP announcements. 
MR. WASCHER.
6  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll be referring to the handout 
titled ﬁMaterial for Gross Domestic Product Update.ﬂ  You 
have a table that 
summarizes some of the key aspects of this morning™s GDP data, and the first thing I 

would say is that it™s nice to be lucky once in a while.  [Laughter] 
As you can see 
from the first line of the table, the BEA™s advance estimate of real GDP 
growth in the 
first quarter was 0.2 percent at an annual rate.  That™s 
one-
tenth of 
1 percentage point 
higher than 
our estimate
 in the Ap
ril Tealbook. 
Among the major spending categories, 
real PCE growth slowed from 4.4 percent 
in the fourth quarter to 1.9 
percent in the first quarter, about as we had expected. 

Business fixed investment, which is labeled here by its official title, 
nonresidential 
private 
fixed 
investment, fell 3.4 percent, and residential investment edged up 
1.3 percent.  Again, both of th
ose were close to our expectations. 
The next three lines show some offsetting misses that turned out not to have much 
effect on the top-line GDP number.  In particular, government spending fell by less 

than we were expecting
, net exports fell by more, and 
there was a greater 
accumulation of inventories than we™d written down.  
In terms of their contributions 

to growth, net exports were estimated to have subtracted 1¼ 
percentage points 
from 
GDP growth in the first quarter, while inventories added 
¾ percentag
e point to 
growth.  I should note that, 
for these two categories in particular
, the BEA does not 
have complete data for the 
first 
quarter
.  In the advance GDP estimate
, inventories 
and net exports are based on two months of data and BEA™s 
assumed values fo
r the 
third monthŠin this case, for 
March. 
Our staff had a chance to look at the monthly assumptions and other details of 
both of these components, and Steve mentioned to me that his colleagues in the 

Division of I
nternational 
Finance 
are inclined to disc
ount some of the negative miss 
in net exports between their forecast and the BEA™s estimate.
  Going the other way, it 
looks as though the BEA wrote down a very high assumption for inventories in 

March, and we might be inclined to discount a little bit of that.  So I don™t know that 

it would have much effect on the top line.  B
ut I 
believe
 our thinking at this point 
would be that net exports aren™t quite as weak as the BEA has estimated, and 
that 
inventories may not be quite as large. 
The bottom of the table shows 
the BEA™s estimate of consumer price inflation. 
Total PCE prices fell 
2 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter, the same as our 
6 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
           
        
     
                
                                                                               
  
 Tealbook estimate, while core PCE prices rose 
nine
-tenths 
of 
1 percent, 
one
-tenth 
more than we were expecting. 
Finally, I
™ll
 just mention that real disposable personal income rose at an annual 
rate of 6.2 percent in the first quarter, while the saving rate came in at 
5.5 percent.  

Both of those figures were also close to our expectations.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Are there questions for Bill?  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. Bill, is the staff embarrassed that you missed this by 50 percent? 
[Laughter]  No, congratulations on this.  This is a good call, and I think it was useful information 
to bring to the Committ
ee.  It™s a tough job, and when you get something right, you should 
definitely take some credit for it. 
MR. WASCHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great.  Then let™s turn to Thomas, who is going to brief us on 
our monetary policy decisions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.7  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™ll be referring to the handout 
labelled ﬁMaterial for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.ﬂ 
At previous meetings and, indeed, yesterday, several of you discussed the 
possibility of market turbulence in the run-up to, or following, the onset of policy 
tightening.  Although the Committee now has communications tools, including the 
SEP, that it did not have at the start of previous tightening cycles, unexpected 

movements in yields and volatility, up or down, may nevertheless occur even if the 

expected policy 
rate 
path does not shift markedly.  The upper-
left panel of your first 
exhibit provides some perspective by showing the staff™s estimate of the 10-
year 
Treasury term premium over the past 25 years.  The vertical bars high
light three 
episodes:  the beginning of the tightening cycles in 1994 and 2004 and the taper 

tantrum in 2013.  Within the shaded 18-month windows around these events, term 

premiums moved substantially.  But they also did so at other timesŠ
and likely in 

res
ponse to factors other than monetary policy. 
The upper-
right panel isolates the episodes associated with the three shaded 
regions and, for reference, the current episode conditional on the staff™s assumption of 

liftoff at the September meeting.  As shown by the red line, in 1994, the term 

premium rose substantially in the months following the onset of tightening.  By 

contrast, in 2004, in blue, it moved up several months before the federal funds rate in 

response to stronger economic data that moved up the expected timing of policy 
7 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
                       
     
  
       
           
   
    
  
             
 tightening.  But the term premium then began to decline and continued to do so over 

the remainder of 2004Š
the well
-known ﬁconundrumﬂ episode.  Finally, in 2013, the 
term premium began to rise around the time of Chairman Bernanke™s JEC testimony 

in late May, apparently reflecting market participants™ reassessment of the outlook for 

asset purchases and possibly policy rates.  As shown in the middle-
left panel, these 
term premium movements may, to some extent, have reflected uncertainty about the 

future course of monetary policy.  The panel shows the width of the 90 percent 

confidence interval for the federal funds rate 12 months ahead, derived from options 

on federal funds futures. The term premiums are highly correlated with this pro
xy for 
policy uncertainty in the 1994 and 2004 episodes, but less so in 2013, presumably 

because uncertainty in that episode was driven less by the path of the federal funds 

rate over the next 12 months than by the course of asset purchases and longer
-term 
rates. 
These experiences suggest that, even in a context in which the FOMC™s policy 
communications tools are more extensive than in the 1994 and 2004 cycles, it may be 

prudent for the Committee to consider its likely response to unexpected changes in 

term
 premiums that might occur around the time when it begins policy firming.  A 
special exhibit in the ﬁMonetary Policy Strategiesﬂ section of the Tealbook, Book B, 

provides some background that might be useful.  As shown by the dotted black line in 

the middle-right panel, the staff projects that the 10-
year term premium will rise at a 
modest pace after the Committee is assumed to start raising the federal funds rate. 

This slow projected rise in the term premium reflects in part the waning effects on 

longer-t
erm yields of the Committee™s asset holdings.  The magenta line presents the 
path for the term premium in a scenario, labeled ﬁTightening Tantrum,ﬂ that is similar 

in magnitude to, albeit less persistent than, the rise in the term premium that began in 
May 2013 (the green line).  As shown in the lower-
left panel, in the ﬁtantrumﬂ case, 
optimal control would call for a more gradual increase in the federal funds rate for 
several quarters, with the federal funds rate running, on average, 35 basis points 

below 
the optimal control path associated with the Tealbook baseline (the black line) 
over the four years following the shock. 
Recent public discourse has largely focused on the specter of another market 
tantrum.  However, a repeat of the 2004 experience, in whi
ch term premiums 
remained surprisingly low for a while, is also a possibility.  For example, such an 

outcome might occur through the effects of the very large asset purchase programs 

that are under way in Europe and Japan.  The yellow line in the middle-
right panel 
shows a scenario for the path of the term premium that is similar to the 2004 

conundrum episode.  In this instance, optimal control would call for a federal funds 

rate path that is 40 basis points higher, on average, over the next four years. 
The 
lower
-right panel highlights a few caveats. The tantrum scenario abstracts 
from the possibility of widespread liquidity or solvency problems, a point worth 

mentioning in light of recent commentary about reduced liquidity in key markets, 

which Simon discussed in his briefing.  More generally, the scenarios do not examine 

the consequences of term premium movements that are associated with other 

disturbances.  If, for example, the term premium fell because of weaker economic 
           
                   
        
       
         
          
    
  
  activity abroad and associated fl
ight-
to-safety flows, the optimal policy response 
could be to keep the federal funds rate lower, not higher, than in the baseline.  Finally, 

the appropriate policy response to either scenario depends importantly on the 

persistence of the deviation of the t
erm premium from its baseline path, which will be 
known only in retrospect.  In response to such scenarios, policymakers may wish to 

emphasize that they will respond to financial conditions that are judged inconsistent 

with the achievement of the FOMC™s objectives. 
Turning to the draft policy alternatives, thanks to the excellent work of Bill 
Wascher and his colleagues, I can discuss the alternatives as distributed yesterday. A 

key issue for your decision today is how to convey the implications of recent and 

incoming economic information for the likely timing of policy normalization.  First, 

as indicated at the top of exhibit 2, assuming that the Committee decides to remove 

time
-based forward guidance from the statement, it will primarily rely on paragraphs 
1 and 2 to speak to its assessment of whether its criteria for liftoff
 have been met or 
when they are likely to be met.  In broad terms, with alternative B, the Committee 

would communicate that the conditions for an increase in the federal funds rate are 

not yet in place, while alternative C would suggest that those conditions will likely be 

in place in the near future.  Alternative A would indicate that the preconditions for 

liftoff are unlikely to be met in the near future. 
The second set of bullets summ
arizes how each of the three alternatives may 
shape expectations for the timing of liftoff.  On the Committee™s criterion that it 

would need to see ﬁfurther improvement in the labor market,ﬂ alternative B states that 

ﬁunderutilization of labor resources wa
s little changedﬂ over the intermeeting period, 
citing the moderation in the pace of job gains and the steady unemployment rate.  

Regarding the second criterion, that the Committee would need to be ﬁreasonably 
confident that inflation will move back to its
 2 percent objective over the medium 
term,ﬂ alternative 
B updates the description of recent data in paragraph 1 and retains, 
in paragraph 2, the expectation that inflation will 
ﬁrise gradually toward 2 percent 
over the medium term.ﬂ  Thus, alternative B does not signal a change in confidence 
about the inflation outlook. 
In addition, the Committee noted in the March minutes that the timing of the first 
increase in the federal funds rate would also depend on the evolution of economic 

conditions and the outloo
k.  In that regard, alternative B provides the judgment that 

the Committee sees the recent weakness in economic activity either 
ﬁin part
ﬂ or ﬁat 
least in partﬂ as transitory and indicates that, despite the first
-quarter slowdown, the 
Committee still expect
s economic growth at a pace that will lead to further 

improvement in labor market conditions.  Under alternative B, the Committee would 

remain fully data dependent and offer no time-based guidance about how soon the 

conditions for liftoff are likely to be 
met. 
By contrast, alternative C would communicate the Committee™s readiness to begin 
policy normalization in the near term.  Paragraph 1 indicates that, despite a steady 

jobless rate, ﬁsome labor market indicators suggest that underutilization of labor 

resources continued to diminish.ﬂ  It expresses a more positive reading of recent news 
               
    
    
    
           
    
    
              
                   
         
on inflation and notes that, although inflation remained below the Committee™s 

objective, ﬁit was no longer declining.ﬂ  In addition, paragraph 
1 of alternative C 

attributes this winter™s economic slowdown largely to transitory factors. Paragraph
 2 suggests not only that the Committee continues to anticipate moderate economic 

growth and further improvement in labor market conditions, but also that it now has 

become more (or perhaps somewhat more) confident that inflation ﬁwill rise 

gradually to 2 percent over the medium term.ﬂ  Having made those assessments of 

recent developments and the outlook, the Committee would adopt new guidance in 

paragraph 3.  Rather than repeating t
he criteria for liftoff adopted in the March 
statement, the Committee would announce that ﬁeconomic conditions mayﬂ or ﬁlikely 

will soon warrant an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate.ﬂ  While 

alternative C reintroduces a time dimension 
to the forward guidance, it also retains 
the more general data
-dependent statement that the timing of the adjustment would 
depend on realized and expected progress toward the Committee™s objectives of 

maximum employment and 2 
percent inflation. 
Finally, with alternative A, the Committee would express heightened concerns 
about the underlying strength of the economic expansion, downside risks to the 

outlook for the labor market, and possible persistence of below-
target inflation. 
In paragraph 1, in 
alternat
ive A, 
as in alternative B, the Committee describes 
underutilization of labor resources as ﬁlittle changed,ﬂ but it stresses that inflation 

ﬁcontinued to run well below the Committee™s longer
-run objective.ﬂ  It does not 

offer any judgment on how much of this winter™s slowdown may have been 

transitory. Additionally
, in 
paragraph 2™s assessment of 
the outlook, 
under 
alternative 
A it would be report
ed that the Committee now sees the risks to economic activity 
and the labor market as ﬁtilted to the downside.ﬂ And the statement would voice 
concern that ﬁinflation could run substantially belowﬂ 2 percent for a protracted 
period, and possibly that ﬁthe pace of improvement in the labor market could remain 

slow.ﬂ 
Given these risks to the outlook, alternative A 
introduces a somewhat more 
stringent precondition for the initiation of policy firming, stating in paragraph 3 that 

the Committee would need to see inflation ﬁclearly moving up towardﬂ the 

Committee™s 2 percent objective rather than being ﬁreasonably confi
dentﬂ that it will 
do so.  In addition, alternative A emphasizes concern about the inflation outlook by 

indicating that ﬁthe Committee is prepared to use all of its tools as necessary to return 

inflation to 2
 percent within one to two years.ﬂ All told, alternative A would 
communicate that liftoff appears unlikely for some time. 
Thank you, Madam Chair.  That concludes my prepared remarks, and I will be 
glad to take any questions. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there questions for Thomas?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHA
RT.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Thomas, I™d like to ask you about your 
thinking as you drafted 
alternative C.  Specifically
, I™m referring to the bracketed choices in 
                  
             
            
             paragraph
s 2 and
 3, and I™m interested in how the staff is thinking about the choice of the 
ﬁhas 
become somewhat more confidentﬂ
 and 
ﬁmay soon warrant an increaseﬂ language
, as opposed to 
the 
ﬁhas become more confidentﬂ 
and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ language. 
These two language options could be seen as a sequence of statements over, say, two 
meetings.  They could convey increasing certainty on the part of the Committee or increasing 

probability of a liftoff decision.  Alternatively, I can imagine choosing between these two 

language options 
at the 
meeting ahead 
of liftoff
, with the choice depending on the probability of 
the 
liftoff decision. 
So I can see a case for both of these interpretations of the alt
-C bracketed 
language as something we might consider in the future, and 
I wonder if the staff had either of 
these ideas in mind or 
if 
it™s just providing an option for this meeting alone. 
MR. LAUBACH. 
We also explored the choice between ﬁmayﬂ and ﬁlikely willﬂ 
in 
previous drafts of a
lternative C and in other materials that
, if I remember correctly
, were sent to 
the Committee ahead of the January meeting.
  In my view, just focusing for now on that, one key 
question is how the Committee wants to strike a balance between, on the one hand, sending some 

advance notice and, on the other hand, emphasizing data dependence.  So I think one key 

question for you at some point will be, how firmly do you want to express that the next meeting 

might be likely for liftoff
, and how do you 
balance that against 
the fact 
that
, of course, over
 any 
intermeeting
 period, yo
u will receive data that may change the 
course of policy?  T
hat™s some 
of 
the thinking that went into the considerations about 
ﬁmay
ﬂ and ﬁ
likely will.
ﬂ As to the ﬁsomewhatﬂ in 
paragraph 2, you
™re right that you can see a pair between
Š ﬁsomewhatﬂ in 
paragraph 2 could perhaps fit better with ﬁmayﬂ in p
aragraph 3 because it still 
emphasizes a little bit more that you™re reserving judgment.  So that™s certainly a possibility. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
          
   
    
     
          
     
      
           
     MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes
Šthank you, Madam C
hair.
  I had a question and a 
comment.  The comment is on page 1 of the handout that you provided, ﬁMarket Expectations 
and Policy Issues.ﬂ  I thought that was a very nice set of experiments, and 
I like the idea of 

having these three possible cases
 and 
lay
ing them out.
  My own thinking is, focus more on the 
tantrum case, but, 
certainly
, it™s useful for us to keep in mind 
the conundrum case as well. 
My comment is about the use of optimal control as a way to evaluate the appropriate 
policy response here.  
Whe
n I think about what was going on in these episodes
, it wa
s really that 
there were uncertainties in markets about what the 
Committee was trying to achieve with policy 
Šand you used 
the same language, I believe
, when I was listening to you. 
But
 optimal con
trol, 
of course, involves the 
assum
ption that 
what we were trying to achieve 
with
 policy 
is all pretty 
much common knowledge. 
For example, 
in the tantrum case, we might want a more aggressive response in order to 
rebuild lost reputation, 
in some sense
, abo
ut what we™re actually trying to achieve. In the 
conundrum case
, the same is true
Šwe might want to be even tighter than what™s built in here, 
because we™re actually trying to convince markets that we are really concerned about inflation 
getting too high.  
But
 in the tantrum case, 
we might 
be even easier than what™s described by 
optimal control, because we have this need to rebuild reputation in 
the eyes of the markets 
about 

the fact that 
we really
 care about getting inflation back up to 2 
percent. 
That™s a comment.  The question I had actually builds, 
I think
, on what Dennis was 
asking about alternative C.  I™ll ask the same question about a
lter
native B.  As you described on 
page 2, which was a great way to summarize 
what™s in the various alternatives, we™re really 

relying on p
aragraphs 1 and 2 to speak to the Committee™s assessment of 
the 
criteria for liftoff.
 I         
  
   
            
       
             
         guess we™re relying on the evolution of the data over time to allow the public to figure out what 
we think 
is relevant. 
Another way to proceed is to actually be more explicit about, 
ﬁOkay, we™ve had some 
incoming dataŠparagraphs 1 and 2.  We just saw GDP now.  H
ow does that affect the li
kelihood 
of liftoff in, say, June?
ﬂ  So we could have provided more explicit guidance about that in the 
statement in 
alternative B.
  And I guess my question is, what were you thinking in not doing 
this? 
MR. LAUBACH. 
I have 
two thoughts, perhaps, on that, and maybe Simon can also 
weigh in on 
at least one of them
.  N
amely
, as Simon showed you yesterday, there was a question 
in the primary 
dealer survey on which factors market participants view as most relevant for the 
achievement of reasonable confidence.
  So there is an indirect route in the sense that what you 
say in the statement will be evaluated even though you may not have a direct statement in there 

about how 
the Committee is no
w more or less confident than before.  Presumably, 
market 
participants will
 look at your characterization of these various factors and draw conclusions from 

that about how your confidence has shifted. 
I™m not quite sure how easy it would be to try 
to come up with a summary statement for 
the degree of confidence because, well, my 
guess is that various participants rank different 
criteria differently, and I think that
™s evident from your comments.  Therefore, I believe 
this is a 
step that™s left to market participants and the public in general to draw conclusions about this. 
MR. POTTER. 
Prior to the GDP release, I think 
the 
dealers put an average 
probability of 
13 percent on liftoff in June.  Let™s assume that™s moved down to 8 
percent 
or something 
right 
now based on the 
GDP release
.  If you felt that that 
8 percent 
was way t
oo low compared 
with 
the likelihood that you might lift off in June, then you might want to try 
to indicate something.  
                                          
    
      Before it was way too high, but it 
seems a little bit 
less likely that you would want to indicate 
something at 8 percent. 
MR. KOCHERLAKO
TA.  That™s helpful.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Are there other comments or questions?  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thomas, I wonder if you could, to help us understand these scenarios, 
refresh the Committee™s memory about the extent to which overnight 
short-
term interest rates 
that we influence directly through the federal funds rate target can affect economic activity in 
the 
FRB
/US model 
independently of the value
s of the 
5-, 7-, and 10-
year interest rates
, which appear 
to figure prominently in th
ese scenario
s. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  Monetary policy transmission 
in the 
FRB/US 
model 
is largely through 
long-
term rates
, so I™m
Šlet me think. 
MR. LACKER.  Entirely? 

MR. LAUBACH
.  Largely
Šwell, to varying degrees.  F
or example, there are some rates 
in there
, like
 the rate on auto loans, that arguably are not quite as long term.  So they are not only 
a 10-year Treasury 
yield
. But it™s true that the funds rate
, in and of itself, doesn™t carry a whole 
lot of weight in monetary policy transmission, but only through its ef
fects on longer
-term yields. 
By implication, 
these shifts in term premiums that we are considering in the scenarios are 

actually quite powerful.  So they do have 
a substantial macroeconomic effect
s. 
MR. LACKER. Well, 
I have two follow-ups.  One is, when I think about this, 
I have 
difficulty reconciling that structure with the impression that a sizable volume of bank lending 

among 
the bankers I talk to seems to be priced off LIBOR and other short
-term interest rates. 
The s
econd thing is, what would this imply for Taylor r
ules? 
Have we been wrong for 
years?  Should we have been including a ter
m premium thing that we accommodate in the Taylor 
           
  
       
   
     
      
  
  
    
  
  
               rules? 
Should we think about policy differently now that we™
ve got this transmission 
mechanism 
whose 
strength varies
 depending on what the term premium does? 
MR. LAUBACH
.  There are two separate aspects to this.  One is, what if monetar
y policy 
transmission also importantly works through term premiums?  That means that term premiums 
systematically vary with the path of short-
term interest rates. 
To some extent, that is actually the 
case in 
the 
FRB
/US model
Šnamely
, that the term premium is an endogenous function of 
expected future output gaps.  So to the extent that choices about the path of the funds rate affect 

the outlook for future output gaps, that has an added effect by moving term premiums 

endogenously 
as well. 
A separate ques
tion is, should a Taylor r
ule also take into account other financial 
conditions more broadly?
 And there, arguably, a Taylor rule that responds only to current 
economic conditions may have a shortcoming because it responds only to current inflation and, 

say, the current output gap, whereas financial conditions that you observe today, like movements 
in the dollar and things like that, clearly affect your outlook in the future.  So that is not an asp
ect 
that is captured by Taylor r
ules that
 just mechanically respond to current conditions.  Of course, 
for example, if you look at optimal control, 
it obviously knows about these things because it™
s run under 
perfect 
foresight.  Therefore, agents anticipate that changes in financial conditions 
today more broadly, including changes in term premiums, will affect the future outlook. 
MR. LACKER. 
Let me follow up further.  When I look at the plot in the upper-
left
-hand 
corner, if I took Taylor rules and incorporate this term premium, d
oesn™t that mean that an 

augmented Taylor r
ule should now predict interest rates 
2 percentage points higher 
for
 1994 than 
would a Taylor r
ule without that augmentation
?                            
         
    
          VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  That™s a
ssuming you have a time-constant equilibrium 
real rate, but the equilibrium real rate could be moving, too. 
MR. LACKER.  Yes, there
™s that.
  There™s the gap.  There™s inflation.  But now we add 
the term premium
, and that™
s poi
nting in the other direction by 2 percentage points. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  If you look just at, say, the lower-frequency movement, it now seems 
as though, 
on a
n almost secular or at least a highly persistent basis, the term premium seems 
about 2 percentage points 
lower than it was back then.
  That is an effect that arguably ought to be 
reflected already in current conditions. 
MR. LACKER.  Current conditions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  If you thought about a sudden drop right nowŠ 

MR. LACKER. 
What about the current Taylor r
ule?
  Shouldn
™t it be in the current 
Taylor r
ule, too
?  We should include 
it. MR. EVANS.  It™s in the current Taylor rule through current conditions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  W
ell, I think the point I
™m trying to make is that this 
is a 
secular 
downshift 
in the term premium from a mean of what looks like around 2 percent in the 1990s to 
about close to 
zero
 now.  But that™
s not a recent development
, that™
s been persistent since
 the 
mid
-2000s.  T
he decline in the term premium
, in and of itself, arguably had, at some point, 
a stimulative effect
.  Assuming that this really occurred in isolation
, as I referred to in my briefing, 
you could seeŠ 
MR. LACKER.  So it
™s affected the current gap and the current inflation rate. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  Exactly. 
MR. LACKER.  But your optimal control says that, even given the current gap and the 
current inflation rate
, there should be some response of the funds rate to the term premium. 
               
  
   
     
                         MR. LAUBACH. Yes
, but those are projected future changes in the term premium, not 
where it is today
.  So my point is, if you had just observed 
in recent history a 
2 percentage point 
decline in the term premium, then if that had happened in isolation, 
that should indeed affect 
your outlook.  Your outlook should be stronger, all else being equalŠagain, wit
h the caveat ﬁall 
else 
being equal.ﬂ  If the 2 percentage point decline occurred in the context of a flight to safety, 

that™s no longer so obvious.  But if that had recently occurred, then, indeed, 
there is a little bit of 

a discrepancy in terms of your standard Taylor rule response only to current conditions.  If these 

current conditions haven™t responded yet to that decline in the term premium, then there is a bit 

of 
a tension since 
you project that 
that decline in the term premium, in itself
, actually is going to 
provide a boost. 
If you think, for example, about the staff projection, 
it is, very importantly, driven by our 
assessment of financial conditions today and over the projection period.  So the Taylor r
ule does 
take account of that over the projection period. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Governor Fischer, do you have a two-hander? 
MR. FISCHER. 
Yes, it™
s a two
-hander.  
What is the correlation between the term 
premium and the difference between the short
-term rate and the long-
term rate?  Is it high? 
MR. 
LAUBACH
.  The correlation between the term premium and the slopeŠ
sadly, I do 
not know this right off the top ofŠ 
MR. 
POTTER
.  It has to be high on a daily basis. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It has to be high. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Yes, i
t would be high. 
MR. POTTER. 
That™s because the short
-term
 rate is not moving that much
, because the 
FOMC
 is not moving 
it, but the 10-year is moving around every day. 
                                      
    
         
         
  
         MR. EVANS.  Yes, arithmetic, I guess. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS. 
My question is related to P
resident Lacker™s topic, but I guess it
™s really more about how we think about movements in the term premium in general.  A
s I understand 
the 
FRB
/US model and 
the way you described it, Thomas, is that these 
movements 
have very powerful effects because they affect all asset prices. 
They 
affect mortgage rates, the 
stock market, and the 
exchange rate. These 
movements are really spilling over throughout 
financial conditions, 
and 
so have a very powerful effect on GDP, employment, and inflation. 
The research on the effects of QE
ŠI™m thinking of the work of 
Vis
sing-Jorgensen 
and 
KrishnamurthyŠa lot of the research has looked at this and 
seems to have called into question 

whether there
™s this full pass
-through of T
reasury term premi
um effects onto private rates, 
such 
as corporate bond rates 
and 
mortgage rates, 
as well as asset prices in general.
  I guess the 
question is, to what extent are you buying into the story that maybe the term premium doesn™t 
affect financial conditions as fully as the FRB
/US model would tell you? 
Or how do we think 
about some of the more recent research in terms of these simulations? 
MR. LAUBACH
.  I think the short answer to that is, what I have here on the handout and 
what is being shown in the 
ﬁMonetary Policy S
trateg
iesﬂ section of Teal
book, Book B, of course, 
buys fully into the FRB
/US view that, to the extent that long rates matter for re
al a
ctivity, 
changes in the term premium are in 
long-
term
 rates.  So no distinction 
is drawn between
 whether 
the movement 
is in the expectations compo
nent or in the 
term
-premium component
. We could certainly 
try 
to look at how the results will change.  Broadly speaking, my 
expectation would be 
that 
the lines 
you see in the lower-
left 
panel 
are based on 100 
percent
Šthat 
                     
     
                 
        is, t
erm premiums are worth 
exactly 
as much as changes in expected future interest rates
.  Then 
you can shave that if you thought that a more reasonable estimate was, say, 50 percent. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you.  The second comment is really to President Lacker.  
This 
is why you have a 
time
-varying 
r*. In my view, this is the argument for thinking about the fact 
that the term premium changes over decades.  Other factors
, such as 
risk premi
ums
, the equity 
premium, 
and the sovereign risk premiumŠlots of things change in the 
economy
, whic
h is 
basically the argument not to have a constant 
r*. Your point is exactly right.  On its own, the term premium going down would argue for a 
higher 
r*. So what™
s really striking is that 
Laubach
-Williams, which just tries to let the data 
decide, has 
r* falling all 
of 
the way to zero, despite the fact that QE and other factors have 
pushed the term premium down.  T
he way I view this is
, there are these factors pushing 
r* up, but the other factors, the headwinds and the other things, are just so much more po
werful that
, on net, they push 
r* down.  Through the lens of 
r*, everything makes sense.  [Laughter]  Thank 
you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Why don™t we begin our round now?  O
ur first speaker is 
President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m looking forward to hearing 
President Williams™
s remarks through the lens of 
r*. [Laughter]  We™
ll see how that goes. 
Madam Chair, I favor alternative A.  My rationale for alternative A is based on the modal 
outlook for prices and employment, the risks to that outlook, and the zero lower bound.  On the 

benchmark outlook in 
the 
Tealbook
, Book
 A, you see 
that inflation does not return to the 
FOMC™s target of 2 percent until 2019, which is four years from now.  We should take steps to 

facilitate a fas
ter return of inflation to target.  These additional steps would also help boost 
           
   
    
                          
  
   
    employment over the medium term.  
Our congressional mandate calls for us to achieve 
maximum employment and stable prices.  If we are able to simultaneously create more jobs an
d impro
ve our performance on the price-stability goal, we should do so. 
That™
s the argument 
just 
based on the modal outlook alone.  It provides a clear 
justification for the policy course described in a
lternative A. 
I think this argument is enhanced 
by consideration of the risks to the outlook.  I agree with the Tealbook, Book AŠthe risks to the 
outlook for prices and employment are to the downside.  The standa
rd risk
-management 
considerations that are often advanced by the Committee suggest that these fut
ure downside risks 
bolster the case for current accommodation. 
When we think about the zero lower bound, as recent Brookings 
conference paper 
by 
President Evans 
and his colleagues 
makes crystal clear, these risk
-management considerations 
are significantly 
enhanced by the presence of the zero lower bound.  The past five years have 
taught us that when we™
re close to the zero lower bound, as we expect to be over the medium 
term, we will not be able to mitigate downside risks as effectively
 as we would like.  A
s President Evans™
s paper points out, this means that we should make policy choices so as to 
strengthen the economy in advance of these shocks hitting.  That, again, argues in favor of the 

kind of stance described in a
lternative 
A. So I see three arguments
 in favor of a
lternative A
Šthe modal outlook, the risks to the 
outlook, and the constraints on policy imposed by the zero lower bound. 
As I
™ve indicated in the past, I believe that it is important for monetary policy decisions 
to take account of the macroe
conomic risks created by potential financial instability.  My own 

reading of the QS report is that the main financial stability risk we face right now is actually 
          
         
      
     
   
                
associated with higher, not lower, interest rates. This will build on some of the work that 
Thomas was showing us earlier this morning. 
In May 2013, we began to tighten policy while we were still apparently several years 
away from achieving our macroeconomic objectives.  Market participants lost confidence in the 

willingness of the FOMC to buffer the economy against adverse shocks, and we saw a rapid 

increase in the term premium. If we raise the target range for the federal 
funds rate when 
headline inflation and core inflation are both running so low, we risk sending the same message 

that we did in 2013, and, accordingly, 
we risk seeing the same rapid run-
up in the term premium. 
Madam Chair, the modal outlook for inflation is too low.  We can best address this 
deficiency and simultaneously create more jobs by making clear, as 
alternative A does, that we 

are willing to use all 
of 
our tools to return inflation to target within one to two years, and that 
such a determined approach
 in 
the pursuit of our mandated objectives is also the best way to 
manage the risks we face, especially
 near the zero lower bound. 
I™d like to conclude by suggesting a topic for a possible research briefing
.  I
t builds on 
President Bullard™s comments yesterday and
, actually
, the conversation we were just having 
among 
President Williams, President Lacker, an
d Thomas.  I think it would be really useful for 
us to understand the work going on in the System on 
r*Šwhat™s determining it and 
what
™s moving it around.  It plays, actually, a pretty critical role, even in the statement itself.  So I 

believe
 exposing the Committee to the research going on in the System on this would be very 

valuable.  
With that, I
™ll conclude.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Today™
s GDP report confirms what we 
alr
eady knewŠ
that GDP growth slowed significantly in the first quarter. It™s too early to 
       
                  
   
  
       
      
     
 determine whether that slowdown will be persistent or whether it will be t
emporary, as last 
year™s first
-quarter slowdown turned out to be.  With no decision on the table, we don™t have to 
make that determination today.  
June™s decision is going to be data dependent, 
and we™ll be receiving important 
information
, including two monthly employment reports, 
to help
 come to a decision about liftoff 
in June.  Thus, I think it™s important not to signal anything today about a June decision.  
I support the spirit of a
lternative B today because
, at this point
, I favor data dependence 
and the meeting-by-meeting nature of the decision of liftoff.  
I believe it is appropriate to 

acknowledge the slowdown in growth and employment in paragraph 2, but then to maintain the 

characterization of the risk
s to the outlook for economic activity and 
the labor market as nearly 
balanced.
  However, in my view, the tone of the first paragraph on inter
meet
ing developments is 
too negative.  I think some of that negativity comes from focusing too much on short-
term 
changes 
in economic indicators instead of providing the Committee™s assessment of changes in 
economic cond
itions that matter for a policy decision. 
I do appreciate some of the changes that 
were made between the first draft of statement language that was circulated and the draft on the 

table today that addressed this issue of tone, but we have to remember that the public doesn™t see 

the evolution of our drafts. 
The 
Tealbook, Book B, 
tells us that the intention of 
alternative B is to avoid any date
-based guidance and ret
ain the option of beginning policy normalization in June if the data and 
outlook justify it.  
My concern is that 
alternative B doesn™t seem to achieve this.  My concern is, 
it™ll be read as our signaling that we™ve taken June off the table when that™s not the case, and it 

would be inconsistent with our data-dependent approach. 
             
  
    
           
                      Since our 
March meet
ing
, market expectations have shifted to a later liftoff and 
a flatter 
policy 
rate 
path.  In normal times, 
such a shift would be reflecting their assessment of the 
incoming data for the economic outlook, and we might want to take some signal from it.  
But 
as we prepare for liftoff, markets are particularly sensitive to our communications.  The shift in the 
expected policy 
rate 
path may not be providing any independent assessment of the economy.  
Instead
, it might be reflecting the market™s view of the Committee™s view. 
As former Chairman Alan Greenspan once said when discussing how difficult policy 
communications are, ﬁPeople hear what they want to hear.ﬂ  In such an environment, 
we must be 

even more careful than usual not to say things that could be misinte
rpreted
, even if they™re 
factually true.
  Of course, anticipating how the market might react to anything 
we do say is a 
difficult task. 
Turning to language specifics, in paragraph 1, I would opt to say ﬁgrowth slowed . . . , in 
part reflecting transitory f
actors,
ﬂ rather than ﬁ
at least in part.
ﬂ  And at this point, I understand 
that the rest of the language is pretty well locked down, but I would like to suggest one change.  

Instead of 
ﬁGrowth in household spending declined,ﬂ 
can we say ﬁH
ousehold spending 
continued to grow
, although at a slower pace
ﬂ? Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  So you said 
that, 
instead of 
ﬁGrowth in household spending 
decline
dﬂŠwhat did you want? Just review what you wanted to say instead. 
MS. MESTER.  Ye
s.  ﬁHousehold spending continued to grow, although at a slower 
pace.
ﬂ CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  
President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I support 
alternative B, including the 
statement and President Mester
™s suggestion concerning ﬁin part.ﬂ 
                 
        
                    
I see t
he decision 
at this meeting on both policy and statement as straightforward.  So I™d 
like to spend a few minutes looking ahead and thinking aloud about statement language 
possibilities in alternative economic scenarios, obviously evidence
d by incoming data, and 

alternative liftoff decision scenarios. 
I expect it will be evident in this round that there is some desire to keep June an active 
option.  In any event, I think having various communication strategies in mind could help the 

Committee achieve as smooth a policy transition as possible and reduce the chances of avoidable 

and unwanted market volatility associated with liftoff.  For my part, I™m not so optimistic that by 

June we will be able to make a clear and plausible case that the economy is on track 
in terms of 
our two decision criteria.  Having repeatedly emphasized the data dependency of our liftoff 

decision, I think it™s important that we not cause impartial observers to scratch their heads about 

the data on which we™re basing a liftoff decision.  I expect 
that the data picture will be 
sufficiently inconclusive by the time of our next meeting to justify waiting a bit longer. 
As my earlier question to Thomas indicated, I™m trying to think through how 
communication might evolve in the coming meetings should we decide not to move in June.  As 

I suggested in framing the question for Thomas, there are a couple of ways the language options 

in this meeting™s 
alternative C might serve as a template. 
The ﬁ
has become 
somewhat more 
confidentﬂ and 
ﬁmay soon war
rant an increaseﬂ language option
, combined with the ﬁhas become 
more confidentﬂ and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ version
, could be viewed as a 
sequence of statements o
ver two meetings in advance of the liftoff decision.  
Alternatively, the 
two v
ersions could be viewed as distinct choices
, with one or the other selected depending on the 
degree of certainty or probability the Committee wishes to convey, presumably in a statement of 

the meeting just ahead of the liftoff meeting. 
         
             
             
          
        Having said all 
of 
that
, my sense of 
opinion in 
the Committee is that there is not a lot of 
appetite for signaling liftoff two meetings in advance, even if couched in very tentative terms.  I 
also doubt there™s much support for a move to language along the lines of a
lternativ
e C unless 
the liftoff decision is highly probable.  So I have difficulty actually envisioning circumstances in 

which we might choose to use the softer ﬁ
has become 
somewhat more confident
ﬂ and 
ﬁmay soon 
warrant an increase
ﬂ version in a
lternative C. 
Where 
this leaves me is the view that the most 
feasible approach to some amount of guidance in advance of a liftoff decision is the ﬁhas become 

more confidentﬂ and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ choice.
  I apologize for walking 
everyone through my tortu
red thought process.  [Laughter] 
It™s certainly possible that we will receive a string of data reports between now and June 
that is strong enough to justify pulling the trigger.  If we were to move in June, 
the advance
-
signal decision will be moot, of cour
se.  In that case
, the question becomes whether the June 
statement ought to address what comes next
Šthat is, provide some more concrete guidance on 
what is the Committee™s expected path of policy over the subsequent meetings. 
As I said at the top of my remarks, 
I just want to air some communications 
considerations.  I think it would be helpful to further discuss the question of whether to provide 

advance guidance and, if so, how to phrase it.  And it™s not too early to start thinking about ways 

to prepare the public for the path of policy 
after 
liftoff. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
alternative
 B.  The data to 
date have 
not 
met the conditions we provided in the Marc
h statement for raising rates.  I am very 
skeptical that these conditions can be met by June.  
With t
wo quarters of weak real GDP growth, 
        
  
             
  
              
  
  
   
  
       
we once again are faced with a forecast of improvement
Šthe data reflect broader
-based 
weakness. 
In addition, interna
tional conditions since the 
March meeting have become more 
worrisome.  The frustration among Greek leaders when talking with European policymakers is 
palpable, while the European policymakers I spoke with seem
ed to have more confidence that 
any problems as
sociated with a Gree
k default could be readily contained. 
I am less confident 
that a smooth resolution will be achieved.  Moreover, I worry that this misplaced confidence 
in the likely 
containment of spillovers arising 
from a possible Greek default may ge
nerate 
conditions that make default even more likely. 
As I discussed yesterday, it is possible our inflation target is too low, given the 
accumulating evidence that we set the target based on research that underestimated both the 

likelihood and severity of being at the zero lower bound.  If we are willing to entertain a higher 

target, then a later liftoff would be further justified.
  In part, this would also indicate a higher 
standard for moving, shifting from reasonable confidence that we are moving toward our 

inflation target to just plain confidence that we are moving toward our inflation target. 
As the 
data to date should not make us even reasonably confident, this distinction will become more 

relevant at future meetings, presumably in the fall. 
In term
s of language, I would take out the ﬁat least,ﬂ and I would keep ﬁin part reflecting 
transitory factors.ﬂ
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
First Vice President Holcomb. 

MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
There
™s no denying that the bulk of data 
on real activity released since our March meeting has disappointed expectations.  However, a 
                              
       
      
    
     review of what has happened and what may be revealed to have happened argues for maintaining 
flexibility with respect to the tim
ing of liftoff. 
Labor market conditions continue to improve, albeit at a slow pace.  We™ve also seen the 
trade
-weighted exchange value of the dollar fall slightly against other major currencies and the 
price of oil move irregularly upward.  So we have some reason to think that the two main forces 

that have driven down headline inflation and which might pose a threat to long-
term inflation 
expectations are abating. 
Measures of core inflation have ticked upward. 
In the University of 
Michigan survey, longer-term inflation expectations edged downward in April™s preliminary 

report but remain within their recent range. 
Between now and the June meeting, the information that we will receive may shed new 
light on jobs, retail sales, consumer sentiment, and the overall health of the manufacturing and 

nonmanufacturing sectors.  We will also have two new reports on trimmed mean PCE inflation 

and household inflation expectations. Several of the current uncertainties hanging over the world 
economy may be at least partia
lly resolved.  It seems to me to be well within the realm of 
possibility that the information we receive between now and June will warrant a policy response. 
I believe it is important, therefore, that a June liftoff remain on the table. 
While
, technically
, there is nothing in the language of a
lternative B that takes June liftoff 
off the table, I do have some concern.  I can readily imagine people in the financial markets and 

business press drawing the conclusion that June action is all but impossible, given the lack of 

foreshadowing in a
lternative B.
  This move in market expectations could prove to be an 
impediment to Committee action.  Therefore, the language in paragraph 3 of a
lternative C with 
the ﬁmay soonﬂ option is attractive, 
as it more clearly indic
ates that June remains a viable option. 
On the other hand, a
lternative B states the Committee™s intention to take timely action once its 
         
            
    
                 
  criteria have been met
.  With the possibility of continued uncertainty on both fronts, 
I support 
alternative B.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, although with a 
language change, which I will get to toward the end of my remarks. 
I first wanted to say that I agree with people that once w
e have removed the forward 
guidance, as we™ve now done, every meeting should be a live meeting in which the possibility of 

a change in the federal funds rate can be on the table.
  Having said that, though, we still have 
different assessments as to how like
ly it is that we think we
™re going to want to raise the federal 
funds rate target range in the next couple of meetings.  I, for one, don™t think it™
s very likely at 
all.  But I do 
believe
 that we should not do anything that formally takes it off the table. 
I wasn™t going to comment on this, but 
President Lockhart
™s 
thoughtful observations did 
provoke me to say a couple of things on how to begin moving forward.  I think I™m coming out 
in a somewhat different place, although only in a tentative way, and would 
like to hear other 
people™s views on this.  I™d be reluctant to put back into paragraph 3 at some point an indication 

that, one or two meetings from now, we are more likely to move.  T
he reason 
is, I think that 
becomes a form of calendar guidance of its o
wn.  J
ust as
, when we put in the quasi-
calendar 
guidance before, saying, ﬁWell, 
this isn™t really calendar
Šit™s all data dependent,ﬂ the markets 
all read it as calendar guidance
, I think the same thing is going to happen now if we put in 

language such as t
hat included in paragraph 3 of a
lternative C. 
My preference would be that we use paragraph 2 as the vehicle for beginning to 
communicate a change in the Committee™s collective view as to where the economy is headed, 

which
, it™s hoped, actually begins to, I would say, 
increase some volatility a little bit as people 
        
           
         
  
      
  
       begin to think 
liftoff
 is more likely but is not a done deal.  T
hat 
way, we don™t have a surprise at 
the meeting in which we eventually lift the target range, but it is not de facto occurring just by 
the inclusion of language in paragraph 3 at a meeting before we™
ve actually decided to lift the 
target range. 
As I said, my current view is that June is very unlikely as an appropriate time to increase 
the target range.  I thought that paragraph 1 as originally circulated a week or two ago actually 

hit about right the factual characterization of the economy.  It™
s fairly
 hard to argue with the 
proposition that the data w
ere 
rather 
disappointing and pretty bad, yet paragraph 1 began with 
something sayin
g that it was 
ﬁin part reflecting transitory factors.ﬂ  M
ost important, 
I think, the 
beginning of paragraph 2 communicates that ﬁAlthough growth in output and employment 

slowed during the first quarter, the Committee continues to expect
–ﬂ In other words, 
the basic 

direction of the 
Committee™s expectations ha
sn™t changed, notwithstanding the disappointing 
developments reported in paragraph 1. 
Notwithstanding the fact that I thought the original paragraph 1 got it about right, I
™m okay with most of the chang
es that have been made since the original language was circulated, 

although I wouldn™t want to see us going too much further to try to look for the cheery in a way 

that would obscure what™
s actually happened.
  The one exception, Madam Chair, is the 
sentence 
on inflation, which is the second-
to-last sentence in paragraph 1.  Back in March, that sentence 
said ﬁInflation has declined further below the Committee™s longer-run objective, largely 

reflecting declines in energy prices.ﬂ So the phrase 
ﬁlargel
y reflecting declines in energy pricesﬂ 
was, in effect, explaining how the decline had gone further below.  It was an explanation of the 

delta. 
                                
       
  
       
 I think the language that was circulated 
originally to the Committee a week or two ago is 
now in a
lternative A
, and the language is as follows: 
ﬁInflation continued to run well below the 
Committee™s longer
-run objective, largely reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and 
decreasing prices of non
-energy imports.ﬂ  There, the way I read it when that language wa
s circulated was that now this 
phrase 
ﬁlargely reflectingﬂ in effect explains the ﬁwellﬂ part
Šwhy 
it is ﬁwellﬂ below.  But as it
™s been modified, the sentence now reads ﬁInflation continued to run 
below the Committee™s longer-run objective, largely reflect
ing earlier declines in energy prices 
and decreasing prices of non-
energy imports.ﬂ 
I don™t think it
™s the case that all of the difference between the Committee™s target and 
where we are right now is explained based on the earlier declines in energy prices 
and decreasing 
prices of non-energy imports.  On the contrary, as many people pointed out yesterday and a little 
bit today already, we haven™t been hitting the inflation target for quite some time now.  And if 

you pull out housing inflationŠ
which
, of cour
se, is largely a function of rents imputed to 
homeownersŠthen you have an awful lot of continuing questions 
about how much inflation 
there is. 
As a factual matter, I think we should modify that sentence to say something like the 
following: 
ﬁInflation cont
inued to run below the Committee™s longer-
run objective, partly 
reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non
-energy importsﬂŠ
or something just making clear that that second phrase does not account for all of the difference 

betw
een the Committee™s target and where we are right now. 
Finally, like those who have gone before me, I would prefer removing ﬁat leastﬂ in the 
first sentence.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 
                   
                             MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Our March statement provided forward 
guidance only as far ahead as this meeting, and it effectively said we were going to go to a 
meeting
-by-
meeting
, data-dependent approach to decisionmaking.  From now on, that™
s the right 
thing to do, and I think 
tha
t™
s imp
ortant.
  This means we will not be in the business of 
telegraphing interest rate moves in the previous meeting™s
 statement.  I support the observations 
President Lockhart made on this.  A
n important corollary 
of that is that we should not be 
encouraging pe
ople to believe we won™t raise rates without having sent a telegraph on the issue 
in the previous meeting™s 
statement. 
Concerning 
alternative 
C as a stalking
-horse for future statements, I don™t feel the need to 
include language like that in paragraphs 2 or 3 
at a meeting prior to liftoff
.  So I agree with 
Governor TarulloŠevery meeting should be live, and we should, to the extent that we have the 

opportunity, condition people to expect that we could move without forewarning, perhaps.  
A critical aspect is today™s characterization of the economy
, especial
ly in the first 
paragraph.  As I said in the earlier round, a substantial amount of data is scheduled to arrive 

between now and our June meeting.  If those reports are reasonably close to what the Tealbook is 

forecasting, they
™re going to show a rebound in consumer spending growth, and they™re going to 

show a firming in the monthly inflation figures. 
In that case, there could well be a strong argument for raising rates in June.  Now, we 
don™t know for sure the data will come in that way, and we don™t know for sure there won™t be 

some looming concerns on the horizon that alter the outlook. We could find we™ve hit a more 

prolonged soft patch.  I
n that case
, we may be inclined to delay raising rates when we get to 
June, and I™m open to that possibility.  But, in view of the information we™
re going to get, I think 
it™s very important not to take June off the table. 
        
  
                 
   
         
          As I said, the critical aspect is how the statement characterizes the data, and that focuses 
attention on the first paragraph.  T
he revisions that were made between 
the 
beginning of last 
week and the end of last week in the first paragraph were good, important, and 
necessary
.  But I 
agree with President Mester that the first paragraph still has somewhat of a ﬁglass half
-empty
ﬂ tone, emphasizing the empty half of the glass I guess you™d say.  I support her suggestion for 
changing the characterization of household spending.  I 
also 
support Governor Tarullo™s change 
of ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpartl
y.ﬂ I think he™
s right on there. 
But I 
believe 
that the inflation sentence in 
alternative 
C is more balanced and fair
, as it acknowledges that inflation is no longer declining.  
It calls that out. 
Central bank communication i
s all about what you choose to call out, and I 
think it would be fair to call out that inflation isn™t declining
.  S
o I™d put that suggestion on the 
table. 
Regarding 
the phrase ﬁat least,ﬂ 
I™ve 
been wrestling with that in my mind.  Certainly, in 
a broad-brush kind of way, you can see how including it might make things a little more dour than 
they ought to be, as President Mester argued.  But, on the other hand, ﬁat least in partﬂ means 
that the amount that™
s attributable to transitory factors is 
ﬁin part
ﬂ or ﬁgreater than in part.ﬂ  F
rom 
that point of view, 
ﬁat least in partﬂ seems to me like a more upbeat assessment than just ﬁin part 

reflecting.ﬂ But I could be persuaded either way on that.  Those are my comments on language, 

Madam Chair.  Thank you very much. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank y
ou.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m going to make three comments here.  
First of all, I support President Kocherlakota™s call for a symposium on 
r*.  We could probably 
benefit from getting a lot of views on the table about th
is important parameter in our models
Š         
  
    
                 
    
        
  
  
   how we
™re thinking about it and how that thinking shapes policy choices.  So that would be an 
excellent thing to do, if we could fit that in at some point. 
That leaves me with two comments.  One is about building credib
ility for data
-dependent 
policy, and the other is about shading policy to prevent asset price bubbles.  On the credibility 
question, as we all discussed yesterday, recent data ha
ve been relatively weak.
  We have been 
trying to build credibility 
regarding 
a data-dependent policy 
being the basis for rate decisions 
as we go forward.  
I guess my assessment so far is that we have indeed built some credibility, even 
considerable credibility, 
regarding 
a data
-dependent policy rate for the period ahead
, despite the 
fact that we haven™t moved the policy rate for six and a half years.  And that™
s an achievement. 
Markets
Šappropriately
, in my viewŠmoved the likely date of liftoff back in response to 
weaker
-than-expected readings on the U.S. economy during the intermeeting period.  That™
s exactly what you™d expect to observe if policy is data dependent.  If we can maintain this type of 

credibility as the 
data wax and wane during 2015, we™
ll be in excellent shape at the time of 
policy liftoff, whenever that should arrive, in the sense that there will be few surprises in the 

markets at that juncture. 
The more we can do to convince people that we™re going to 
react to the data
 and be clear 
about what data we™re going to react to, the better off we™
ll be
.  I™m hopeful that the day of the 
first move will be an anticlimactic event because we have credibility that that
™s what we 
were 
going to do.  T
hen we make the 
move, and it™s pretty smooth.  I think we™
re well on the way to 
that, but we probably have more work to do during the spring. 
Let me turn to the second comment on the shading 
of 
policy.  The staff™s forecast is that 
there will be a smooth glide to the steady state.  This forecast envisions unemployment only a 

few ticks lower at the end of the forecast horizon in 2017 than it is today.  This is not my 
        
                   
          
    
     
    baseline forecast. 
I envision unemployment falling well into the 4 percent range over the 
forecast horizon,
 barring any large negative shock to the U.S. economy.  This is what happened 
in the 1990s and in the 2000s, and I think it™
s a good baseline forecast of what
™s going to happen 
again this time. 
Simultaneously, the labor market conditions index, which takes 
into account all aspects 
of labor market performance, will continue to rise far above its average value
.  So we
™ll be 
talking about, 
in the years ahead
, a very robust labor market performance when compared 
with 
metrics on past labor market performance in 
the U
nited S
tates
.  This is going to constitute a 
boom phase for the U.S. economy, notwithstanding this morning™s GDP report, which I think is 
going to prove to be temporary. 
The boom will be associated with about 3 percent growth, at least for a time, in the U.S. 
economy.  That 3 percent growth, while not stellar, is still about 1 percent higher than the 

potential growth rate for the U.S. economy.  T
his is very similar to the 1990s
, when we had years 
in which 
we were at 4
 percent in an economy that had a 3 
percent potential growth rate. We
™ll be growing at 3 
percent for a time in an economy that has a 2 
percent potential growth rate. 
Inflation will rise
, go through the inflation target, and be higher than 2 percent over parts of the 
forecast horizon. 
Duri
ng this period, interest rates will remain exceptionally low by historical standards. 
We™ve already committed ourselves to that by saying 
that
, even 
when 
we start to normalize, it 
would be very small and very gradual.  You could throw in that my view is t
hat this policy rate, 
as we
™re envisioning it over the next couple of years, 
will be below the likely natural rate of 

interest, the 
r* value.  I
n this sense
, we™re going to provide accommodation as currently 
                         
        
        
      envisioned all 
of 
the way through this boom phase for the U.S. economy.  This is how I™
m thinking about it. 
Now, the boom period, combined with exceptionally low policy rate settings, is a recipe 
for asset price bubbles.  Asset price bubbles have plagued the U.S. economy during the 1990s 
and 2000s and have been a major point of debate at this Committee over the p
ast 20 years. 

These bubbles are not in our models.  They were not in the past 20 years, they™
re not in our 
models today, and we don™t see any component of this in our standard presentations on w
hat we 
should do about monetary policy.  So we do not have a good understanding of where these 

bubbles come from or how to control them when they occur.  Furthermore, bursting asset price 

bubbles can have devastating consequences for the U
nited S
tates
 and the global economy.  It™
s no small matter if this thing gets going and develops. 
The basic strategy, in my view, should be to head off this kind of possibility.  We™ve had 
boom-and-bust cycles during the 1990s and the 2000s.  What you™d like to do this time around is 
not to 
have that boom
-and-bust cycle
.  Then you™ll get a longer expansion, and you
™ll 
get better 
outcomes for everybody. 
It™s true that we have an improved macroprudential stance today, and that 
will help 
mitigate some of the more severe consequences of a bursting bubble.  But untested 
macroprudential tools alone are, in my view, insufficient to rely on, given the exceptionally dire 

consequences of bursting asset bubbles not just for the U.S. economy, but 
also 
for the global 
economy. 
The prudent policy, in my view, is to combine our efforts on macroprudential policy with 
a sensible monetary policy that hedges our bets in the direction of prevention of the kind of asset 

price boom-and-bust cycles 
that we
™ve
 experienced during the 1990s and 2000s.  I think we 
      
   
                    
       
    
     
  
  
      should be shading in the direction of slightly higher interest rates than we would otherwise have, 
on the grounds that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure on this dimension.  We do
n™t 

have very good knowledge of what these bubbles are or how they form, so we should be hedging 

our bets on this.  This is an important reason to get going on a modest normalization program 

when the opportunity ar
riv
es, which I expect it will later this y
ear. 
Let me turn just to alternative
 B for a minute.  I support 
alternative
 B, 
as written, for 
today, without the ﬁat leastﬂ phrase 
in the first paragraph.  T
he ﬁin partﬂ covers the bases there, 
and I don™t think we need to add anything more to that. 
I do 
agree with President Mester™s suggested change. 
The wording ﬁG
rowth in 
household spending declined; household
s™ real incomes rose stronglyﬂ is a little bit jarring, and I 
like President Mester™s suggestion there that would smooth that out a little bit. 
I agree with Governor Tarullo and President Lacker that we should not try to reintroduce 
calendar
-dependent language as liftoff nears.  We™re trying to get away from that, so we should 
not try to do that.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  P
resident Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  President Kocherlakota made a good case for 
alternative 
A, and I™m sympathetic to his view, but I can support a
lternative B.  I continue to 
believe that economic conditions will most likely be consistent 
with an appropriate time for 
liftoff being sometime in 2016.  I currently think, based on data, that it will take until then for me 

to be reasonably confident that we™re on course to achieve our inflation objective within an 

acceptable time 
frame. 
The information we™
ve received since our 
March 
meeting has not changed my opinion on 
this.  Indeed, I™
m a little nervous over the latest data on activity and their implications for further 
                    
                            
             slower reductions 
in resource slack. The recent stabilization of energy p
rices and 
the 
dollar are 
positives.  But, 
as I discussed yesterday, I need to see a good deal more broad
-based, concrete 
evidence before being confident that underlying inflation trends actually are heading up with 
adequate momentum.  But, having said that
, we
™ll see how the data evolve. 
Let me make a couple of comments about other things people have mentioned.  I agree 
completely that we have moved to the point 
at which 
it™s a meeting
-by-meeting decision.  
They
™re all live decisions on the rate increase, 
so data conditionality, by itself, is all we need.  I 
don™t think we need special language, 
either
, to signal our intent. 
I agree completely with Governor Tarullo on the paragraph 1 language on inflation.  I had 
noted that myself.  T
he problem is that the 
previous iteration had talked about the gradientŠ 
inflation declining
Šand now it
™s a level concept
Šﬁcontinued to runﬂŠ
but it leaves the same 
factors in place. 
So if you add, as I think you said, ﬁ
part
ly reflecting earlier declines,
ﬂ that would 
take care of 
that.
  Alternatively, if you leave the language, you could also add ﬁand resource 
slackﬂ as part of the explanation, but the more minimal ﬁpart
lyﬂ would probably be better there. 
I™m indifferent on the language about 
household spending
 growth that Preside
nt Mester 
indicated.  I™
m a little worried that it
™s going to sound like 
the message you communicate 
when 
you go out and say, ﬁI support so-and-so 1,000 percent.ﬂ  When you say, ﬁHousehold spending 

continued to grow,ﬂ the alternative to that is a recession.  If household spending doesn™t grow, 

it™s a recession, so I
™m not quite sureŠbut, 
at any rate, that
™s fine. 
On ﬁ
consumer sentiment remains high
,ﬂ these are factually correct observations, 
but
 I™
m a little worried that it might be risky.  After all, we
™re thinking that the energy price declines are 
transitory.  Gas prices are going to go up, and we know that sentiment goes down when gasoline 

prices go up.  
So we might be providing a different bright line for people looking for a bright 
            
  
    
      
                 
     
  
  
    sign here.  Then, if you see that one go down, 
it might have a little more of an implication than 
we intend
.  B
ut otherwise, I don™t have a problem with that.  I support a
lternative B. 
Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B and the latitude it 
offers the Committee to consider a change in policy at its next meeting. 
In terms of guidance that we can glean from policy rules, the benchmarks in the 
Tealbook, Book B, continue to generally suggest 
that 
the funds rate should be higher than its 
current setting. Granted, the equilibrium real rate, or 
r*, we
™ve been discussing remains 
depressed and raises 
questions as to whether these benchmarks are providing appropriate 

guid
ance today. 
At the same time, common frameworks used to estimate 
r* also provide an estimate of 
potential GDP in which 
declines in 
r* go hand in hand with lower potential.  
For example, the 
current Laubach
-Williams framework indicates that 
the equilibrium real rate is negative, though 
it also implies that output is actually above potential.  So
, while policy should incorporate a 
lower equilibrium real rate into the appropriate setting of the funds rate, it also should not neglect 

the implications for potential GDP and the output gap.  For example, using the lower 
r* measure 
and positive output gap in the Taylor (1999) rule with inertia suggests a higher current funds 

rate.  The Taylor (1993) r
ule indicates a setting above 1 percent, even with the lower equil
ibrium 
real rate.
  I don™t take the positive output gap to completely reflect current conditions by any 
means, since some labor market slack remains.  However, this example illustrates 
that 
taking on 
board a lower equilibrium real rate may also imply a sma
ller output gap. 
      
              
          
              Finally, although this is not a decision for today, I note increasing uncertainty about the 
timing and effects of ceasing reinvestments.  I
™m a bit concerned in looking at the market 
participant surveys and noting that expectations on the 
timing of when reinvestments will be 
ended are quite diffuse. For example, a slight majority of dealers expect 
Treasury reinvestments 
to end in the first quarter of 2016, but then expectations are spread over the next four quarters 
into 2017.  This is somewhat concerning, especially given the risk highlighted in the QS report 

and recent IMF financial stability reports that longer
-term rates could increase sharply 
approaching liftoff.  Or the Committee could be facing another conundrum in which longer-
term 
rates 
remain low.
  I think we should try to manage some of this risk by providing more guidance 
on the timing of reinvestment, perhaps incorporating 
it into the SEP or perhaps just 
distributing it 
on an internal basis for our own use, to think about 
expectations on when we anticipate ceasing 
reinvestments.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Prichard. 
MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I view the evolution of the draft 
alternative 
B to finally contain entirely data-dependent language.  This is a very positive 
development and, 
I believe
, an essential step on the path to policy normalization.  I also interpret 
the language in alternative B as leaving our options open for beginning normalization at any 
future meeting 
as we are
 informed by incoming data. 
My biggest concern with a
lternative B is its overly weak interpretation of the current 
economic environment.  As I mentioned yesterday, expenditure-side data for Q1 over the past 

30 years appears to be suffering from poor and pe
rhaps incorrect seasonal adjustment.  An 
ind
icator that incorporates income
-side data, GDPplus, which was posted to 
the website of 
our Real-T
ime 
Data Research 
Center this morning, indicates that the first quarter may not be nearly 
             
              
     
    
          
   as weak as many of the 
nowcasts
 being reported.  GDPplus grew at 1.65 percent in the first 
quarter after growing 3.3 percent 
on a year
-over-
year 
basis
 in 2014:
Q4. 
Further, 
I suggest that the Committee consider
, now or in the future, 
simplifying its 
assessment of the labor market. 
Many labor market indicators paint a relatively healthy picture 
of the labor market.  F
or that reason
, I would favor deleting the third full sentence in 
paragraph
 1Šagain, either now or in the futureŠand simplifying it.  T
hat sentence begins with 
ﬁA range of labor market indicators–
ﬂ  This sentence is fairly imprecise, and it adds little to the 

meaning that is already embodied in the preceding sentence.  The idea would be to seek every 

opportunity to boil the FOMC statement down to its essence by eliminating sentences that don™t 

add particularly to meaning or understanding. 
I am otherwise supportive of the suggestion to eliminate ﬁat leastﬂ and 
of the other 
suggestions that have been made.
  Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Presid
ent Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B.
  Let me respond to 
some of the language suggestions first.  Like others, I would not include the phrase ﬁat leastﬂ in 

the opening paragraph.  That™s not needed.  It™s even unclear. 
On Governor Tarullo™s suggestion, I think he™s absolutely right.  I would put ﬁpartly 
reflecting earlier declines in energy pricesﬂ in the penultimate sentence in 
paragraph 1. 
That™s 
exactly right.  In the recent data, core is running about 1 per
cent.  O
verall 
inflation
 is running 
at around zero over the past couple of quarters, but 
it was 
obviously negative in 
the first quarter
.  There are a lot of factors going onŠPresident Lacker made this point, too.  T
hat™s just accurate 
and, 
I think
, better.
  Paragraph 2 is really 
the place in which we do the heavy lifting and explain 
how we interpret things. Paragraph 1 is really about the data. 
         
                              
  
    
   
     
   I™ll 
make a comment about data dependence in 
paragraph 1.  T
his is part of life. We™re in 
the data-dependent mode.  Paragraph 1 is going to describe the data.  We had only a month, 
really
, of data here.  This is a very small sample, but these are the data we have, and I think we 
have to just describe them accurately. 
The part of the statement 
in which we try to expl
ain how we interpret 
them 
is 
paragraph 
2. In that respect, 
I thought 
paragraph 2 did a nice job of making the point that, yes, the data 
have been weaker.  Yes, we™ve had th
ese 
factors in terms of inflation
.  But, basically
, our outlook 
hasn™t changed much.  I™m not concerned so much about the weakness or the signaling in 

paragraph 
1 as currently stated
, because I think that™s the way the data have been.  It™s just a 
small sample, and
, of course, we™ll get a lot more data bef
ore our next meeting.  So I™m fine with 
that. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo and others who™ve commented on where the future 
statements should go, obviously President Lockhart started us down that road.  I strongly agree 
with Governor Tarullo and, 
I think
, P
resident Evans 
as well as
 some others that we shouldn™t be 
going back to trying to put some quasi-
date
-based guidance in there.  That whole thing of how 
we have to take a couple 
of 
steps before we act is a kind of straightjacket we don™t want to get 
ourselves in. We™re in a good place now on our statements, and I wouldn™t want to see us move 
back to that. 
Now, my own view in terms of the outlook hasn™t really changed based on the data we™ve 
seen in the 
past month, 
which is similar to what 
others have mentioned.  
First
-quarter 
data seem 
to be distorted by some seasonal factors and other factors.  We™ve been down this road before.  

In terms of the inflation data, I haven™t changed my view there, 
either. I still have 
the 
view that 
inflation 
will come back over the next couple of years to our target. 
                    
                               
  But this is 
all 
forecast
, and we™re now in the data-dependent mode.  When I™m asked 
when I think we™ll be raising rate
s, I say,
 ﬁI might have a view on this, but I don™t know.ﬂ 
I try to avoid tal
king about June, September, December, or whichever year because it really depends 
on how the data 
come in
, how they influence our outlook, and what the right policy is. 
That™s a hard message for us to get across
, because we™ve been focused on June versus 
September versus December or whatever.  So I™ve been thinking a little bit outside the box here 
about how we can, beyond this statement, get to a more data-dependent approach.  
Madam 
Chair, I have a suggestion for you.  I made you a special T-
shirt 
[Laughte
r].  The message reads 
ﬁMonetary P
olicy Is
 Data 
Dependent.ﬂ 
CHAIR YELLEN.  How about one for everybody? 

MR. WILLIAMS.  I have a whole box of them.  You wear this around, and then I think 
that™
ll make the point pretty clear
.  We won™t have to worry so much aboutŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Fantastic. 
Love it. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you. 

MR. 
TARULLO. 
Have the softball team wear th
ose. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Another great idea.  Oh, I have one 
last comment I want to make
Š sorry
.  [Laughter] 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You can™t top that, 
John. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  No, I know.  Actually, 
President Kocherlakota
, I can
Šin this way.  I 
would like to second the comments of 
President Kocherlakota
 and 
President Bullard about 
having more of a discussion 
regarding 
the natural rate of interest, 
with 
r* e
stimates
 obviously 
being at the center of this.  I get a lot of feedback, pro and con, about this, and there is some 
                    
              
      
  
           literature developing on 
this besides just the Laubach
-Williams 
model.  So I really do think that 
having a further discussion about 
that wo
uld be helpful. 
The basic logic of Laubach
-Williams is actually pretty simple.  Over the 
past five years
, output growth 
has been averaging 2.3 percent
ŠI™m picking up on President Kocherlakota™s 
point yesterday about 
how L
aubach
-W
illiams
 works.  The 
trend
 growth in our model is 2.0 
percent
.  I think that™s consistent with most people™s views. So we™re getting growth of 
0.3 percentage point above trend over five years, while the real federal funds rate has been about 
minus 1.7.  The only way you can interp
ret this statistically is 
to think 
that the real rate gap
Š basically
, the 
amount of monetary stimulusŠis very modest over the p
ast five years, and this 
hasn™t changed in our model. 
What 
Laubach
-Williams is telling you is simple.  We™ve had negative real rat
es for five 
straight years.  Output growth has been just a smidgen above potential.  Therefore, 
there™s really 

not much monetary stimulus relative to the neutral rate going on.  This is something we should 
discuss further, but, 
basically
, that™s how the mo
del interprets the data.  If the equilibrium real 
rate really were 
2, growth would have been a lot faster than 2.3.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I had read about the T-
shirt in the 
media, and I™m glad to see the real thing in front of us. 
But the 
more 
serious thing 
is, President Williams summarized a number of people™s 
comments that we want to get away from being date 
dependent.  One challenge 
with regard to 
that is the way the 
Summary of 
Econom
ic 
Projections presents our policy outlooks.  That™s very 
date dependent.  In fact, that™s what I™m often asked about
:  ﬁBoy, it looks as though everyone™s 
saying 2015. What do you think about that?ﬂ  So it™s something to be thought about
.  I
f we™re 
        
         
    
                       really trying to get away from date dependence, I think that says something about how we want 
to be talking about interest rates in the 
Summary of 
Economic P
rojections as well. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  That™s a good suggestion.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FIS
CHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d like to first discuss briefly the inflation 
target issue that arose yesterday
, and then turn to the monetary policy decision and explain why I 
support 
alternative 
B. Yesterday President Rosengren
, supported by President Kocherlakota and one or two 
others, 
suggested raising the target inflation rate, a suggestion that™s also be
en made by 
Olivier 
Blanchard.  I believe 
that 
we should constantly be reexamining all 
of 
our assumptions about 
monetary policy and the behavior of the economy, but that, 
particularly in the case of targets, we 

need to be very careful about our public stance. 
With regard to our public stance, we fixed a target inflation rate in 2011 and announced a 
2 percent target in 2012.  The setting of a 
target inf
lation rate was a major achievement and
, to 
those outside the S
ystem
, a major surprise
.  We need to be very careful indeed about reopening 
that decision and that discussion. 
The argument for raising the target inflation rate is that the higher target would permit 
normal monetary policy to attain a more negative real rate of interest than is now possible.  That 

is true, but there™s not so far been public discussion of the negative aspects of a higher inflation 

target. 
The main cost, I believe, relates to Al
an Greenspan™s definition of the desired inflation 
rate as a rate such that inflation is not taken into account in routine economic decisions.
  In 
particular, at around 4 
percent inflation
, we very likely would see the return of indexation into 

relatively 
short
-term contracts, including labor contracts.  Monetary policy becomes much more 
difficult in heavily indexed economies, in part because the inflation rate typically becomes more 
                  
        
    
  
      
               
  variable the higher the indexation rate and 
because 
the probability that t
he dynamics of inflation 
become unstable increases. 
A second cost relates to the credibility of the inflation target and of the F
OMC
.  It is possible that we should, at some future point, 
raise the inflation target
.  But if we 
go out now and 
start a public discussion about the inflation target, we will undoubtedly be asked why we™re 
raising the target and what the effects of doing so are likely to be.  
There are answers to these 

questions, but the answers may well reduce our credibility precisely at a time when reasonable 

people regard us as the most credible and most professional of the macro policymaking 

institutions in the United States. 
WeŠthat is, the participants in this meeting
Šshould not take that risk.  We should not 
go public with any doubts that we might have about the goals of monetary policy.  At the 

moment
, we™re in the middle of the process of trying to normalize monetary policy.  We should 
always be reconsidering our policy framework, but there are times to go public and times not to 
do so.  That is why our discussions of the target inflation rate should continue within the Federal 
Reserve System and within the Committee, and that is why it is fine that Eric raised the issue in 

yesterday™s go
-round, but we should not go public with that discussion. 
Turning now to the monetary policy decision, yesterday™s discussion, 
in which almost 
every participant said, 
rightly
, that 
the key issue is whether first
-quarter weakness i
s transitory or 
a signal of a longer-term weakening of growth, and this morning™s announcement 
of the first 
estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth make it clear that we should wait before making a decision 
to change the interest rate. I say that while bearing in mind an almost true maxim I once heard:  

ﬁThe situation is never clearer in the future.  It™s just unclear in a different way.
ﬂ  [Laughter] 
         
      
       
       
        
           
    I support 
alternative
 B, in which the first three paragraphs do a good job of showing that 
we are watching the data carefully
, and that the probability of a June liftoff has declined, but that 
June remains on the table. As weak as the incoming data have been and as threatening as 
the 
many black clouds that are out there 
are, it remains important to keep June as a possible liftoff 
date.  How could it be possible?  Well, we™ll receive two more employment reports before the 

June meeting.  If we see very high payroll gains in April and May and if the unemployment rate 

comes down to, say, 5.3 percent while the spending data firm as expected, it would be reasonable 

to argue 
for liftoff. 
Some might suggest that we should wait just a little longer to be sure
, since September 
isn™t really that different from June
, to perfect our communications about liftoff or to reexamine 
the tools we intend to use to raise the interest rate.
  That would mean that even in the face of very 
good data, the June versus September decision would be a close call.  But in making that call, 
we 
need also to take into account the importance of our credibility, which would require us to act 
when the conditions for acting that we have set out are fulfilled. 
Turning to the bigger picture, my views on when to lift off were influenced by the very 
helpful paper that was sent to this Committee in January by 
Oliver d
e Gr
oot, 
Etienne 
Gagnon, and Robert 
Tetlow
, whose results I quoted in the March FOMC meeting.  In that paper, they 
compared the probabilities that policymakers might regret their decisions under early and late 
liftoff scenarios.
  Using random draws from historical shocks, they show that the probability that 
we would fall behind the curve and wish that we had tightened sooner was negligible if we go on 

the early side but 
was close to 
10 percent if we wait a year longer
.  In contrast
, the difference 
between the probabilities that we would need to retrace our steps if we go earlier, 10 
percent, 

rather than later, 
5 percent, w
as not as great. 
        
        
              
           
       
Now, it™s a very good paper, but it™s not obvious where we are today relative to going 
early or
 going late.  Nonetheless, all in all, I found that analysis very useful, and it helped 
persuade me that we should seriously be contemplating lifting off soon.  It further helped 
convince me that ﬁ
early and gradual
ﬂ is a much better approach to raising the 
interest rate than 
ﬁlate and steep.
ﬂ  Of course, in the event, 
we may have to raise the rate faster or slower than we 
anticipate, but, 
at this stage
, we have to work with expectations. 
I™d also like to relate to the argument that we™re only in this relati
vely good position on 
employment and 
this 
potentially good position on inflation because the interest rate is so low, 
and that, therefore, we should not move anytime soon.  It™s undoubtedly true that the U.S. 

economy would not be in this relatively favorable position if the F
OMC
 had not moved rapidly 
after Lehman Brothers to the zero lower bound and then undertaken three rounds of QE 
as well 
as Operation Twist.  I believe history will show that the 
Federal Reserve
Štogether with the 
decision to recapitalize 
the banking system, in which the Treasury and the Congress played 
critical roles
Šsaved the United States from a second Great Depression. But we need to realize 
that, at some point, we have to put the interest rate back into action as a tool of monetary policy.  

In so doing, 
we™ll not only begin to activate a more normal way of undertaking monetary policy, 
but we™ll also be sending an extremely important signal to businesses and households that, 
after 

seven years
, the American economy is ready to exit the Great Recession and begin the return to 

normal. 
When should we do this?  The answer is, we should do it w
hen an interest rate higher 
than we have now is still consistent with 
the closing of the output gap.  I believe that, on the 
inflation rate
, the 
staff 
forecasts we heard yesterday from Bill Wascher are far less pessimistic 
than what I™ve heard around this table this morning.  I
t™s true we™ve got negative inflation in the 
          
           
  
    
                         
  
   first quarter, but it™s very important to note that forecasts of core PCE inflation 
are somewhere 
well above 1 
percent, and that when you take the special factors into account, it™s expected to 
rise not to 0.7 percent, but to 1.7 percent, which is very close to target. 
We should also note that even the 
r* in the Tealbook, Book B, is about 110 basis points 
above our current real federal funds rate, suggesting that a sooner liftoff would not be 
incompatible with further progress toward our goals if the situation improves.  Or, to put the 

criterion in the words of 
alternative 
B, we should move when the Committee ﬁ
has seen further 
improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 

2 percent objective over the medium term
.ﬂ  And I expect that will happen reasonably soon.  
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B.  On the 
statement
, I support taking out ﬁat leastﬂ and changing ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpartly.ﬂ 
More broadly, paragraph 1 initially struck me, and continues 
to strike me
, as fairly 
downbeat.  But what saves it for me is this comment about how household real income is rising 

strongly, which I think really sets out our narrative for just how much we™re counting on 

consumer spending and is a pretty strong statement in a context of weak spending.  
So, overall, 
it achieves a level of balance, and I™m fine with it with those changes. 
In terms of forward guidance, I™ll just add that I 
believe 
it™s a very bad idea to surprise 
the market with l
iftoff.  I would avoid calendar-based guidance.  I would let the data speak.  I 

would let the statement
, the minutes, 
and the speeches speak. 
I do think the market will get it. 
It™s very unlikely that the people in this room would be approaching a decision to lift off the 

interes
t rate
, with all 
of 
the attention we™re getting, and that this would be a surprise to the 
        
         
     
   
                    
  
   
          
   market.  T
hat™s incredibly unlikely. 
In fact, my guess 
is, as we approach that, it™s not going to be 
a surprise to the market, 
in light of 
all of 
the transparency and all of the attention being paid. 
More broadly, I think that policy is right where it™s supposed to beŠlooking at incoming 
data to see whether the liftoff narrative still holds together, that narrative being reasonable 
growth that is strong enough to support further improvement in the labor market at a meaningful 

pace and inflation moving up to 2 
percent in the medium term. 
The sense I had at the beginning of the year was that the labor market would continue to 
heal fairly quickly in a context of moderate growth, and I thin
k there™s a better
-than-
even chance 
that something like that narrative will reemerge as we leave the first quarter behind, just 
as it did 

in 2014.  
So, as I said yesterday, I feel good about where the current Tealbook forecast is, and 
I consider that to be still on the same path we were on
Ša little bit slower, but a reasonable path. 
I do have to admit I have a concern now, though, that the speed limit on U.S. growth may 
now be closer to 2 percent than 3 percent, because of the drag gen
erated by
 the behavior of net 
exports, and that improvement in the labor market will also slow down as a result.  TimeŠand 

dataŠ
will tell
.  Monetary policy can respond and really has already done so through 

expectations.  It may 
limit further tightening bu
t doesn™t feel 
as though 
it can reverse 
the 
tightening 
in financial conditions that we have already experienced. 
In the case of returning closer to the old path that had strong job growth, we™re close to 
the natural rate.  Monetary policy works with long lags.  Zero isn™t the right number.  This 

remains for me a very satisfying approach if we do get back to that path, and, 
again, that™s my 

modal case. 
The lower path is just much tougher. We™re still close to the natural rate. We™re still 
eliminating slack
, but at a much slower pace, and I think 
that, 
more important, 
the economy is 
       
                      
              more vulnerable to an unwanted tightening 
in financial conditions and probably in a nonlinear 
way. 
I would still want to lift off, just a little bit later
.  But I would point 
out that the 
communication challenges and the risks are much less attractive. 
I™d be very happy to see data come in that would justify liftoff in June or at any meeting 
subsequent to that
.  But, 
having resisted predictions so far for the most part, I™ll co
ntinue to do so 
today.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  I support a
lternative B.  It seems appropriate for the 
statement to recognize that incoming data ha
ve shown softness across a range of 
spending 
categories
, in industrial production as well as in labor market conditions. 
Although there is reason to believe that some of the weakness reflects transitory factors 
or statistical noise, my best guess is that some of it also reflects a more persi
stent slowing in 
economic momentum.  In particular, the negative effects of dollar appreciation and weakness in 
activity abroad on net exports and business investment, as well as the negative effects of earlier 
oil price declines on drilling and mining, appear to be greater than expected, and the boost to 

consumption has not materialized. 
This softness of recent data
, along with the advance estimate of GDP, 
leads me to favor 
removing the bracketed ﬁat leastﬂ language from the first sentence. 
I also support Governor 
Tarullo™s modification to the sentence on inflation.  T
hat is simply a more accurate statement. 
By the same token, reflecting our uncertainty about the persistence of these effects, it is 
appropriate to include mention of some continuing positive economic signals, such as the 

relatively high level of consumer sentiment.  For that reason, I support the additional words in 
        
  
           
            
        
       paragraph 2, which stress that, 
despite the weaker data, the Committee continues to expect the 
economy to expand at a moderate p
ace. 
For those who worry 
that p
aragraph 1 is too downbeat, I would note this is significantly 
counterbalanced by the fact that a
lternative B makes few changes to 
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the 
March statement, including importantly reiterating that the risks to
 the outlook and the labor 
market are nearly balanced rather than emphasizing downside risks in light of recent data. 
In my view, the incoming data, on balance, do not suggest we™re appreciably closer to our 
two conditions for liftoff.  The incoming data on the labor market do not provide evidence of 

further improvement.  If anything, the softer tone of the aggregate spending data raises the 

possibility that labor market improvement may stall this year.
  My reading of the data on 
unemployment, labor force p
articipation
, and the number of employees working part time for 
economic reasons is that slack remains.
  Nonetheless, we™ll have two additional labor market 
rea
ding
s to help with our assessment before the June FOMC deliberations. 
Meanwhile
, the modest improvement we™ve seen in putting a floor under inflation falls 
short of our standard of reasonable confidence.  We™ve seen some encouraging movement in 

core CPI, although core PCE remains persistently soft relative to our 2 
percent target. 
The recent 
firming
 of oil prices and the recent 
plateauing 
in dollar appreciation raise the possibility that we 
might be seeing an inflection point
, but further appreciation seems likely
, accelerating wage 
growth has 
yet to materialize, and market
-based measures of 
inflation expectations remain soft, 
although they™ve shown some improvement as the price of oil has firmed. 
It™s possible that the data we 
will 
receive 
in the coming months 
will reveal the weakness 
in the data to have been a temporary aberration, and that momentum in underlying activity is 

undiminished.  It could also be that incoming data and economic developments abroad will show 
                  
     
                  
       
 foreign activity to be on more stable footing than now appears to be the case.  
If so and if price 
inflation 
and 
measures of in
flation expectation
s show further signs of firming, then liftoff could 
be appropriate.  On balance, my assessment is that
, although June should remain on the table, the 
probability of liftoff has shifted from June to later in the year.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLE
N.  Thank you.  
Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.
  I support a
lternative B.  Given the 
slowdown in growth, the weaker payroll trend, and a host of other weak economic data, I think 

it™s unlikely, speaking for myself, that I™m going to see su
fficient news in the next seven weeks 

that™
ll cause me to want to lift off at the June FOMC meeting.
  That said, I wouldn™t rule it out 
completely
, because, as 
Governor 
Fischer makes clear, it™s possible that we could see two strong 
employment reports and a big upturn in economic activity.  So we could get there.  I just don™t 

think that™s very likely at this point. 
I hope the economy is going to cooperate and is going to make a September liftoff 
feasible, but I 
don™t even 
really have that much confidence about that, 
either. 
The Tealbook 
forecast is actually interesting now in the sense of how flat the unemployment rate trajectory is. 

So modest shortfalls in growth could actually cause the unemployment rate trajectory to be 

completely flat or even tick up.  In that case, we might not find ourselves yet 
able to pass the 
ﬁfurther improvement in the labor market
ﬂ test. 
I think that 
ﬁfurther improvement in the labor marketﬂ and ﬁreasonably confident [about] 
inflation
ﬂ are really good tests, and I feel very comf
ortable using those 
when 
speaking about my 
own views in terms of the tim
ing 
of liftoff
.  We should talk about that in speeches and make 
those our criteria, and that will help the market participants think along with us. 
       
                                
   
     
             
In terms of language, I™m with every
one else. I would delete ﬁat least.ﬂ  I™m not that 
confident that it™s all due to transitory factors
, so 
I think ﬁat leastﬂ goes a little too far. 
With respect to President Mester™s suggestion to change the sentence about consumption, 
I believe 
the meanin
g is the same. 
MS. MESTER.  The meaning is the same. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Given 
that 
the meaning is the same, I guess I prefer to go 
with the more parsimonious number of wordsŠ
a more direct approach.  So I think 
I prefer what 
we have. 
MS. MESTER.  I 
think second derivatives are harder to understand. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo™s ﬁpartlyﬂ versus ﬁlargely,ﬂ 
I think you really could go either way.  You think about the gap between our target of 2 
percent 

for inflation and where we 
are. 
My judgment would be 
that
 about two-thirds of that gap is due to 
lower energy prices and the stronger dollar, so about one-third is due to other things.  You could 
call that ﬁlargelyﬂ if you wanted to
, or you could call that ﬁpartly.ﬂ 
It™s really wh
at the 
Committee wants to communicate in terms of how concerned they are about inflation being low 
that should drive whether you want to be ﬁ
largely
ﬂ or ﬁ
partly.
ﬂ  I would slightly favor ﬁ
partly
ﬂ because I™m not as concerned about inflation today as I was six weeks ago, but I™m happy to 

accept the judgment of the Committee. 
With respect to the statement, I™m really glad that we™
re now in a data-dependent place, 
and I don™t feel bad about that in the slightest.  The market should be able to think along with us 

as they see the data
, as long as they can interpret them through the prism of labor market 

improvement and 
whether we are
 becoming reasonably confident about the inflation outlook 

over the medium term.  
If the market starts to diverge from what our expe
ctations are, there 
are 
                    
     
                        
       
 plenty of forums in which to remind people of what the data mean to us in terms of those two 
criteria.  I think we can easily pull the market back. 
Lastly, Chair 
Yellen 
opened the meeting by recognizing Chris Cummings
, so I want to 
close my remarks similarly.  I want to acknowledge Chris™
s service to the New York Fed
, the 
Federal Reserve System
, and this Committee.  On several occasions during the crisis
, Chris was 
forced to sit in this chair and provide the New York Fed™s views on monetary policy, and she did 

that very ably.  We hope that will never have to happen again. 
In terms of Chris™
s contributions to the 
System, they™re very large.  She™s been a great 
colleague to me and to many others throughout the Federal Reserve System.  I™ve heard many 

people comment to me over the past few days and weeks about how much they™re going to miss 

her and how important she™s been in contributing to the Federal Reserve System writ 
large, as 
opposed to just the New York Fed.  She embodies, in my mind, the modern central banker 
in that 
she has a 
very deep and broad portfolio, ranging from 
serving as p
roduct d
irector for the 
Wholesale Product Office to chairing the Financial Stability Board™s Cross
-Border Crisis 
Management Group.  That™s a pretty wide span of responsibilities. 
I want to thank her personally for her wise counsel and support during my tenure.  And, 
of course, I wish you the best in all 
of your future endeavors.  [Applause] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thanks, everybody.  
First of all, 
let me acknowledge 
that I 
heard the support for 
a Committee discussion about 
r* and the factors influencing it, and I also 
think that™s a good idea
.  W
e™ll work with Thomas and others to see if we can put that together.  
It™s a great idea. 
I heard
, in gene
ral
, broad-based support for 
alternative 
B for today, and we have a few 
language issues to review.
  First, starting at the top of 
paragraph 1, we have the bracketed ﬁat 
         
       
               
   
               least,ﬂ and I actually heard a large number of people who suggested we not include the bracketed 
ﬁat least.ﬂ
  Let me give anybody who wants it in there an opportunity to say 
so.  President 
Lacker
, I heard you support putting it in there, but are there others?  [No response] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Then I will
Š MR. LACKER.  I c
ould support deleting 
it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great. 
So we will remove the bracketed ﬁat least.ﬂ
  The next 
change suggested was President Mester™s recommend
ed change in the language about household 
spending.  Just to remind you, she suggested changing the words ﬁGrowth in household spending 

decline
dﬂ to ﬁ
Household spending continued to grow
, although at a s
lower pace.ﬂ 
I heard a little 
bit of support, not a great deal, and a couple of people 
were opposed.  Let me just ask
ŠI think I 
heard two supporters in addition to 
President Mester.  Is there widespread support for that 

change?  If so, please indicate if you support that change. 
MR. FISCHER.  I do. 
PARTICIPANT.  I support the change. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I see 
three
 people who are supportive.  And how many are 
opposed?
  [Show of hands]  Okay.  I™m going toŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Chair™s prerogative. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Chair™s prerogative
.  I think leaving it as is
, rather than going with the 
suggestion, is, frankly, my own preference. 
Finally
, we have Governor Tarullo™s 
suggested change
.  That would be in the ﬁinflationﬂ 
sentence, the next
-to-last sentence in 
paragraph 1, and the suggestion is to change ﬁlargely 
reflectingﬂ to ﬁpartly reflecting.ﬂ 
I did hear quite a bit of support for that.  Personally
, I™m also 
               
  
   
      
                
   open to making that change, but let me see what people think who didn™t weigh in on that.  H
ow 
many people wouldŠ
President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  C
ould I ask a clarifying question? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sur
e. 
MR. EVANS. 
Vice Chair
man
 Dudley, you mentioned two-
thirds o
fŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  That would be my characterization. 

MR. EVANS. Was that 
of 
headline inflation or 
core? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Headline 
is zero
.  Core is running about 1.3-ish on a 
year
-over
-year basis
. MR. EVANS.  So you™re saying two-thirds of the low headline inflation. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Yes, exactly. 

MR. EVANS.  Ye
s.  That™s fair. I agree. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It refers to inflation.  It doesn™t refer to core inflation. I 
think you can argue it either way, frankly. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Inflation is running about ¼ 
percent.
  Core is running about 1.4 or 
something like that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.  So about two
-thirds of the gap is in these transitory 
factors
, and about one
-third is
Š MR. EVANS.  When I s
ay inflation
, I™m thinking underlying inflationŠ
something closer 
to coreŠso that™s why I 
believe 
ﬁpartlyﬂ is important
.  But you™re right.  If this was nailed down 
and 
it said headline inflation
, that would be okay.  At any rate, I support Governor Tarullo™s 
recommenda
tion. 
             
          
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
            CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. 
Let me see support for Governor Tarullo™s suggestion.  [Show 
of hands] 
I see broad
-based support.  Is there anyone who feels strongly opposed?  Okay.  So let 
us also make that change. We will change the word ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpart
ly.ﬂ
  And those are all 
of 
the suggestions that we need to review, s
o I think we™re ready, Matt
. MR. LU
ECKE.  The vote will be on a
lternative B 
as depicted 
on pages 7 and 8 of 
Thomas™
s handout, with the changes of taking out the words ﬁat leastﬂ in the fir
st sentence and 
replac
ing ﬁlargelyﬂ 
with 
ﬁpartlyﬂ in the penultimate sentence in 
paragraph 1
.  It will also cover 
the directive on page 12 of Thomas™s handout. 
Cha
ir Yellen 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
Governor Brainard 
Yes 
President Evans 
Yes 
Governor Fischer 
Yes 
President Lacker 
Yes 
President Lockhart 
Yes 
Governor Powell 
Yes 
Governor Tarullo 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You should have your gavel.  [Laughter] 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
Okay.  
We need 
to confirm the date of the next meeting, which is 
Tuesday and Wednesday, June 16 and 17.  Thanks, everybody, for your participation.  The 

meeting is adjourned. 
END OF MEETING 
      
                                                                
    
 ________________ Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
April 28
Œ29, 2015 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 28, 2015, at 

1:00 p.m. 
and continued on Wednesda
y, April 29, 2015, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the 
following: 
Janet L. Yellen, Chair 

William 
C. 
Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Lael Brainard 

Charles L. Evans 

Stanley Fischer 

Jeffrey M. Lacker 

Dennis P. Lockhart 

Jerome H. Powell 

Danie
l K. Tarullo 
John C. Williams 
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, and Eric 
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Helen E. Holcomb and Blake Prichard, First Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Dallas and Philadelphia, respectively 

Thomas Laubach, Secretary and Economist 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 

David 
W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle 
A. Smith, 
Assistant Secretary 
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Eric M. Engen, Michael P. Leahy, and William 
Wascher, Associate Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account 

Robert deV. Frierson,
1 Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market Committee and t
he Board of Governors. 
                             
                           
  
       
         
   
 ________________ Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of 

Governors 
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Governors 
James A. Clouse and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 
William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, 
Board of Governors 
Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider, and Stacey Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board, 
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Michael T. Kiley, Senior Adviser, 
Division of Research and Statistics, and Senior 
Associate Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 

Governors 
Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Joshua Gallin, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci,
2 Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 
of Governors; Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, 

Board of Governors 
Jane E. Ihrig
1 and David López
-Salido, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Edward Nelson, Assistant Director, Division
 of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Eric 
C. Engstrom, Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Penelope A. Beattie,
1 Assistant to the Secretary, Of
fice of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
2 Attended the portion of the meeting following the joint session of the Federal Open Market Committee 
and the Board of Governors. 
                                    Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Katie Ross,
1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
Jonathan E. Goldberg, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

James M. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

James J. McAndrews, Executive Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 
Troy Davig, Michael Dotsey, Evan F. Koenig, and Spencer Krane, Senior 
Vice 
Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Todd E. Clark, Sylvain Leduc, Giovanni Olivei, Douglas Tillett, and David C. Wheelock, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, San Francisco, Boston, Chicago, 

and St. Louis, respectively 
Kei
-Mu Yi, 
Special Policy Advisor to the President, Federal 
Reserve Ba
nk of 
Minneapolis 

Matthew D. Raskin, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Jame
s M. Egelhof,
1 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 
                   
             
  
      Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
April 28
Œ29, 2015 April 28 Session 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Good afternoon, everyone.  I™d like to welcome back First Vice 
President
s Holcomb and Prichard, who will again be representing Dallas and Philadelphia, 
respectively. 
On a sad note, my understanding is that this is the last FOMC meeting for New York 
First Vice President Chris Cumming.  Chris has attended 92 FOMC meetings, 70 of which she 
attended as an alternate voter
.  And, as all of you know, Chris has been involved in a wide array 
of 
System work over many years in all facets of what we do and has been a very wonderful 

colleague.  Chris, I really thank you for your service and want you to know that you will be very 

much missed.
  [Applause] 
Next, I™m pleased to let you know that Brian Madigan has agreed to return to the Board™s 
Division of Monetary Affairs as 
deputy d
irector
, reporting to Thomas, effective June 1.  I think 
all of
 you know that Brian served as d
irector 
of the 
division 
and as FOMC 
secretary
 from 2007 
to 2010.  
Since he retired from the Board, Brian has been a visiting professor in the Department 

of Economics at Georgetown 
University
. Now, as I think many of you know
, in recent years
, the job of 
director 
of 
the Division of 
Monetary Affairs has become increasingly burdensome.  It has entailed serving as the 

Committee™s chief monetary policy advisor, as s
ecretary of the FOMC, and as leader of a large 
organization with c
ritical responsibilities.
  As part of a strategy to create a more sustainable 
situation, Brian will have oversight responsibility for the FOMC Secretariat and will play a key 

role in the production of the minutes and transcripts of FOMC meetings.  Obviously, 
these are 
things he has done superbly well in the past and for which he is eminently well qualified. 
                           
                               
                                                           
  Accordingly, I intend to propose that Brian be appointed by the FOMC as its s
ecretary
.  Unless there are objections, I will 
ask the 
FOMC 
Secretariat to send out a request 
in early June 
for notation 
votes to select Brian 
as our 
secretary
.  Under this 
arrangement, Thomas will 
continue 
to serve as 
the 
Committee™s primary advisor on monetary policy and will also be able 
to 
dedicate more of his 
energy to ensuring that 
the Division of 
Monetary Affairs fulfills its critical 
role 
in supporting our monetary policy and other responsibilities. 
Okay.  Now, 
the first two items 
on our agenda 
today will be 
considered in a joint meeting 
of the FOMC and the Board of Governors, and, accordingly, I need a motion to close the Board 
meeting. 
MR. FISCHER.  So moved. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  O
ur first item is financial 
developments and open market operations, and let me call on Simon to delive
r the 
Desk report. 
MR. POTTER.
1  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Lorie and I will split the briefing into 
three parts. 
First, I will review financial market developments. Next, Lorie will 
review Desk operations.
 Finally, I will discuss staff work on enhancing 
the 
calculation methodology for the federal funds effective rate. 
Over the intermeeting period, domestic financial conditions eased following 
more
-accommodative-
than
-expected U.S. monetary policy communications and 
weaker
-than-
expected
 economic data, including the March employment report.  
On net, nominal Treasury rates declined by as many as 25 basis points, the S&P 500 
index gained 2 percent, and the DXY dollar index decreased nearly 3 percent. 
A substantial portion of these changes came around 
the time o
f the March FOMC 
events, which were characterized as 
being 
more
 accommodative than expected 
despite the removal of ﬁpatientﬂ language from the statement. 
Investors pointed, in 
particular, to the large downward shift in the target 
federal funds 
rate projections 
in 
the SEP 
and, to a lesser extent, the downward revisions to Committee participants
™ projections of inflation, GDP growth, and the longer-run unemployment rate.  
The 

left column of your top-
left panel shows 
that nominal and real interest 
rates declined 
in the one-hour window around the statement and SEP releases
, while measures of 
inflation compensation rose, equity prices increased, and the dollar weakened. 
As shown in the right column of the table, the absolute magnitudes of these moves 
were 
1 The materials used by Mr. Potter and Ms. Logan are appended to this tran
script (appendix 1). 
             
            
    
         
           
     
         
     very large relative to changes in one-hour windows around FOMC statement releases 

over the past decade. 
One hypothesis for seeing moves of this magnitude could be decreased market 
liquidity. Indeed
, late in the trading session outside the window use
d to measure 
these FOMC announcement effects, there was a very large move in the euro
dollar 
currency pair.  The move pushed the intraday trading range for the currency pair to 

over 4 percent, a 5 standard deviation move over the period since 2004, as shown in 

the top-right panel.  The size of the move is comparable to the 6 standard deviation 

range in the 10
-year Treasury yield on October 15, both of which took place amid 

very high volumes.  
The March FOMC events shifted out expectations for the timing of 
liftoff 
according to the Desk surveys, as shown in the middle-left panel.  
The ﬁflashﬂ survey, 

taken 
three 
business days after the March FOMC meeting
, suggests that most of the 
shift occurred in response to the meeting and the large price moves in the hou
r 
following the March FOMC 
statement release
, therefore likely reflect
ing shifting 
policy expectations as opposed to outsized liquidity 
effects
.  Since the flash survey, 

soft domestic economic data and speeches from Federal Reserve officials appear to 

have further solidified this shift in policy expectations. 
The April surveys also showed a notably slower expected pace of policy 
normalization after liftoff. 
The middle
-right panel shows that the probability 
distribution for the pace of tightening in the fir
st year after liftoff, assuming no return 
to the zero bound, shifted toward a slower pace over the period, the first notable shift 

in these views since 
the question was originally asked last September.  
A similar shift 
occurred in the distribution of the expected pace of tightening in the second year after 

liftoff. 
In considering when the Federal Reserve will begin to normalize monetary policy, 
market participants are particularly focused on the outlook for inflation and the 

Committee™s reasonable confidenc
e that inflation will move back to its 2 percent 

objective.  
We asked survey respondents to score the importance of various factors 
they believe the Committee will use in assessing whether reasonable confidence in 

the inflation outlook has been achieved.  As shown in the bottom-left panel, 

respondents assigned the most importance to a further improvement in the labor 

market and the absence of weakening in realized core inflation.  
Over the intermeeting period, market-
based measures of inflation compensation 
increased alongside higher energy prices and a weaker U.S. dollar, as shown in the 

bottom-right panel.  Forward measures of inflation compensation increased at both 

shorter-
and longer
-dated horizons but remain below levels at the end of 2013.  
The 
increa
ses over the period were attributed to the March FOMC communications, 
somewhat higher-
than
-expected 
realized inflation, the increase in oil prices, and 
positioning dynamics in the TIPS market.  Longer-
term inflation expectations from 
Desk surveys were little changed over the period.  Meanwhile, front-month Brent 

crude increased nearly 22 percent but remains more than 40 percent lower since the 
      
   
               
          
            
       
   
                        
  end of 2013.  
As I noted, the DXY dollar index declin
ed nearly 3 percent over the 
intermeeting 
period but is over 20 percent higher since the end of 2013. 
Despite the depreciation over the period, market participants expect the exchange 
value of the U.S. dollar to continue its broad appreciation amid ongoing monetary 

policy divergence across major economies.
 Desk dealer survey respondents reported 
that dollar appreciation seen since last summer has prompted them to revise lower 

their forecasts for 2015 growth and inflation, with the median markdowns to 2015 

GDP growth and core PCE inflation of roughly 40 basis points and 20 basis points, 

respectively. 
A key factor contributing to broad dollar strength has been widening global 
interest rate differentials, especially between the 
United States
 and the 
euro area. 
These interest rate differentials became more pronounced as 
euro-
area sovereign rates 
have traded increasingly negative and yield curves have flattened substantially. 
The 
top-left panel of your next exhibit shows the extent of 
negative rate trading
 by country and maturity. 
 Red indicates that 100 percent of the bonds in that category 
trade at a negative yield, while green indicates that none trade negative. 
Despite the continued decline in 
euro
-area rates and the increasing universe of 
securities trading at negative yields, there have been few market
-functioning issues, 
and the ECB has stated that it has had little trouble achieving its purchase targets thus 

far.
 Even so, it is possible that market functioning strains will emerge over time, and 
to help address such strains, the ECB unveiled details of an augmented 
securities
-lending program aimed at supporting bond and repo market liquidity. 
The declines in 
euro-area rates, coupled with the very large currency depreciation 
and increase in equities, have s
ubstantially eased European financial conditions since 

President Draghi™s remarks at 
the 
Jackson Hole symposium last August.  
It is interesting to compare the asset price reaction 
with
 recent LSAP programs.  Using the 
price changes from when asset purchase
 expectations began to form until three 

months after the purchase programs were announced, the 
ECB™s PSPP and B
OJ™s 
QQE, shown in the left and middle columns of the top-
right panel, 
respectively, 
contributed to significant currency depreciation and meaningful equity price 

increases. The ECB™s program resulted in large declines in German nominal forward 

rates, but 
it has not been accompanied by an increase in longer
-dated 
forward 
inflation measures
.  In comparison, Japanese policies supported a large rise in 
forward inflation compensation and a pronounced increase in equities, perhaps 

stemming from the focus on reaching the new higher inflation target.  By contrast, 

U.S. asset price reaction
s to 
LSAP3 
were
 more limited, as the right column showsŠ 
though it did have a large effect in the mortgage markets, which is not included in the 

panel. 
One potential flashpoint for 
financial markets is the highly fluid situation in 
Greece. While Greek asset prices
 have responded sharply to recent developments, the 

broader market reaction to perceived downside risks in Greece has been relatively 

muted and perhaps a bit complacent.  
Market participants attribute the lack of 
          
  
                  
               
    
     
                
       
  
             spillovers to institutional improvements in 
the euro area, reduced 
private
-sector 
exposure to Greece, and the effects of ECB asset purchases. 
Reflecting the mounting 
liquidity pressure from deposit flight and bank funding strains, Greek banks have also 

increased their borrowing via the emergency liquidity assistance program to 

•76 billion in April from •69 billion in March.  
As would be expected, Greece™s 

Target2 liability, which represents balances owed to others in the E
urosystem
, rose in 
March, shown in the middle-
left panel. This level is near Greece™s prior peak Target2 
liability in June 2012.  It is uncertain how long the Greek government will be able to 

meet its debt obligations. 
Some market participants still expect an agreement 
between Greece and its creditors to be reached but only after
 a high-
stakes game of 
brinkmanship.  
Steve will further discuss Greece in his briefing. 
Shifting to emerging markets, there has been a very sharp increase in Chinese 
equities over recent months, shown in the middle-
right panel. Over the intermeeting 
period, mainland Chinese and Hong Kong equities rose by 23 
percent 
and 16 percent, 
respectively, and, 
over the past year
, the Shanghai Composite has more than doubled.  
Mainland equity outperformance 
came despite a worsening domestic economic 
outlook and proba
bly involved some speculative dynamics, though it was supported 
by expected and actual monetary policy easing.  
During the intermeeting period
, the 
People™s Bank of China 
cut their reserve requirement ratio 
by a larger
-than
-expected 
100 basis points; most contacts expect additional cuts to reserve requirements or 

decreases in lending and deposit rates in the near 
term. 
Equity prices in other emerging markets also increased
, and, as shown in the 
bottom-
left panel, broader EM asset prices rose, partially retr
acing prior period 
declines.
 The moves were supported by the accommodative March FOMC 
communication as well as a moderate abatement of risks in a number of countries, 
including Brazil and Russia.  
This partial retracement of emerging market asset prices 
came despite continued markdowns of expected growth in several countries.  
These 

markdowns and recent U.S. dollar strength have contributed to a broader trend of 

emerging market currency depreciation since the May 2013 JEC testimony or 
so-called 
taper tantr
um. 
Some market participants are concerned that taper tantrum
Œlike volatility in 
emerging markets could materialize as the Federal Reserve approaches normalization. 

Recall that implied volatility in emerging market currencies rose sharply with U.S. 

interest rate implied volatility in spring 2013, shown in the bottom-
right panel, and 
has recently moved back to similar levels.  Decelerating emerging market growth and 

rising corporate leverage, as well as volatility in commodity prices may make 

emerging markets vulnerable as normalization nears. However, these risks are 

somewhat offset by lower emerging market asset valuations and reportedly more 

cautious positioning fro
m emerging market investors, as discussed in the special QS 
memo. 
Volatility in emerging markets is only one part of broader financial market 
volatility that some worry could ensue from expected Federal Reserve normalization.  

Indeed, a senior IMF official 
recently warned of a ﬁsuper taper tantrum,ﬂ 
in which 
              
     
                                        
     negative term premiums 
would be rapidly decompress
ed as domestic policy rates are 
increased; Thomas will comment more on this risk in his briefing.
 Given the 
punctuated bouts of recent realized volatility in the very deep and liquid markets I 

discussed earlier, financial market volatility during normalization could be even more 

challenging for relatively illiquid markets. 
I will now take questions before turning to 
Lorie. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  No questions? 
Lorie. 
MS. LOGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll start 
with
 exhibit 3 and provide an 
update on MBS reinvestments, discuss testing of normalization tools, and conclude 

with the staff recommendation to extend the existing central bank liquidity and swap 

arra
ngements. 
The Desk™s MBS reinvestment operations continue to go smoothly, 
and MBS 
market liquidity remains stable.  
The continued trend 
toward higher prepayment 
speeds in March was largely an ongoing result of the low mortgage rates witnessed 

earlier in th
e year and has pushed the current monthly reinvestment amount up to 
approximately $40 billion, as shown in the top-left panel of your third exhibit.  

Despite the increased size of reinvestments, we do not anticipate having any issues 

with the execution of MBS operations, but we have increased the frequency of our 

operations to accommodate their larger size. 
Testing of the Federal Reserve™s overnight and term RRP operations continued 
over the intermeeting period.  Patterns of total RRP demand remained broadly 

consistent with recent experience, as shown in the top
-right panel.  
The additional 
25 counterparties that began participating in operations on March 16 have only 

modestly 
affected
 overall RRP usage. 
For broader perspective on the Federal Reserve™s 
involvement in reverse repo 
activity, this panel also includes reverse repos conducted with foreign official 

institutions, known as the ﬁforeign RP pool,ﬂ shown in gray.  The size of the foreign 

RP pool is notably above its pre-
crisis levels, largely a ref
lection of central banks™ 
desire to hold greater dollar liquidity buffers, while at the same time they are 

tightening their counterparty 
risk
-management
 frameworks.  Increases in the foreign 
RP pool this period, and since the beginning of the year, have been primarily driven 

by a single customer who has sought to increase the liquidity profile of its FX 

reserves 
due to precautionary 
financial
-stability motivations, in part by raising its 
cash balance 
held 
at the Federal Reserve. 
The Desk conducted two term operations over March quarter-end, the first a 
$75 billion, 14
-day operation and the second a $125 billion, 7-day operation, 

summarized in your middle-left panel.  This $200 billion offering in term RRPs 

reduced the Federal Reserve™s overall RRP offered am
ount spanning quarter-
end to 
$500 billion, down from the $600 billion offered at year-end.  However, the reduction 

did not appear to have an adverse 
effect
 on markets or meaningfully change 
participation, likely because the amount offered was perceived to still provide ample 
           
      
   
    
                     
   
           
         headroom above expected demand.  The 14-day operation was modestly 

oversubscribed, with $81 billion in propositions and a stop-
out
 rate of 9 basis points, 
a slightly higher rate than was expected.  
The 7
-day operation conducted on March 30 
was undersubscribed
, with $101 billion in propositions submitted and a stop-
out rate 
at the max offering rate of 10 basis points, similar to the rates on the undersubscribed 

operations held closer to year
-end.  Substitution between overnight and term R
RPs 
and the breakdown of counterparty demand at the March term operations were 

broadly similar to behavior observed in December. 
As shown in your middle-right panel, the Desk™s RRP operations continued to 
provide a soft floor under short-
term interest rate
s, even around quarter-end.  
The 
federal funds effective rate averaged 12 basis points over the period and printed at 

6 basis points on quarter-end.  While rates and volumes in unsecured 
markets
 over 

quarter-end were broadly in line with expectations, temporary funding pressures in 

secured markets
 were much larger than expected, with the overnight GCF repo index 

for Treasury collateral, shown in the dark blue line, printing at 45 basis points. 
Further, the dispersion in repo rates increased notably.  For ex
ample, the spread 
between rates on overnight Treasury GCF repo and 
triparty 
repo widened 
considerably on quarter-end.  This spread, shown in your bottom-
left panel, reached 
30 basis points on quarter-end.  
While all the factors that drove the larger
-than
-expected widening between repo rates are not fully understood, institutions with 

stable access to triparty repo funding appeared to demand increased compensation to 

intermediate between triparty cash lenders, like money funds, and GCF borrowers, 

such as sma
ller or less creditworthy dealers. 
It should also be noted that the spread between GCF and triparty repo rates has 
been gradually widening over the past several months even outside quarter-end.  
This 
trend is likely partially driven by financial institutions modifying behavior in 
response to regulatory changes and associated higher costs to intermediate between 

triparty and GCF repo markets. 
Looking forward, pursuant to the resolution adopted at the March FOMC 
meeting, the staff proposes conductin
g term RRP tests over June quarter
-end. 
For the June quarter-end, we suggest a slightly different approach to 
the 
public 
communication about the term RRPs than was used in December and March.  As 

outlined in your bottom-right panel, the Desk proposes to re
lease a statement shortly 
after the April FOMC meeting minutes on May 20 that would note the tentative 

intention to offer at least $200 billion of term RRPs in addition to capacity 
of 
overnight 
RRPs for the June quarter-end.  Based on our experience with t
he March 
term operations, we believe that $200 billion in term RRP capacity over June quarter-

end, in combination with at least $300 billion capacity in overnight 
RRP, should 
provide sufficient headroom on total RRP availability, assuming no change in the 

target range.  Further, we would propose noting in the statement that the Desk would 

release the remaining details on Monday, June 22
Šthat is, after the June FOMC 
meeting. 
        
   
     
  
                   
   
  
       
       
     
       
            
        We would thus come back to the Committee with a recommendation of the exact 
size and
 maximum offering rate for each operation at or shortly after the June 
meeting.  This communication approach could be replicated in future quarter-ends 

and should provide the market 
with 
confidence in available supply around quarter-
ends, but, 
importantly
, retain some flexibility to adjust the specific parameters of the 
operations should the Committee decide to lift 
off. 
In order to maintain operational readiness with the TDF
Šboth within the Federal 
Reserve and 
among banksŠthe staff is developing plans to resume a routine, every-
other-month testing schedule that would be similar to that employed prior to the 

series of special larger test operations conducted over the 
past year. Offering rates, 
counterparty limits
, and other terms of these operations would b
e set so that the scale 
of such testing operations would be modest.  The tentative plan is to announce and 

resume the routine periodic testing beginning next month. 
Additionally, the work on implementing changes to the methodology for 
calculating interest 
payments is proceeding according to schedule.  Comments on the 
Federal Register 
notice 
are due by the middle of May.  
If there are no major issues 
raised by those comments, the staff should be in a position to implement the new 

methodology before the June 
FOMC meeting as planned. 
Your fourth exhibit begins with the focus of some market participants over the 
intermeeting period on the discussion of normalization tools 
that appeared 
in the 
March FOMC minutes.
 Contacts specifically highlighted the discussion concerning 
temporarily elevated capacity for the ON RRP facility. 
In the Desk™s April surveys, 
respondents were asked to provide their expectations for both the level of the daily 

aggregate cap and level of ON RRP demand around the time of liftoff. 
As sho
wn in the top-left panel of your final exhibit, 10 respondents expected there 
to be no cap on the ON RRP facility immediately following liftoff.  Among those 

respondents expecting a cap at liftoff, the median expectation was a cap of 

$500 billion, and all anticipated that ON RRP demand would be at or below the cap.  

Across all respondents, regardless of whether they expected a cap, the median 

expected level of ON RRP demand immediately after liftoff was $300 billion, 

unchanged from the March survey. 
However
, many respondents did update their expectations for ON RRP demand 
from the previous surveyŠ
both immediately after liftoff and 
one- and 
three
-years 
ahead.  Expectations shifted in both directions, with a number of participants moving 

their expectations by several hundred billion dollars, perhaps pointing to significant 

uncertainly about the likely level of 
take
-up. 
Respondents were also asked about 
their 
expectation
s for the variation in ON 
RRP demand over various time horizons.  They expected the variability of the ON 

RRP demand around the time of liftoff to be more elevated than recent experience, 

largely due to uncertainties over the mix of overnight and term RRPs 
as well as how 
      
    
   
    
    
    
                       
              
          
      
   
    regulatory reforms might 
affect money markets when rates rise from the zero lower 
bound. In terms of the expected levels of money market rates at liftoff, the median 
estimate across respondents for the level of the federal funds effective rate was 

35 basis pointsŠ
very close to the center of the expected target range. 
The April 
surveys also asked respondents for the probability 
they attach to the level of the 
effective rate averaging within certain ranges during the month following liftoff.  
As 
shown in the top-right panel, respondents assigned very high probabilities to the 

effective rate 
being within the target range and only a negligible probability to the 

effective 
rate 
being outside the range. 
Finally, as discussed in the memo sent to the
 Committee on April 15, we would 
like to ask the Committee to vote on the authorization to renew for another year the 

standing liquidity swap arrangements with foreign central banks and NAFA swap 

arrangements. 
While the liquidity arrangements were authori
zed for an indefinite 
period in October 2013, the FOMC has the ability to unilaterally terminate its 

participation with 
six months™ notice. 
This is similar to the NAFA swap 
arrangements with Mexico and Canada, which are renewable annually on or before 

Dec
ember 15 of each year and require 
six 
months™ notice to terminate. 
The use of liquidity swap lines recently has been sparse, as shown in the middle-
left panel, with demand limited to regularly scheduled 
seven
-day dollar auctions held 
by the 
Bank of Japan
 over year
-end and March quarter-end.  
While this is consistent 
with relatively calm conditions in 
dollar funding markets
, we believe the swap lines 
are an important liquidity backstop, helping to maintain stability and confidence in 

global funding markets.  Additionally, liquidity swap and NAFA swap arrangements 

are tangible and constructive signals of cooperation among central banks, and their 
attendant costs are minimal.
 Liquidity swap arrangements also support the approach 
that the Federal Reserve along 
with other major central banks have endorsed that 
there are ﬁno technical obstaclesﬂ to central banks™ capabilities to provide liquidity 
quickly to a systemically important financial market utility. 
Therefore, the staff 
recommends that the Committee vote to renew the liquidity swap lines and NAFA 

arrangements. 
I will now turn back to Simon to discuss the calculation methodology for the 
effective funds rate. 
MR. POTTER.  Thanks, Lorie.  As detailed in a memo circulated in advance of 
the meeting, the staff has assessed that there might be some merit in changing the 

calculation methodology underlying the federal funds effective rate concurrent with 

the change in data source to the 
FR 2420.  We are interested in the Committee™s 
initial feedback on this 
assessment. 
As you a
re aware, the federal funds effective rate is currently calculated as a 
volume-weighted mean.  That is, each observed transaction rate is weighted by the 

share of total volume transacted at this rate
, and the effective rate is the sum of these 
                         
    
             
                      
 weighted rates.
 The distribution of volume by rates for a particular day from the 
FR 2420 data is shown in the middle-
right panel. 
The 
staff
™s 
assessment is that it may be more appropriate to calculate the effective 
rate as the median (
that is
, the 50
th percentile) of the distribution rather than its mean. 
As shown in the bottom-left panel, the volume-
weighted median generates a statistic 
that is the same as
, or very close to, 
the mean at most times
 except for 
the crisis 
period.  However, on tho
se occasions 
when
 the mean and median do differ 
significantly, the 
staff
™s 
preliminary analysis shows that the median is typically a 
better measure of broad money market conditions across a wide range of situations.  

Moreover, the median is much more robus
t to invalid data.
 In general, for an invalid 
transaction to 
affect
 the median, it must have a large volume attached to it, while the 
mean can be moved by an invalid transaction that has a more typical volume and rate.  

The s
taff believes this characteris
tic of the median would enhance both the integrity 
of the effective federal funds rate as a reference rate as well its credibility as a 

monetary policy instrument. 
 We look forward to your views on this subject, and, 
based on your feedback, the 
staff may p
resent a plan to move forward at the June 
meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  T
hat concludes our remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Are there questions or comments
, particularly in 
response to Simon™s request for comments on the federal funds rate?  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I found 
that 
the staff memo and also the 
memo to Reserve Bank r
esearch 
directors
 made a pretty good case, 
to my min
d, for using the 
volume-weighted median.  I
t™s a better measure of financial conditions for all the reasons that 
you went through, Simon.  
In addition, it™s more difficult to manipulate. 
What 
I mean 
is, in 
theory, 
any trade moves a mean, whereas to move the median
, it either needs to be 
fu
rther 
away 
or bigger.  Anyway, I think it is a good case, and I guess I have two questions 
relating to 
when 
we do ﬁ
socialize
ﬂ this to the public, 
which we may not have the answers 
to today.  One is, 
will a 
median versus a mean have a differential effect on existing contracts
, of which there are many 
trillions?
  Two is, I™d be interested to hear how market participants react to this mean
Œmedian 
thing. 
I think that the potential cost that™s laid out in 
the memo is that of successfully 
communicating 
it to the public.  I don™t really see that as an insurmountable concern.  I mean, 
                       
       
   
  
    
    
                 
  
      very few people even know what the 
effective 
federal funds rate is in the first place, and the kind 
of people who know that ar
e probably able to tell the difference between a 
volume-weighted 
mean and a median if they want to and need to.  I don™t see that as a big thing, but I would 
certainly be sensitive to the views of market participants on that. 
MR. POTTER. 
In terms of the c
ontracts that are written on the 
effective 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate, if we were to pursue this, there would be a long lead time 
during which 
the market 

participants would know that the change is coming.  We would have to weigh the effect that that 

would have, an
d it would have some effect because the median is not always equal to the mean, 

but many of these contracts average over a long period of time.  
So occasions on particular days 
when 
we do see differences 
are
 probably not going to have a large 
effect
 on tho
se contracts. 
What they will be perhaps more interested in is the level of rates that you™ll be setting in 
the future.  If you think about a contract in 2016, that™s going to be very heavily influenced by 

where they think you™ll be setting the target rate. 
The
 kinds of issues to do with the gap between 
the mean and the median are very second-order, compared 
with
 that.  They also have to think of 
things 
like
, ﬁWhere would the 
effective 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate
 be trading in the range?,ﬂ and so on.  
I don™t believe this change is anything 
of 
first
-order importance for 
a contract, and it™s pretty 
typical for the uncertainty that market participants face overall in terms of trading in the fed
eral 
funds market
, which 
we know some large participants have 
left
 and s
ome other participants 
could leave in the future, 
affecting where the federal
 funds 
rate 
trades 
in the range. 
On the market participants™ knowledge of this, I agree that many people probably don™t 
know that much about the detailed calculation of 
the effective 
federal funds rate.  Those who do 
would find it pretty understandable, I believe, that we switch from a volume-weighted mean to a 

volume-weighted median, partly because one of the things that we do know is 
that 
the mean is 
       
                                    
        quite heavily influ
enced by a small transaction at a rate 
that 
is far away from where most of the 
volume is. 
MR. POWELL.  That™s helpful. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I
n the 
LIBOR 
case, the issue about really 
small changes in LIBOR from what was perceived to be a correct LIBOR pricing was considered 

a big issue. 
Here you™ve got a picture of 
a 20 or 40 basis point difference.  I
t gives me a little bit 
of pause that the people 
who
 are contracting on this might be upset by this change. 
MR. POTTER. 
In the crisis period, particularly as the balance sheet got larger, we didn™t 
have that much control over the fed
eral
 funds 
rate
, and that was an event that really was 
exogenous to the calculation method.  Whichever calculation method we would have used, there 

would have been more variance at that time.  If
, arbitrarily
, the Federal Reserve
 had turned up on 
one day and sa
id, ﬁWe are going to change that calculation method,ﬂ without any kind 
of 
forewarning, that would make payments flow differentially to what people expected.  The plan 

here is
, if there is support f
or moving forward 
with
 this, 
it will be clearly communicated well in 
advance, and it will be the type of consideration that all market participants should have to take 

into account when pricing contracts. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments?  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL. 
Well,
 I have a question now.  This 
refers 
to the expectations about the 
size of the 
ON RRP facility 
post-
liftoff. 
This is anecdotal, but it sounds like there™s a systematic 
difference between 
buy-side 
participants
, who tend to be predicting a larger facility, and primary 
                      
        
      
    
     
   dealers
, who are predicting something more in line with what the Committee has been thinking 
of saying.  
Is that accurate? 
MS. LOGAN. We do see some distinction between the two.  The median for the dealers 
is 
$190 billion at liftoff for demand.  For the buy side, 
it is 
$350 billion.  T
here is some variation, 
but there is variation within the dealer estimates as well.
  But I think you are correct that the buy 
side is skewed a bit higher. 
MR. POTTER. 
There is variation within the same 
firm
. MR. POWELL.  Are we incl
ined to attribute more or less weight to the buy side? 
MS. LOGAN.  I don™t think there™s anything in the commentary that would suggest the 
buy side has some better analytics of understanding that from what we™re reading in the 

commentary.  As Simon said, even within firms, we™re hearing the numbers to be quite different.  

In the survey, we did find that some firms had produced written reports that had different 

expectations than 
those 
who
 filled out the survey, 
so I don™t think there™s any additional 
knowledge or analytics that the buy side is drawing upon. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions or comments?  [No response]  Okay.  Then let™s turn 
to swap arrangements.  We have a proposal to renew both the NAFA swap arrangement with 

Canada and Mexico and a proposal to renew the liquidity swap arrangements.  L
et me first ask 
whether there are any questions or comments on these proposals.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d like to respectfully dissent again 
on the 
foreign swap arrangements.  
The 
Richmond 
Reserve Bank has dissented on these swap lines 
going back 20 years on the grounds that they facilitate inappropriate actions by 
the Fed
eral 
Reserve
.  One is sterilized foreign exchange operations, which are inappropriate for reasons I 
       
   
                
                     
   
    
                                                              spoke about in January.  The other is channeling intergovernmental assistance to our 
NAFA 
partners, among others, who may be well deserving of such assistance, but that constitutes fiscal 
policy that™s best left to fiscal authorities
, in our view.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments or questions?  [No response]  Okay.  Hearing 
none, seeing none, we need two separate votes
.  I™d like to first ask
Šand this is an FOMC 
voteŠon the renewal of the NAFA swap arrangements with Canada and Mexico.  All in favor? 

[Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed? 
MR. LACKER.  Opposed. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker is opposed. 
Okay.  I think that passes, and, second, 
I™d like to ask for a vote on the liquidity swap arrangements.  All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes] 

Any opposed? 
MR. LACKER.  Opposed. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Okay.  We need one more vote to ratify 
domestic open 
market operations
. Is there a motion? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Any opposed?
  [No response] 
Okay. 
We will consider those 
approved 
as well
.  Next, I think we™re going to move to our second topic, which is normalization 
procedures, and I™m going to call on Ellen Meade to provide 
a briefing. 
MS. MEADE.
2  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  I will be referring to the handout 
labeled ﬁMaterials for Briefing on Governance Issues Associated with Liftoff.ﬂ  
When you commence the normalization process, the Committee will set the 
stance of policy by announcing the new target range for the federal funds rate.  In 
addition, as you™ve discussed previously, the Committee and Board will set the 

administered rates
Šthe IOER rate will be set to the top of the new target range and 
the ON RRP rate will be set to the bottom of the new target range.  The Federal 

Reserve will also announce the details associated with the capacity of the ON RRP 
2 The 
materials 
used by 
Ms. Meade 
are 
appended 
to this 
transcript 
(appendix 2). 
            
                                      
    
          facility and the discount rate, which will be set at a spread above the top of the federal 

funds rate target range. 
Earlier this month, you received a memo outlining possible arrangements fo
r enhanced reporting of market developments and the governance of decisions on 

operational adjustments to the administered rates around the time of liftoff.  In the 

early days after the liftoff announcement, it may be somewhat difficult to get a clear 

pict
ure of how normalization is proceeding because it may take several days for some 
participants in money markets to adapt to the new market environment.  For example, 

money market participants may need to revise investment guidelines, counterparty 

limits, or other restrictions on their allocation of 
funds 
so that they are able to engage 
in the arbitrage opportun
ities available after liftoff. 
Even if the federal funds rate initially lies below the Committee™s new target 
range, you may judge that the prudent course is to monitor developments while giving 

money markets some time to adjust.  During these early days, you may find it useful 

to 
prearrange
 briefings during which the staff could provide updates on market 
developments and assess the effectiveness of pol
icy implementation, and you could 
ask questions.  For example, you could schedule daily briefings for perhaps the first 

two weeks following the liftoff announcement; such briefings could be held via audio 

or videoconference.  These briefings would not be F
OMC meetings
, so no transcripts 
or minutes would be prepared.  Should you wish to express your views about market 

developments or discuss whether to adjust the target range or the administered rates, 

the briefings could be readily converted into joint meetings of the Committee and 

Board.  If the liftoff process does not proceed as planned and the funds rate is 

persistently outside its new target range, then you would presumably wish to discuss 

the timing and course of possible policy actions, and the scheduled briefings would be 

replaced by joint videoconference meetings. 
As discussed in the memo we sent you, the FOMC and Board may also 
wish
 to 
establish decisionmaking procedures that would govern small operational adjustments 

to the administered rates after the first tw
o weeks or so following the liftoff 
announcement.  Adjustments to these administered rates could be helpful if the 

effective federal funds rate were persistently outside its new target range. The memo 

did not discuss the advantages or disadvantages associ
ated with adjusting the IOER 
and ON RRP rates, either separately or together, relative to the new target range for 

the federal funds rate.  The memo focused on the governance of any such 

adjustments, and we provided two approaches for you to consider. 
Under the first approach, each adjustment would be approved by a vote of the 
Committee or Board.  The Chair could convene a joint FOMC and Board meeting via 

videoconference at which you could discuss potential changes to the administered 

rates; all policymaker
s would be involved in the discussion of changes to the IOER 

and ON RRP rates.  Following that discussion, the FOMC would vote on any change 

to the ON RRP rate, while the Board would approve any change to the IOER rate.  A 

variation on this approach would involve policymakers using SDS to submit 

comments on proposed adjustments to one or both of the administered rates, with 
       
           
      
  
        
   
                      
   
    
          
           
 approvals for changes to the ON RRP rate and/or IOER rate recorded via notation 

votes by the FOMC and Board, respectively.  While this would be operationally less 

burdensome than holding a meeting, and would not require the preparation of 

transcripts and minutes, it would not allow for an interactive discussion and, as a 

result, might be most appropriate for relatively straightforward adj
ustments that the 
Committee had previously discussed. 
Under the second approach, you would delegate to the Chair authority to adjust 
the ON RRP and IOER rates, subject to limitations established by the FOMC and 

Board.  If the first couple of weeks of the normalization process had proceeded 

smoothly and you felt comfortable with the delegation approach, one of the staff 

briefings could be converted to a meeting at which you would formally take the 

decision to delegate authority.  You might prefer this approach to ensure that the 

Federal Reserve is able to respond quickly should market conditions warrant.  This 

delegation would allow the Chair to make small adjustments to the administered rates 

if deemed necessary to keep the federal funds rate trading in its 
new target range.  As 

an example, the memo suggested that the Chair could be authorized to make 

adjustments of perhaps 5 or 10 basis points in the administered rates and 
also 

indicated that policymakers could determine in advance whether they preferred to 

address such a situation by adjusting the IOER rate, the ON RRP rate, or both rates in 

parallel in order to maintain a constant spread between them. There may be some 

communications advantages associated with the delegation scenario in that it would 

clearly separate your decisions on the stance of policy
Šthe target range for the 
federal funds rate established by the FOMC
Šfrom small technical adjustments to the 
administered rates necessary to achieve that policy stance. 
The final page of your handout lists the questions that were distributed with the 
memo for today™s go-round on governance issues.  Another memo that was 

distributed at the same time concerned the setting of the primary credit rate.  The 

lending rate for primary credit was originally set in 20
03 at 100 basis points above the 
Committee™s target for the federal funds rate.  The spread was reduced twice during 

the financial crisis, and has stood 50 basis points above the top of the federal funds 

rate target range since February 2010.  The memo discussed two options for the 

setting of the 
primary credit rate spread:  maintaining that spread at 50 basis points 
above the top of the Committee™s new funds rate target range at the time of liftoff and 

for some period thereafter, or raising the spread to 1
00 basis points at the time of 
liftoff.  During the go-round, you may also wish to share any views you might have 

on that issue.  Thank you; this concludes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Before we turn to questions for Ellen and our go-round, I 
would like to just make a few remarks of my own.  
At the outset, I want to emphasize that 
although our policy tools, by law, have different governance structures, the overall conduct of 

monetary policy is obviously the purview of the FOMC.  The gov
ernance issues before us this 
                           
                   
       morning really don™t concern the determination of our intended stance of monetary policy.  
Rather, this discussion pertains to the narrow issue of how to make tactical adjustments to our 

policy tools to deliver the intended st
ance of policy. 
We have spent a great deal of time and effort in devising our framework for 
normalization, and I am highly confident that it will work. But it is clear that when the time 

comes to raise the federal funds rate, we will face unprecedented un
certainties, and we need to 
stand ready to make adjustments, if needed.  It is important that we agree on an approach for 

managing both the initial phase of liftoff and the process for subsequent adjustments that may 

conceivably be needed once that initial 
phase is complete. 
The staff memo proposed that, 
for the first two weeks or so after liftoff
, we set aside time 
on our calendars to receive frequent market updates and, if necessary, hold meetings to make 

adjustments to our tools through the Committee and Board votes.  During this time, the FOMC 

may need to reconsider the setting of our tools, including the administered rates, parameters of 
the overnight RRP facility, and the use of term tools.  I just want to make clear that
, in my own 
view, decisions during this initial period should not be delegated to me. 
The FOMC and Board should vote on adjustments that are deemed necessary after 
debating the relevant policy considerations and alternative approaches.  For example, if the funds 

rate is trading soft relative to the target range, the Committee should decide whether to raise both 

rates, keeping 
the 
IOER

 RRP 
spread
 constant, or to instead adjust only one of the rates.  
These decisions are not entirely tactical or routine.  My expectation, however, is tha
t after some 
initial period, which the memo is guessing might be two weeks, we will have a reasonably good 

sense 
regarding
 how our approach is working, and only minor adjustments, if any, might be 
subsequently needed to keep the federal funds rate in the t
arget range. 
              
   
         
  
    
         
   
Assuming that our approach works roughly as expected, such intensive monitoring on the 
part of the Committee shouldn™t be necessary beyond this initial phase.  We ought to be able to 
settle into an arrangement in which
, at most
, modest adjustm
ent to our tools, especially to the 
administered rates, will be called for to keep the federal funds rate in the target range.
  I hope 
that such adjustments, if they prove necessary at all, can be made in a simple and efficient 

manner.  From a practical pe
rspective, I tend to favor an approach in which authority is delegated 

to me as 
Chair to make modest adjustments, perhaps up to 5 or 10 basis points, to the IOER and 

overnight RRP rates to help maintain the federal funds rate 
in the Committee™s target range. 
These adjustments would be in accordance with a strategy pertaining, for example, to the spread 

that had been decided by the Committee.  In such circumstances, I would, of course, keep the 

Committee fully apprised of ongoing developments.  If any problems in implementing policy 

emerge
d, clearly we would need to convene a meeting. 
I would expect the Committee to decide on any such delegation only at a time when we 
feel we have a good sense for how our approach is working and n
ot at the time of liftoff. Of 

course, if many of you are not comfortable with such an arrangement, we will have to, as Ellen 

indicated, work out a method for holding Committee and Board votes, likely by notation voting, 

and possibly on short notice, to ma
ke these potential modest adjustments once the first couple of 
weeks after liftoff have passed.
  Regardless of the approach we agree on, it 
will be important that 
it serve
s to reinforce rather than undermine market confidence and our normalization approach.  
Let me stop there.  I very much look forward to hearing your views.  W
e have now scheduled a 
full go-round, soŠ
Vice Chairman
 Dudley. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
So I am going to make a forecast that we are all going to 
agree that
, at least for the first few 
weeks
, we are going to want to have some sort of 
a discussion 
            
        
             
  
        
       if the funds rate is trading outside the target range.
  If we are going to do that, I have a couple of 
questions of the staff.  
At w
hat time of day would it be most appropriate to have those meetings? 
How would it work in terms of having the meeting, making the decision, notifying the marketsŠ 

what would the timeline look like as you are carrying that forward?  Because the memo didn™t 

really get into the mechanics of how you would actually implem
ent this.  I was just curious if 
there is any thought given to that at this point. 
MS. MEADE.  I think that we were trying to be optimistic when writing the memo
.  So we were thinking about the first couple of weeks or so as being briefings and not being about 

decisionmaking. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let™s say they were 
about decisionmaking.  When will 
you know enough in the day to have a meeting, to have decided?  When would you have to 

announce it to the market? 
MR. POTTER. We are still looking at when some of the volume is transacted and also 
scheduling, because not everyone is in the same time zone.  I think 
we believe that 
later in the 
afternoon 
will work
.  And that will give us enough time to then announce to the market that 
evening what the changes would be. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay. 

MR. POTTER.  The other choice is to announce very early in the morning. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I guess I would say that
, if we agree on this, we should 
nail that down pretty soon, because, in principle, this could happen as early as June, and it would 

be helpful if people actually had the time blocked out on their calendar.  I think we need to figure 

out the time slot. 
MR. POTTER.  We are working on it. 
                             
       
               
    
  
      CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions before we begin the round?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Just to clarify your proposed approach, 
any adjustment in the first two weeks of the overnight reverse repo rate would be an FOMC 

meeting. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  I know the memo used two weeks.  I am thinking there is an 
initial period. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Until things settle down, basically. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. When we are figuring things out, and if we have to make 
adjustments, we need to meet, we need to discuss it, and during that phase, until 
we decide 
further things are
Šlet me just call them ﬁroutineﬂ
Šthere would be FOMC votes.  We would 
probably be having videoconference briefings that would be converted to meetings, and both 

groups would be voting. O
nly after whatever that initial period is 
when
 things have settled down 
would we agree 
that 
now we have fallen into a rhythm, and any adjustments, if they are needed 
at all
ŠI mean, I think 
in 
the most likely case, we are not going to need any further 
adjustmentsŠbut if we do, those things 
will be 
routine, and then we are talking about delegating. 
Let™s see.  First, President Lacker, then President Rosengren. 
MR. LACKER. 
In this initial period, would you envision all meetings, or a mix of 
briefings and meetings? 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
My understanding is 
the idea 
is that 
we are going to preschedule 
these times. 
When we start the video meeting, we will have some sense of whether things are 
going smoothly, and we really don™t have decisions to make, in which case the staff could be 

relieved of the burden of doing transcripts and so forth.  I would call that a briefing.  
But clearly, 
if things are not going very smoothly and we need to deliberate, we would convene that as a 
         
           
      
  
                  meeting 
right from the outset
.  And, I suppose, even in the middle, if something bega
n as a 
briefing, and we decided in the middle of that briefing, ﬁLook, we need to discuss something.ﬂ 
Is that fair 
to say? 
MS. MEADE.  Yes. 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
We could then say, ﬁLook, let™s convert this now to a joint Board and 
FOMC meeting.ﬂ 
MR. LACKER. 
Okay.  I ask because it has been a while since this group gathered in a 
briefing format.  I think we did it back during the crisis.  There are some rules about not saying 

something that matters, or has substance, orŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN. Well, we can™t deliberat
e. 
MR. LACKER.  That™s not quiteŠ 

CHAIR YELLEN. We can™t deliberate. 

MS. MEADE.  It is really a distinction, I believe, between asking questions and 
discussing among yourselves. 
MR. LACKER. 
If we have something to say
, like ﬁI think this means we should do 
X,ﬂ then we have to convert it to a meeting to say that? 
MR. 
POTTER
.  Well, you could pose it as a question. 
MR. ROSENGREN
.  Like in 
Jeopardy!
  You have to ask a question.  [Laughter] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I see Scott 
Alvarez is 
fretting
 back there. 
MR. 
ALVAR
EZ.  A briefing is an interaction with the staff, and you can ask questions, 
and it is for the purpose of disseminating information.  If the Committee wanted to have a 

discussion in which they are deliberating about a decision, that would be a meeting itse
lf. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 
      
          
          
                MR. ALVAREZ
.  We could set it up so that it could start as a briefing and be converted 
into a meeting, if that seemed to be the direction the Committee wanted to go in.  We can, 
as the 
Chair says
ŠI think the thought process is 
that 
we will have a pretty good idea before we set it up 
whether there is going to be a discussion, and we will just start from scratch as a meeting if that
™s the case. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Just a 
follow-
up to 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley™s question.  For how 
many of the short-term credit markets is it important to know about the closing in Europe?  A
s we think about the timing of the meetings, are there a bunch of short-
term instruments 
that
 would 
make it 
relevant to 
act
 in the morning, 
because of when Europe closes? 
MS. LOGAN. 
For the repo markets, most of that is going to be U.S. activity, and that is 
going to be early in the morning.  For unsecured fed
eral
 funds and E
urodollars
, there is going to 
be some very active trading in the ea
rly morning hours from Europe.  We saw this during the 
crisis when there was a lot of volume done early, and then there is some late-
day volume as well 
in the 
United States
.  It is going to be a mix.  We are going to do more analysis on the full pattern 
of volume data in the unsecured markets before we recommend a time of 3:30 or 4:00 or 4:30 in 

the late afternoon.  But you can think of the unsecured markets as having two trading periods, 

and the repo as being mostly very early in the morning. 
MR. ROSENGREN
.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  I was looking for a clarification.  In the context, the memo offers that 
both the 
IOER or ON RRP 
rates might be subject to these technical adjustments if we delegate 
them.  When I go back and look 
at the normalization principles, as they are described, they talk 
        
     
                 
              
          about IOER as being the primary mechanism by which we will move the funds rate into the 
target range. 
Let™s say we delegate on a technical adjustment basis 
the 
ON RRP rate
.  That 
seems to 
take care of itself.  But by delegating some adjustment to 
the 
IOER 
rate
, does that 
signal a change in policy stance in any way?  Or will it be understood that you are trying to move 

the spread in lockstep? 
MR. POTTER.  I have gotten this question quite a few times in public.  I use an idea that 
Jamie came up with, which is 
that 
everything we are doing in terms of the mechanics of lifting 

rates comes from interest on excess reserves.  We are trying to keep the overnight RRP as small 

as possible, and that me
ans it is just trying to get better trading in the arbitrage relationship 
in 
which 
you are getting interest on excess reserves. 
I view it as the primary way we are lifting 
rates.  But it is not really a measure of the stance of policy.  The stance of policy is the federal 

funds target range. 
MS. GEORGE.  Okay.  In the context of these basis points we have talked about, it 
would be understood these are technical moves, and thatŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN.  The Committee has set the target range and decided to make small 
adjustments to keep the funds rate there. 
MS. GEORGE.  All right.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Yes.  This is just a logistical question, Madam Chair.  Do I understand 
correctly that what you anticipate doing is, if we agree with the concept of having these 

prearranged 
briefings, that all of our calendars will need to be kept open for two weeks following 
each of the next I-don™t-know-how-
many FOMC meetings? 
       
     
         
                    
 MS. MEADE.  I think we were thinking initially about the liftoff 
meeting.  Oh, well, yes, 
of course. 
MR. TARULLO.  Unless you know something I don™t know.  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You™d have to prepare for the earliest meeting you might 
liftoff for, right? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I suppose
ŠI mean, people will have some conflicts,
 right? 
MR. TARULLO.  They have major ones. 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
We can™t for the next whatever meetings
ŠI mean, we can try to 
block out 
those times.  But
 some people will have trips presumably that they can™tŠI suppose if 
somebody can™t participateŠ 
MR. TARULL
O.  There are already a number of international meetings that several of us 
on the Board, 
I think
, are going to haveŠand 
Vice Chairman Dudley will have conflicts with as 
well. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s my point.  I™d prefer to get this nailed down 
sooner rather than later, so we can block out the time as efficiently as possible.  That would be 

my preference. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Maybe we can call in
ŠI mean, we normally have videoconferences, 
but conceivably we can 
call. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In the old days, 
we had telephone calls, right? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. 
Maybe we could have some telephone calls that people could 
take fromŠ 
MR. POTTER.  As long as they were secure.  That would be the 
issue. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Well, we need to work this out for sure.  Governor Brainard. 
             
               
             
      
  
  MS. BRAINARD. 
This is just 
from a communications point of view.  Would we 
communicate at the outset that the FOMC is going into the mode of daily briefings with the 
possibility that they could take intermeeting action?  Or would we simpl
y be silent on that until 
such time as we found it necessary to take an action? 
MS. MEADE.  The minutes of this discussion will reflect that you have discussed some 
of these issues. 
MR. POTTER.  I take your question as, 
ﬁLet™s be very careful,
ﬂ and I agree
 we should be 
very, very careful.  Maybe we want to think hard about how this is described, because we don™t 

want everyone thinking every day the FOMC is meeting at 4:00 p.m., and we are waiting for this 

thing to come over the wires 
about what the rates ar
e going to be the next day.  That is probably 
notŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  This is contingen
cy planning. 
MR. POTTER.  Yes.  This is a contingency plan. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
This is contingency planning for something that doesn™t 
work as well as we think i
t is going to work.  I think we want to present it in that manner. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. 
My question 
is in terms of contingenciesŠdo you anticipate that we could 
do this by notation vote?  Possibly, 
if there was a conflict
 and you 
were
 traveling, you missed the 
videoconference and 
maybe a staff member was sitting in
Šthey could give you a quick 
executive summary and then the notation vote could be done by a BlackBerry anywhere, right? 
MR. POTTER. 
Again, we would have to look at the timing exactly and tell you what that 
window is, because the meeting could go quite long.  Then we would still have to put out the 

announcement or switch to 7:00 a.m. in the morning or something. 
         
             
      
  
  
                  
     
  MR. EVANS. 
You anticipate making an adjustment in the middle of the dayŠI mean, 
for the market. 
MR. POTTER.  No, no.  After the meeting, it is probably pretty good practice to 
announce the decision.  I would feel more comfortable announcing quite soon after the 
conclusion of the meeting, rather than waiting, 
but
Š MR. EVANS.  That does put a premium on the turnaround. 

MR. POTTER. 
Šyou could have some time gap there and 
instead 
do it earl
y in the 
morning.  To 
Governor Brainard™s question, there 
are 
a lot of complications
Šif this is the way 
you want to goŠ
that w
e would need to describe to you, so you understood exactly which way 
you wanted to go. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Presumably, Simon, you would want to announce this 
the day before, because the money market trading starts very early they need to have this 

information, so they can digest it. 
MR. POTTER.  We are actively checking so you have the full information to 
make 
that 
choice. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let™s begin the go-
round.  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the first question, m
y answer 
is ﬁY
es.ﬂ It™s as simple as that. 
On the second question, regarding approaches, I actually think you laid 
out 
the approach we should take really well in your comments just a moment ago.  W
e hope we 
won™t need to do any of this, but having a 
serious meeting 
to 
discuss what is causing the 
funds 
rate to 
trad
e outside 
the target range, understanding what the effects of moving the two different 
administered rates would be, and having 
FOMC
/Board of Governors 
decisions seems like the 
right 
approach.  But once things haveŠ
I think ﬁsettled downﬂ is the phrase 
you usedŠ
I think it 
                
          
                  
      
       would be completely appropriate to delegate to you any further tweaks, plus or minus 10 basis 
points, say, to the two administered rates.  I fully support the approach that you laid out today.  
I do view this as representing prudent contingency planning more than something that I would 

expect to happen.  I am still pretty confident that we won™t have problems keeping the fed
eral 

funds rate within the range, but I think it is goo
d planning. 
I do think that one of the issues that came up 
in the questions 
asked 
in the 
past minute or 
two is really important, and that is about the communication
s in connection with 
this.  
One of the 
Committee™s long
-standing principles is that, to th
e extent possible, policy decisions regarding 
monetary policy really should be separated from technical issues associated with the 

implementation of policy.  
I™m thinking back to the good old days when the Desk had wide 
latitude to adjust the amount of 
reserves in the 
System
 in order to achieve the 
target fed
eral
 funds 
rate.  I think it would be very useful, if we canŠand this is going to be 
the 
challengeŠ
frame 
the 
communications regarding 
these adjustments t
o the administered rates so 
that 
we indicate t
hat 
these are just mostly technical decisions reflecting, of course, the decisions of the FOMC and the 

Board of Governors on the policy decisions, but really communicated as technical means to 

achieve the policy goals that we have agreed on.  
We really wan
t to avoid this perception that 
moving around these administered rates reflects some kind of shift in the stance of policy or 

creating some noise 
in connection with
 that.  I think we are doing prudent planning.  It is April 

now.  Thinking through these iss
ues now 
makes a lot of sense. 
Again, I support the approach 
that you laid out.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am in favor of delegating to the C
hair 
certain tactical decisions that en
sure that we attain the policy goals voted on by the FOMC.  This 
             
        
  
      
   
   
  
        
          is consistent with the FOMC setting strategy 
but delegating tactical implementation of monetary 
policy.  However, determining the scope and timing of that delegation should wait until we have 
a better understanding of how the constellation of short-
term interest rates will respond to our 
setting of IOER and overnight RRP 
rates 
at, and immediately following, liftoff.  I am still 
somewhat uncertain about how successfully we will be able to targe
t the federal funds rate and 
other short-
term rates at liftoff.  As a result, I could imagine a wide variety of adjustments that 
may be necessary following liftoff. 
While the federal funds rate and other short-term rates may be comfortably bounded by 
the IOER and overnight RRP 
rates
, I can easily imagine situations 
in which 
that is not the case. I 
can also imagine circumstances in which some market rates do not adjust as expected to changes 

in our policy rates. In addition, it is difficult to predict how variable policy or market rates will 

be at liftoff. 
My preferred approach, 
in light of
 my concerns, would be to have frequent briefings, 
initially following liftoff, 
along 
with the flexibility to turn those 
into 
joint FOMC
Board 
meetings, if necessary.  Once the relationship of the funds rate and other market rates to our 

tools, as well as the variability of those rates, 
is better understood, we could agree on the 
appropriate delegation of tactical decisions to the 
Chair.  
Predetermining 
our arrangements for 
delegation at this time serves little purpose
, if they are quite likely to change after liftoff. I 
recommend being humble about how much we know now about liftoff and plan appropriately to 

have significant consultation and adjustments as we develop a more practical understanding of 

the challenges of lifting interest rates from the zero lower bound. 
Similarly, it is probably premature to determine the normal relationship we expect for the 
primary credit rate.  The current spread of 50 b
asis points above the IOER rate seems an 
           
   
                  
             
  
    
    
     
appropriate spread at liftoff. We can decide to alter the spread once it is clear where the federal 

funds rate and other short-
term rates are likely to trade relative to our policy tools. 
In summary, I suggest a highly flexible policy that is highly consultative.  Once 
relationships are better understood after liftoff, we can discuss delegation of tactical decisions for 

achieving our goals.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank 
you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable with a governance 
approach that involves prescheduled staff briefings for a period 
of time after liftoff and then
, after the initial period when things appear to have settled down, delegating authority to the C
hair 
to ma
ke small technical adjustments to the ON RRP and IOER rates between FOMC meetings. 
These technical adjustments would be for the purpose of keeping the funds rate from moving 

persistently outside the FOMC™s target range.  If the Committee agrees on the del
egation 
governance structure, then this delegation of authority should be communicated at the time of 
liftoff. 
It is important that the Committee be aware of the developments in financial markets and 
the effectiveness of policy implementation after the li
ftoff announcement, and the briefings 
would be very useful in that regard.  Whether two weeks is the appropriate time for the initial 

period isn™t clear to me at this point.  If we opt to prearrange daily briefings for two weeks, we 

might also prearrange a weekly briefing for the remainder of the intermeeting period.  Of course, 

the briefings could be converted to meetings, if necessary. 
I do believe it is important that we demonstrate after liftoff that we have the tools to bring 
the fed
eral 
funds rate int
o our target range.  That may necessitate making modest changes in the 
ON RRP rate or IOER rate in a nimble way.  Delegating the decisions for these technical 

changes to the 
Chair seems appropriate. I believe we should treat the IOER rate and the ON 
      
        
   
    
   
     
         
   
   
                  
RRP r
ate symmetrically with respect to delegation.  That is, if we delegate to the 
Chair, we 
should delegate the authority to make technical changes in both rates. 
Changes that are strategic policy decisions should remain under the purview of the full 
Committee
.  These would include decisions to deploy the auxiliary policy tools, like term 
deposits and term RRPs, as well as making larger changes in the IOER and RRP rates and, of 
course, changes in the federal
 funds rate target.  
Particularly if liftoff doesn™t g
o as planned and 
the funds rate is trading persistently outside its target range, the full Committee needs to be 

responsible for making those hard choices and helping to communicate them to the public.  The 

Chair shouldn™t have to go it alone. 
The Committe
e hasn™t had a full discussion of what constitutes successful liftoff.  This 
will help inform whether a technical adjustment is needed.  Let me offer 
the view 
that liftoff will 
be successful if the federal 
funds rate is within the target range
 on most, but not necessarily all, 
days.  In my view, successful liftoff does not require that the funds rate be at the midpoint of the 
range.  
We plan to operate with a target range of 25 basis points because we don™t expect to have 
precise control over the funds rate.  Under those conditions, I don™t think we should require the 

funds rate to be close to the midpoint of the range. 
Communication of any technical adjustments is an issue.  We have indicated to the public 
that at liftoff we will continue to target a range 
for the funds rate that is 25 basis points wide and 
set the IOER and ON RRP rates at the upper and lower bounds of the funds rate target range, 

respectively. 
If we find that adjustments are necessary to keep the funds rate in the target range, 
we must 
depart from these plans in one way or another.  Presumably, this can better be handled 
if, at the time of liftoff
, we acknowledge to the public that technical adjustments to the two rates 
might be necessary and that
, as we proceed with liftoff and normaliz
ation
, the Board of 
             
       
    
                
     
 Governors and FOMC have delegated authority to the Chair to make those adjustments, and 
also 
that any technical adjustments would not constitute a change in policy.  Thank you, Madam 

Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE
 CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable 
prescheduling the staff briefings during the first few weeks following liftoff.  They can be 

canceled if they are not needed
Šall is working smoothly, for example, and the federal funds rate 
is tr
ading within 
its
 target rangeŠor they could be converted to 
joint 
FOMC
Board 
meetings 
if 
adjustments to the overnight RRP and IOER rates are needed to keep the federal funds rate in its 

target range.  Obviously, we have to retain some flexibility about how 
long this period lasts
, depending on what our experience is. 
Turning to the governance approach beyond this initial period, I very much favor 
distinguishing between changes that are tactical, such as small shifts in the overnight RRP rate 
and the IOER rat
e to achieve the federal funds rate target selected by the Committee 
and changes 
in policy, which 
are 
shifts in the target federal funds rate
Šthis 
goes to President George™s 
question. 
I think there is a long history that tactical changes needed to implement the monetary 
policy stance that has been selected by the Committee can and should be delegated either to the 
Chair or to the Desk.  If you consider how policy was implemented prior to the crisis, the Desk, 

in close consultation with Board staff, decided 
how much 
in reserves to add or drain each day in 
order to keep the federal funds rate close to its target.  For many years, presumably as a 

governance measure, there was also one FOMC member on the call
, essentially to keep an eye 
on the proceedings. 
             
               
  
        
         
          
     The d
ecision on the amount of intervention and the means of intervention was left during 
normal times to the staff, the New York Desk, and the Division of 
Monetary Affairs at the 
Board.  In unusual circumstancesŠfor example, August 2007Š
the staff consulted clos
ely with 
the Chair in making those reserve adjustment decisions.  The issue in my mind is whether 

changes in the overnight RRP and the IOER rates that are small and designed to keep the federal 

funds rate in its target range meet this tactical criteria, an
d I think they do. 
The changes contemplated would be to implement the monetary policy stance that had 
already been mandated by the Committee.  
So t
his argues for delegation.  One could even argue 
for delegation to the Desk and the Division of Monetary Affairs staff, but I don™t see any reason 

to go this far.  I would favor delegating it to the C
hair to make clear that it is receiving the 
attention it deserves by senior policymakers.
  Also, delegation to the Chair might be more 
appropriate in this particular 
case
, because such 
decisions are about the level of interest rates 
offered 
on our facilities rather than
 as in the past, on the amount of reserves we might add or 
drain. 
To implement this after the initial period, I would give the C
hair the discretion to 
move 
the overnight RRP rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points, so a range of 20 basis points, 

and the IOER rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points 
as needed to keep the funds rate 
within its target range.  The adjustments could either be in tandem to maintain a constant spread, 

or the spread could be widened or narrowed subject to those criteria. 
In contrast to the delegation of modest IOER and overnight RRP rate changes to the 
Chair, I think any other changesŠ
such as implementing 
the time depo
sit facilit
y and things like 
that or changing the size of the cap on 
the overnight RRP facility
Šshould be left to the full 
Committee. With respect to the overnight RRP 
cap, this is pretty consequential because it will 
                 
      
     
                 
         
affect
 the composition of money market flows, and also it is unlikely that changes in the 
overnight RRP cap are going to be needed on a day-by-
day basis. 
So having the Committee 
make
 these changes is not going to be particularly arduous
; they
 will probably be made on a 
much more irregular ba
sis, if at all.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Yes, I™m comfortable scheduling a bunch of 
briefings that can be converted at short notice to meetings.  I think that adjustment of the IOER 

or the overnight RRP rates 
in the first few weeks following liftoff should clearly require an 
FOMC meeting. 
I would point out that it took us almost a year to figure out how we wanted to set the 
IOER and the overnight RRP rates relative to the funds rate.  Committee members brought 

different considerations to the tradeoffs involved, and the initial settings involve a co
mpromise 
among different views about those tradeoffs.  New information about performance of thos
e settings after liftoff is likely to inform Committee members™ views about those tradeoffs and 

likely require recalibration of that compromise. 
For me
, it™s hard to imagine a routine adjustment. 
The analogy has been drawn to the 
Desk™s draining and adding reserves through open market operations
. I™d point out that it has 
taken decades for those to become as routine as they 
did.  A
nd at times 
when 
the FOMC has 
changed its operational regime, those things have been tricky at first, 
and the Committee has 

likely
, in many of those instances, been very involved.  I™m thinking about the early 1980s and 
times in the 
1970s, 
when
 the instructions to the D
esk were very different.  
It™s going to take a 
while for changes to the IOER or overnight RRP rates to be seen as routine or technical rather 

than something 
like: 
ﬁAll right, we™ve set up a new regime, w
e™re trying to calibrate the settings 
          
       
  
     
  
                        
   of these things,
ﬂ and
 the Committee needs to be involved.  W
hat I™d advocate is that we 
plan to 
make all the decisions at meetings until the first meeting at which a decision 
that is made 
appears
, in hindsight, 
to have been 
clearly 
routine; from then on we 
can delegate th
e routine of 
changing 
it. I don™t think routine changes are likely
, to my mind.  If you think about it, what™s at stake 
here is the spread
: the 
arbitra
ge margin between the funds market and 
the 
IOER 
rate
.  It seems 
like 20 basis points, 15 basis points, somewhere in there.  That doesn™t seem like something 
that™s likely to fluctuate the way the need for adding or draining reserves fluctuated on a daily 

basis.
  If it fluctuates, that™s big news if it goes to 30 or 40 basis points.  I™d be kind of surprised 
about that, and I think we™d want to get to the bottom of it.  I don™t think we have an 

understanding of those markets in which it looks like, 
yes
, they should routinely fluctuate by 10 
or 20 basis points.  I™d urge us just to plan on making these decisions at meetings.  I™m happy to 

delegate if it comes to pass that these turn out to be routine decisions that the Committee feels 
like 
delegating.  Let™s go and make one of those decisions at a time like that and then delegate 
thereafter. 
I also wanted to talk about the discount rate spread.  The discount rate spread is 50 basis 
points, and it™s irrelevant to monetary policy right now in the sense that it doesn™t limit spikes in 
the federal funds rate when reserve supply is unexpectedly shortened.  It™s not going to be 

relevant to monetary policy implementation in that sense until
Š2020, I think
, is the latest staff 
projection.  I
ts relevance now is basically for small banks that come 
up short on reserves due to 
poor planning or some unforeseeable contingency t
hat they could claim is outside their control 
but probably isn™t.  Now, large banks have 
a ton 
of reserves 
that i
nsulate them against shocks, 
and they don™t come to the window.  Right now, in our current situation of 
large reserve 
             
             
      
     
         
  
     balances, this is basical
ly about giving the incentive to small banks to manage their accounts 
sensibly. 
I think our old normal spread of 100 basis points would provide a more appropriate 
incentive, given the amounts of money involved if you actually do the overnight calculation.  
I think we should move back to 100 when we lift off.  I would favor that.  It was there.  We set 

that in 2002. We did some analysis.  There was some thought given to the tradeoff involved.  I 

think it makes sense. 
It would also signal normalization in a 
way that would be useful.   
When you talk about discount window borrowing, the word ﬁstigmaﬂ inevitably comes 
up, and the idea is advanced that, well, keeping 
the primary credit rate 
low helps reduce stigma.  
That is certainly true in the only model we have of stigma and discount window lending, but the 

survey research we™ve done as part of the a group looking at discount window issuesŠthey did 

some survey work on stigma, and what they found is that it is not a relevant consideration for 

small banks. Small banks don™t feel stigmatized. Maybe they feel stigmatized already, but they 
don™t feel as if stigma inhibits their borrowing from the window.  It™s just a big bank or 
a too-
big-
to-fail 
bank 
kind of issue, and large banks don™t borrow now.  In the 
last 
crisis
, we lowered 
the primary credit rate
 when it looked as if there was a rationale for big banks borrowing at the 
window.  It turned out they were getting all of the money they needed from 
Federal Home Loan 
Banks anyway, s
o it didn™t seem to be particularly relevant to large banks either. I don™t think 
stigma is a reason to keep the discount rate spread at 50 basis point rather than 100.  That™s the 

import of that.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank
 you.  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My reaction to the questions posed is that 
they™re really matters of pragmatism.  I agree that planning for daily briefings with the option of 
                  
          
            
         
  
         
   invoking an FOMC meeting is sensible and 
worka
ble.  I™m certainly fine with that. 
I™m a
lso 
comfortable with the approach that you laid out
, with
 the Committee and Board making the 
decisions 
the first two weeks
, and then after that
, the delegation of small adjustments. 
So I™m comfortable in both 
cases
.  There are some details yet to be worked out, and under certain 
scenarios
, we may have time to work them out.  We could hear a second version of this possibly 
down the road. 
I haven™t given a lot of thought to the discount rate question, but I™m gla
d that President 
Lacker raised it and talked about it a little bit. 
With regard to
 trying to figure out what that 
spread should be, I want to throw out one thought, 
and that is a recollection that during the crisis, 

the Federal Home Loan Banks became a so
rt of surrogate discount window.  And the 
relationship of our setting of the rates to their operations and their settings may be relevant for us 

to consider. Those are my thoughts.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
First Vice President P
richard
. MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m entirely comfortable with the 
approach described by 
the
 staff and yourself to be used for informing the FOMC on the 
effectiveness of policy implementation during the initial period after liftoff.  
I™m al
so entirely 
comfortable with the approach 
described as that
 to be used for delegating authority to the C
hair 
on tactical matters once we have declared victory on a successful liftoff. 
As it concerns the spread between 
the 
IOER 
rate 
and the discount rate, I think it™s 
actually probably best to 
quiesce 
and minimize the variability at
, and immediately after
, liftoff. 
My preference would be to stay with the 50 basis point spread until we have some separation of 

these events.
  I think the number of moving parts 
at the 
time of liftoff could work against us, 
            
   
      
           
          
       
        especially as we try to understand all of the different things that could be happening, and one 
more change, I think, that isn™t 
necessary might best be saved for later. 
I will add to the earlier discussion on 
the median and midpointŠ
a behavioral issue that I 
would just like 
the staff to consider to the extent that we talk about changing the definition of the 
fed
eral
 funds rate.  I don™t know what the behavioral reaction to that would be
.  It seems like 
when we 
whisper
, people think we shout.  I just don™t know whether people would make more of 
that than is needed, again, at the time of liftoff.  I understand we™re not contemplating the 

definitional change then, but even announcing the plan of a change could have a behavioral 

effect.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  F
irst
, with respect to the meetings and 
briefings, I guess I™m having trouble seeing what the utility of daily briefings for a couple of 

weeks would be in the circumstance 
that 
we think is likely to obtain, which is that 
there™s a 
reasonably successful liftoff. 
It seems to me more likely that 
we would want a briefing or a 
meeting on the Friday following liftoff.  T
hereafter
, I™m just not sure how much there will be to 
say unless things are going wrong, in which case, as everybody says, we™re going to actually 

need meetings and not just briefings.  
But I just note that in passing.  I know this Committee can 

fill up virtually any
 meeting that is set with questions and conversation, but I™m just not sure how 
much there will be to say other than getting emails from Simon and Lorie telling us what has 

happened on day three. 
With respect to governance, like everybody, I think, who™s spoken on this point, I favor 
giving discretion to the Chair, but actually I think I would go further than the staff though.  

Indeed, I™m going to disagree with the Chair in the interest of giving her more discretion than she 
         
   
     
                     
      
     
          
  asked for.  I guess I don™t quite understand why we wouldn™t give her discretion for this kind of 
modest change in the IOER 
rate 
or the 
ON RRP 
rate
 or both, even in the immediate post-
liftoff 
period.  It is new, but we have spent most of the p
ast year talking about how important it is to 
have a smooth and credible liftoff.  And, notwithstanding my substantial uneasiness with the 

potential medium-
term effects of a large ON
 RRP facility, I™ve joined the consensus that our 
dominant goal should be that smooth and credible liftoff, and presumably that smoothness and 

credibility are going to be most importa
nt in the immediate post
-liftoff period, which is to say the 
first couple of days.  I
t seems to me that if we regard the adjustments as 
fine
-tuning 
in pursuit of 
a particular federal funds target rate range, it would be useful to give her the discretion in that 

first couple of days to make such adjustments in an effort to get, as Loretta says, to at least the 

bottom of that range. 
If there™s a major pro
blem with liftoff, we™re going to need another full FOMC meeting.  
But suppose, for example, there™s a little bit of softness in the floor on the first day or two after 
the announced liftoff, and that softness might be firmed by a modest adjustment in the 
IOER 
rate. 
A quick action of that sort might actually buttress the credibility of our tools and intentions 
right from the outset and thereby make the whole process smoother.  
I don™t think
, in any case, 
it represents a policy change, 
because we can talk a
bout it beforehand.  Now, it™s possible that 
markets might read such a quick adjustment as indicating that we lack confidence in the efficacy 
of the decision we had just made a day or two before.  But that™s a judgment that the Chair could 

make in consultation with those best able to discern what market sentiment and intentions may 

be. 
Just by indicating that nimbleness is a 
desideratum
, I think I™ve already explained 
why an 
FOMC decisionmaking process 
won™t 
do the trick.  I just think the logic of what we™re talking 
            
    
    
                 
           
              
     
     about here argues for giving the C
hair this kind of very limited discretion to adjust those two 
rates that we™ve been talking about and 
we will set at the time of liftoff in the period 
in which 
they might be most efficacious in changing or shaping perceptions of how this whole process is 
going to go. 
As to communication, it does seem to me proper to indicate in advance that small, 
operational adjustments might be made in the IOER and ON 
RRP rates between meetings. 
Characterizing those as op
erational adjustments beforehand and contemplating them
, I think
, helps reinforce the sense 
that 
these are technical changes rather than policy changes. 
The 
suggestion that any actual changes be noted by the D
esk, as opposed to 
the Chair or 
the 
Committee 
as a whole, also seems to me a good idea since it would reinforce the fact that these 
rates are more or less operational changes rather than policy changes. 
On the primary credit rate spread, I thought 
President Lacker
™s comments were very 
interesting.  No
twithstanding the fact that they are interesting and we should think about them, 
particularly this difference between 
small
 and large bank stigma when we do discuss this, I 
personally would prefer to wait until the staff thinking about stigma effects and perhaps other 
elements of the discount window are done and maybe a more fulsome memo 
has been 
produced 
and circulated so 
that 
we can have a discussion of that.  It seems to me we™ve got plenty on our 

plate right now, and we might usefully put that conversation off just a bit. 
I want to end by saying I hadn™t thought about it this way, but I fully endorse what 
Loretta said about the criteria for success in how we regard the meeting of the target range post
-liftoff, and I think if we all subscribe to that, it 
would be useful for us, through appropriate 

mechanisms
, to get that expectation out as well so that we™re being evaluated by commentators 
and markets in a manner consistent with what our actual intentions and aims are.
  Like 
President 
      
                    
       
  
      
          
       
    Mester
, again, this is another reason why I think 
these little adjustments even right after liftoff 
are fine for the 
Chair to make
.  And, 
like 
President Mester
, I think using any of the other tools is 
something that should involve the entire Committee.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Did I see a two
-hander?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Like Governor Tarullo, I came to the 
meeting prepared to support delegation in the first two weeks.  I interpreted your earlier 
suggestion as, 
one, respect for governance in a critical period and, 
two
, maybe a desire to have 
more of a group decision than an individual decision.  Could you maybe speak more for another 

moment or two on what your thinking is regarding that? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I feel 
that 
in the days after liftoff, if things are not going exactly as 
we intend, and the funds rate is drifting outside the range, I do really think it™s appropriate for the 

entire Committee to meet, discuss what is happening, try to get 
to the bottom of what the 
problem is, and decide on what the approach is. 
Now, we 
could make the decision 
that
 this is no big deal, the funds rate 
is just fluctuating 
around relative to the target range 
by 
more than we had anticipated and this is the ﬁnew normal.ﬂ 
If we 
want
ed 
to address it 
not by moving the band or changing the spread, but by moving one or 
more rates around to deal with this when we see persistent movements outside the range, and 

early on the Committee says, ﬁLet™s just do this. It™s not that big 
of 
a deal
.  That™s the way to 
address this
ﬂŠand at that point you regard those adjustments as essentially routine, and 
it™s early
, and then you want to delegate it along the lines of what Governor Tarullo said, 
I am 
perfectly comfortable with that, and
, of course, 
that makes life easier.  But I think the Committee 
needs to feel comfortable that we have established procedures that have been determined by the 

Committee that we think are workable and appropriate. First Vice President Holcomb. 
             
        
       
                
MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the staff briefings issue, I say by all 
means they should be useful and perhaps important.  If it should turn out that between the 
regularly scheduled FOMC meetings the funds rate begins to trade frequently below the 

overnight reverse repo r
ate for a reasonably sized ON RRP facility, I support the 
Chair having 
limited discretionary authority to restore 
funds rate control by raising both the IOER and the ON 
RRP rates while maintaining the spread between the two rates.  I agree with Governor Ta
rullo 
that this could be within the first days as well. 
That these rate changes are not to be subject to a 
vote would signal that they are technical adjustments designed simply to implement previously-

agreed
-upon policy.  The main focus would stay on the 
target band for the federal funds rate set 
by the FOMC. 
The simplicity of a system in which the IOER and the ON RRP rates are set equal to the 
top and bottom of the target funds rate band, respectively, is appealing and easily communicated.  

Deviations from that simple system should be temporary with 
reserve
-draining tools
, like term 
deposits and term RRPs, being brought to bear 
whe
n systematically greater interest rate control 
is required. 
I understand that we are entering uncharted territory and may need to act nimbly.  
Therefore, a good solution is for the FOMC and the Board to give the C
hair discretionary 
authority to adjust the IOER
ŒON RRP band relative to the funds rate target range between 
meetings while maintaining the width of the band at 25 basis points.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The staff has laid out a perfectly reasonable 
plan for prescheduled briefings during 
the first two weeks after liftoff.  I expect the process will 

go smoothly and these will end up like routine morning calls.  
If problems arise, I am 
                             
      
          
   
              comfortable with turning the briefings into formal teleconference meetings to handle any policy 
decisions we may have to make. 
After the initial burn
-in period
Šperhaps two weeksŠI also favor the Board and the 
Committee delegating a
uthority to the 
Chair to adjust the IOER and ON RRP rates by up to 5 to 
10 basis points, if necessary, to keep the funds rate within the target range.  I am comfortable 

delegating this authority as early as you™d like.  Even at the outset would be all righ
t with me. 
Basically, these are efficient ways to tweak the dials as necessary, and I see a communications 
advantage to this approach, 
as it reduces the odds of small technical adjustments to 
the 
IOER or 
the ON RRP 
rates being misread as changes in the st
ance of policy.  I completely trust that if any 
major issues arise
, the Chair will not hesitate to bring us in on the decisionmaking process. 
I did have a question.  I can™t remember if this was in the documents or other people have 
mentioned this, but at the time of the first liftoff, would we be comfortable preannouncing that 

we have no intention of adjusting the stance of monetary policy before the next policy meeting 
so that any intermeeting adjustments would be seen as nimble adjustments, just technica
lly to get 
the funds rate in the range? I mean, I can™t imagine that we would really think that we are going 
to have to have a policy tightening in between the first and the second meeting.  But it would be 

unusual, I understand that. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Certainly
, we should make clear that we have an intended target 
range that reflects policy and stand prepared to make adjustments in the administered rates
, and 

that we 
may need to do that. 
MR. EVANS. 
You can say that in your press conference rather than 
it finding its way 
into the statement. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
           
   
              
    
                   
     
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m not entirely comfortable 
with the 
pre
-commitment
 approach that President Evans outlined.  As the Vice Ch
air
man
 talked 
about in some of the remarks he made 
publicly in the intermeeting period, we don™t know 
exactly what is going to happen to financial market conditions necessarily at the time of liftoff.  

If we saw a 
very abrupt tightening in broader financial market conditions, there might be a 
reason for the Committee to think about retracing the steps they have taken, even 
within
 the 
intermeeting period.
  I thought it was an interesting idea, but I, myself, wouldn™t be comfortable 
with that.
  Thanks. 
CHAIR 
YELLEN.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would be happy to set my calendar for 
prescheduled staff briefings during the first two weeks to offer some insight, and I would be 

equally happy to remove them [laughter] 
if the staff judg
es that everything is going smoothly and 
there is nothing to report.  I am also comfortable delegating to the Chair a degree of authority to 
make technical adjustments, and I think we will know whether those are technical or more 
substantive as we go along
. On the issue of the 
discount rate spread, my comments here really are along the lines of 
President Lacker™s
ŠI think this issue doesn™t have much effect right now on overall financial 

market conditions.  But we did make changes to the discount rate during 
the crisis to narrow the 
spread and then widened it to its current 50 basis points.  
Smaller banks do regularly use this 

facility, and Boards of D
irectors 
of the 
Federal 
Reserve 
Banks 
are required to make 
recommendations about the rate. 
It seems worthwhi
le to me to clarify how this rate is going to 
work as we contemplate normalization so that we minimize confusion and perhaps even mixed 

signals at the time of liftoff. 
Thank you. 
              
           
       
       
    
       CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank 
you, Madam Chair.  I appreciate the thoughtful 
analysis and the memos that discuss the intermeeting governance of the IOER 
rate
, ON RRP 
rate, and other policy tools during the early weeks of liftoff.  I thought that the approach 

described of scheduling dai
ly staff 
briefings during those first few weeks is prudent and should 
meet our needs initially, given that we could convert them to official meetings as needed. 
One thing I would note is that it might not always be clear what it would mean to ﬁ
settle 
down,ﬂ so if liftoff takes place, say, in mid-
June or mid
-September, things might settle down 
after the passage of 
quarter-end and then you might have this issue of whether that is really 
settling down from the point of view of being able to deal with quarter-e
nd.
  You might want to 
have staff briefings, again, scheduled for the end of the following quarter, which I guess, 
if we 

raised in September, would be at the end of December.  
I think just the passage of time is not 

necessarily going to tell you 
that this 
is going to be working and working fine.  I think that is 
something to keep in mind as we go forward. 
The staff memo noted that there are quorum rules for the Committee.  Those might be 
useful in the context of these staff briefings.  Not everyone needs to be here for every meeting, 

and the Committee still can operate. 
That might come up in this situation.  I didn™t say this at the 
very beginning, but I should say that I am very confident that this is all about contingency 

planning.  
I am confident the too
ls are going to work.  I think these 
meetings 
are going to 
become
 boring very quickly.  It is going to be like the call.  Not to say that™s boring, butŠ 
[laughter]Š
I misspoke.  But it will become routine
, at least
.  T
hat™s our base
line 
scenario, but I 
do think it™s useful to engage in this contingency planning. 
      
                 
   
      
            
              
   
  I think I am going to be in the minority on my next point, which is, can we trans
ition 
to a 
situation 
in which 
we simply delegate so
-called technical decisions to the 
Chair? 
Here I am not 
supportive of that delegation, and my answer there is shaped by three considerations. First, when 
my staff and I thought about the context in which increases in the ON RRP rate would be 

considered, we weren™t sure that those situations would be that technical 
per se 
or tactical.  It 
seemed like those would be situations 
in which the effective fed
eral
 funds rate would be below 
the bottom of the target range, and that seemed likely to occur in conjunction with the cap on the 

ON RRP volume being binding.  Then there would be some interaction, 
at least
, in your 
discussion about raising the ON RRP rate, and also discussion about raising the cap.  Now, the 

cap is a big deal.  We have talked about that at length.  The Committee certainly has strong 

views about that.  I
t just 
immediately seemed to bring substantive issues into play. 
The second con
sideration is that, a
s I listen to people talk about analogies with the past, if 
we were talking about delegating to the staff, I would almost be more comfortable 
with that 
than 
delegating to the C
hair.  
[Laughter] 
I say that because 
I think 
if 
it is routine enough to be 
delegated to staff, we can delegate it to the staff.  This is clearly not routine enough to delegate to 

the 
staff.
  This is about the Committee deciding tha
t a decision
, which is not sufficiently routine 
to delegate to the staff
, is being delegated to the Chair instead.  T
hat is not something I feel as 
comfortable with. 
Third, basically, there is an issue here of precedent.  This is not about this C
hair.  I f
eel 
perfectly comfortable with you, Madam Chair, and your 
discretion in this matter.  But future 
Committees may not have that level of comfort with future 
Chair
s in related situations.
  Getting 
together for meetings is hard and challenging.  It is always easy to delegate, and I think we want 
             
    
    
                      to fight that tendency, especially in view of how easy modern technology makes it to pull 
together a quorum of the Committee for substantive discussion and deliberations. 
For these reasons, Madam Chair, I recommend that 
the Committee not delegate authority 
for intermeeting adjustments to the 
Chair.  Again, this is all about contingency planning, but I 
think the Committee could make contingency plans to vote, as needed, between scheduled 

meetings, be it by telephone, vide
oconference, telepresence, secure lines
Šall of the other 
suggestions that are out there. 
A quick comment on the primary credit spread.  I thought the idea of doing more research 
and work on this was a very interesting one.  At liftoff, especially if we are going to be doing 

liftoff in the near term, 
the JuneŒ
September 
time frame
, I would favor keeping the 50 basis point 
primary credit spread at that time, then continuing 
to do work on the issue before we decide.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President 
Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I just want to mention 
that 
there has been some loose talk about 
comparing the timing of th
ese briefings
 to the morning call, and I am not in favor of tying them 

to the morning call.  Let me be clear on that. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Notice 
when I was faced with that
, I devised a way to end the 
requirement thatŠ 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I call that leadership by
Š CHAIR YELLEN. 
Thank you.  [Laughter] 
MR. EVANS.  So it can be done?  That™s what you™re saying? 

CHAIR YELLEN.  It can be done.  It only took 50 years, butŠ 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It can be done. 
       
    
                
          
  
  
        CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Generally speaking, I™m comfortable with 
the 
prescheduled
 staff meetings.  Based on the discussion here, I™m wondering whether we need 
one every day.  Maybe twice a week
ŠI™m picking up on some of the comments of Governor 
Tarullo.  I™m not sure how much information you™re going to get from Tuesday to Wednesday.  

You could probably review this a couple of times a week. 
Also, picking up a little bit on themes 
Vice Chairman 
Dudley was talking about, could 
you do this with a subcommittee of the FOMC? Do you really have to have the entire 

Committee reviewing what is s
upposed to be a technical issue?  You could bring the whole 
Committee in
, if necessary, but if everything™s going okay, 
it seems that it
 could be done by 
subcommittee.  That™s something to think about. 
On the governance approach, the 
first part 
was
, should 
we have a vote of the FOMC to 
adjust ranges
? I view this as pretty cumbersome for something that™s supposed to be a technical 
issue.  It sounds nontechnical
. It makes it sound like it™s a policy change regardless of what we 
say, and so I see that
 as a difficult way to go. 
Now, for the C
hair™s authority o
f 5 
or 10 basis points, first of all, I think that moving 
these ranges should be subject to a high bar.  That™s one of my main comments.  
You 
really don™t 
want to do this unless you really have to 
because of
 the communications issues that we™re going 
to encounter.  The payoff to doing this is ultimately pretty low.  
For instance
, maybe the 
fed
eral 
funds 
rate is trading a few basis points below the range
, and now you make this move.  Now the 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate 
moves into the bottom part of the range.  So you™ve 
gained a few basis points, 
but at the expense of markets asking, ﬁWhat are you guys doing?  Are you changing policy?ﬂ 
      
             
  
    
         
     
      
  
   
   
                
 Another question I have that has not come up yet is the authority to go 5 to 10 
basis 
points over what time horizon.  Would you be able to go 5 basis points and then the next week 
another 5 
basis points
, and the next week another 5 basis points? 
I don™t think that™s the intent, 
but that™s something you™ve got to think about here.  And if you went the full 10 basis points and 

it didn™t work
, then I guess the whole Committee would have to come in at that point. 
I see a core problem here
, which we™ve talked about before in our discussions.  The 
Committee insists o
n saying that the f
ederal funds rate is the policy rate, but relatively few trades 
are occurring at that particular rate. 
According to the Committee, 
the IOER rate 
is not the policy 
rate, but, on the other hand
, that is the rate that affects the largest banks in the country
, and it 
affects their funding costs.  And, in other contexts, we have said IOER is our workhorse rate. 
And then you™ve got overnight RRP, which we™re also saying is not a policy rate, but 
which 
is for a market that 
has many traders and 
that 
is potentially 
large at the time of liftoff.  So 
we might say that the 
policy rate is the federal funds rate, but what does 
that 
mean to markets? 
It™s really the markets that are saying what the policy rate is, and if they think moving these other 

rates is more importa
nt than where the fed
eral 
fund
s rate is trading, then we
™ve changed 
policy in 
a macroeconomic sense. 
So, I think this is a conflict, but that is part of the situation we™re in
, given the way we™ve 
decided to do this.  I think it does have potential to sound like a policy move to people inside 

financial markets even though we™re saying, well, the federal funds rate range has not changed 

and so we haven™t done anything different.  The bottom line is 
that I am worried about 
communications issues. Because of t
hat, I don™t think you want to do this unless it™s absolutely 
necessary.  You know, overall I would say 5 to 10 basis points 
per inter
meeting period is okay 
             
             
                           
  
 with me.
  I would agree with President Rosengren that 
it might be premature to decide on this 
today.  You could make the delegation decision later around the time of liftoff, 
if necessary. 
Let me finish with one story that 
old-
timers
 here around the Fed
eral Reserve 
will 
remember from the early 1990s.  I am going to mention ﬁHe-Who-Must-Not-Be-N
amed
,ﬂ who 
is 
former Chairman Alan Greenspan.  At the time, 
it was considered that the 
Chair
man
 had 25 basis 
points on the federal funds rate target and that the 
Chair
man
 could make that adjustment during 
an inter
meeting period without consulting the Committee.  And the Chair
man 
at that time made a 
bunch of those moves and then came into the meeting and said, ﬁNow that I™ve made the move, 
now we don™t have to move at the meeting.ﬂ  This was extremely hot and divisive on the 

Committee in the early 1990s.  We don™t want to get into any kind of situation like that, and I 

know that™s not your intention, but it is a bit of a slippery slope:  What™s going to be delegated? 

Who™s agreed to it?  How much have you agreed to?  Under what circumstances? 
It is a very 
tricky issue
, and it has been a situation in the past on this Committee that has been problematic 
from a collegiality perspective. 
I know we™re not really thinking about anything like that, but I think 
it is a bit of a 
slippery slope.  You™ve got this issu
e about what rates really matter versus what rates 
we are 
calling the policy rate, and you™ve got this precedent in the past 
whe
n it didn™t go so well.
  Thank 
you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 
MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Cha
ir.  I™m comfortable with the governance 
approach in the first two weeks of scheduling daily staff briefings, but I assume that we™ll 

quickly work out whether we need them every day and we can probably unschedule a few of 

them within a day or two.  S
o I th
ink there™s some flexibility the
re.                 
          
           
    
   
  With regard to the governance approach for technical adjustments in the IOER or ON 
RRP rate
s, I don™t know about previous Chair
men
.  I™ve only had one Chair in my life on the 
Board, and my experience with th
at Chair is t
hat if there is going to be any question about a need 
for discussion, she will call for it.  I haven™t detected her trying to get around the FOMC or the 
Board, and I think we can rely on that.  So I™d be perfectly willing to give the C
hair 
an 
adjustment up to 10 basis points.  I agree that 
we need to specify that 
the discretion would be 
granted 
between meetings. 
I™m not sure about the wisdom of constraining the gap between the 
ON RRP and IOER 
rates to 25 basis points. We may find reasons 
why
 we need to move one without moving the 
other, and my general approach is, don™t constrain yourself if there™s no need to constrain 

yourself, because the law of unintended consequences is very powerful. 
On the primary credit rate, I agree with those who think we should t
ry to minimize the 
number of adjustments we make at the time of liftoff, and that this issue is sufficiently important 
for banks to which we give a lot more 
attention than their size would imply.  I™m not sure why 
we would want to start by raising the cost of borrowing by 50 basis points for the smaller banks 
who do borrow at that rate, and we™d need to look at what would happen when we raise the rate.  

And so, for both reasons, 
I favor examining that after liftoff. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  T
hank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m very well aligned with the 
Chair™s 
original comments and additional comments and response to Governor Tarullo™s and 
President 
Lockhart™s points, and with many others around the table as 
well. 
As for the briefings, I think it is fine to schedule them, and if we have them I™ll attend 
them, but I think the only case in which we would actually want to have them is if things are 
         
    
      
              
                 
    
    really not going well.  A
nd I don™t expect that that is likely at
 all in a world in which 
we have 
taken the cap off the overnight RRP or, for that matter, put a very high cap on. 
As far as delegation is concerned, if 
the test is adjustments that are 
routine or 
technical 
in nature
, I completely trust the 
Chair™s instincts on that. I will say that 
if what we™re dealing with 
is a very difficult and failed liftoff situation, I don™t think
, in real time
, that™s going to feel either 
routine or technical.  I think it™s going to feel like something that all of us ought to be involved in 
and accountable for.  I also would not constrain ourselves by holding this space between the 

IOER and 
the 
ON RRP rates
 at 25 basis points.  It might make sense to do something different, 
again, in real time. 
So, for all of that
, I think it™s essentially impossible to anticipate all of these 
things, and I would just say 
that 
I will do what is reasonable at the time. 
In terms of the primary credit facility, it is 
an interesting subject on which 
we can have a 
lot of debate.  I would
n™t touch it until well after liftoff. 
In my view, it™s just not a complication 
that we
, in my view
, need to be taking on right now.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 

MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
the proposal. I think it™s very 
important for us as Committee members to take responsibility for actively being engaged in 

assessing the effectiveness of monetary control and the relative roles of the IOER and the ON 

RRP rates 
in maintaining the federal 
funds rate in the target range for some initial period.  The 
length of that period, I think, should be determined by events.  My guess is 
that 
if the decision to 
lift off is made coincident with a meeting with 
a press conference, as seems very likely, I wo
uld 
expect that period of active involvement to span that quarter-end, but beyond that, 
I think it 
would be unwise to be too prescriptive at this point. 
         
   
  
             
                 
  
    
   
  
  
       
                                                         
  
 When market functioning has settled down, it will be appropriate to delegate to the C
hair 
the authority 
to make the necessary changes to the levels of the IOER and the ON 
RRP 
rates
, or possibly to the spread between them, 
in order to maintain effective monetary control.  I think the 
Committee can make that decision once it judges that the frequent briefings
 and meetings no 

long serve 
the
ir purpose, along with the parameters of the delegation.  
It™s very important that we 
carefully manage communications 
regarding the heightened vigilance and possible activity of the 

Committee and the Board during those initial weeks so that 
our 
communications bolster 
confidence in the normalization process and contribute to smooth market functioning. 
With regard to the appropriate level of the primary credit spread, I would be open to a 
recommendation from the 
staff as to retu
rning it to 
pre-
crisis levels
.  But like many others around 
the table, I would want to put some distance between the timing of liftoff and the 
timing of 
possibly changing that spread so as not to further complicate our 
already challenging 
communications around the time of liftoff.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
I think this has been a very useful discussion.  Let me 
say the Board meeting is now adjourned.  We™re ready to go on to item 3, and I suggest 
we have 
the economic briefings and then 
we™ll 
take a coffee break before going into our round.  L
et me 
turn things over to Bill Wascher
. MR. WASCHER.
3  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll be referring to the top exhibit 
on your pile, which is labeled ﬁMaterial for the U.S. Outlook.ﬂ  The data on spending, 
production, and hiring that we received since the March Tealbook were all weaker 

than we expected.  On the spending side, the February PCE data and March retail 

sales report led us to make a sizable reduction in our estimate of first
-quarter real 
PCE growth.  This downward revision to consumer spending accounts for much of 

the downward revision to first-quarter real GDP growth shown in panel 1 of your 

forecast summary exhibit.  In addition, a number of other categories of spendingŠ 

particularly business investment and residential construction
Šhave also surprised us 
to the downside in recent months, as have the incoming data on factory output.  I 

would note that after the April Tealbook was closed, 
we received the advance report 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
         
        
     
     
   
              
   
  
                
          on capital goods orders and shipments for March, which was also weak but broadly in 

line with our expectations. 
One of the crucial questions that we faced
Šand that you face as well
Šwas how 
to interpret this batch of disappointing news, and wheth
er, in particular, it is best seen 

as just another 
hicc
up in a recovery that fundamentally remains on track toward 
achievement of your policy objectives, or the leading edge of a more serious 

slackening in the pace of recovery.  For the most part, we have 
leaned toward the 
former interpretation.  Accordingly, our projection calls for near-
term real GDP 
growth to return to a pace that is not too different from our March forecast.  In 

particular, although it is difficult to quantify their influence precisely, 
we believe that 
several transitory special factors
Šincluding unusually severe winter weather and 

production disruptions related to labor disputes at West Coast portsŠ
were a small 

drag on first-quarter real activity.  In addition, we think that measured fi
rst
-quarter 
GDP growth will be held down a bit by seasonal adjustment issues that affected 

estimates of state and local construction spending and by a distortion in the BEA™s 

translation of retail sales to PCE associated with the steep decline in gasoline prices 

and the increased share of gasoline sales at large retail establishments such as Wal
-Mart.  We do not judge any of these factors to be exerting a large influence on their 

own, but as a group, our 
back
-of-the-envelope calculations 
put the effect at a
bout ¾ percentage point. 
That said, we have not completely discounted the weaker-
than
-expected incoming 
data.  Specifically, we trimmed our estimate of consumption growth in the second 

quarter a bit as a result of the weaker
-than-
expected March retail sale
s report, and we 
made a noticeable downward revision to our projection 
of 
near
-term residential 
construction activity in response to the lack of a significant pickup in starts and 
permits in March.  We also lowered our forecast for nonresidential structures 
spending, as the latest data on drilling activity suggest that the recent drop in oil 

prices is having a larger effect on drilling and mining investment than we had 

previously anticipated.  Because we believe that the fundamentals underpinning 

household spending remain solid, we continue to expect that real GDP will rise at a 

pace that exceeds our estimate of potential output growth over the remainder of the 

year.  Even so, the 
level 
of real output at the end of this year is almost ½ 
percent 
lower than in our March forecast. 
As a way of providing another perspective on the near-term outlook, panel 2 
presents the results from the Board staff™s dynamic factor model.  This model uses the 

information from a large number of activity and price indi
cators to generate forecasts 

of near-term real GDP growth, and it was among the specifications we showed you in 

the April Tealbook box on nowcasting models.  As you can see, using the data that 

we had available when the April Tealbook was closed, the model 
also predicts a very 
low GDP growth figure for the first quarter followed by a modest pickup in the 

current quarter.  Of course, the model does not know about any of the special factors 

that we think will unwind and provide an additional boost to growth this quarter.  And 

I would note that the range of predictions for first-quarter growth coming from the 
                  
      
              
              
           
         various nowcasting efforts across the System is quite wide, underscoring the 

uncertainty surrounding the interpretation of the pace of activity last quart
er. 
To wrap up the discussion of the near-term spending data, I would remind you 
that we will receive the BEA™s advance estimate of first
-quarter real GDP tomorrow 
morning.  Given how low our current point estimate isŠ
and in light of the relatively 

large degree of uncertainty that surrounds these estimates
, even on the eve of a 

release
Šit would not be especially surprising from a statistical point of view if we 

were to see either a small decline tomorrow or a noticeably stronger increase than we 

have pencil
ed in.  And, of course, the BEA™s initial estimate is itself subject to 
substantial revision over time. 
Moving to the middle panels, the labor market has continued to improve, but here, 
too, the data point to somewhat less momentum than we had anticipated in our 

previous forecast.  In the establishment survey, March total nonfarm payroll 

employment growth was considerably weaker than the very strong pace that we had 

expected
.  I
ncorporating revisions to previous months, the average monthly change in 
payroll employment over the first quarter now stands at about 200,000, which is 

70,000 less than we had written down in the March Tealbook.  The news from the 

household survey also came in a little weaker than we had anticipated:  The 

unemployment rate held steady at 5.5 
percent in March
Šwe had expected it to tick 
down one-
tenth
Šwhile the participation rate, which we had expected to hold steady, 
edged lower. 
To summarize the information from the various pieces of labor market data that 
we have received, panel 3 shows our labor market conditions index, or LMCI.  As 

you can see from the inset box, the LMCI was basically flat last month
.  For the first 
quarter as a wholeŠthe rightmost 
bar in the main chart
Šthe index did increase, but 
at a slower pace than what we have seen in recent quarters.  Just as we did with the 

spending data, we took a modest signal from the incoming labor market news and 

reduced our projected pace of monthly payroll job growth by about 40,000 over the 

current quarter.  We also nudged up our forecast for the unemployment rate in 

coming months. 
Over the remainder of the medium term, our projection 
of 
real GDP growth is 
little revised 
from
 March.  The main conditioning factors that we built into the 
baseline forecast this round
Šparticularly
, the low
er projected path for the exchange 
value of the dollarŠare, on net, expected to be slightly more supportive of real 

activity.  By the end of the medium term, the effects of these changes offset roughly 

half of the downward revisions we put through to the near term, leaving the level of 

real GDP just a little lower relative to our March projection. 
Although it had only a small effect on our projection regarding 
real activity, I 
would point out that we now assume that the federal funds rate will lift off from 
its effective lower bound in September, one quarter later than in our previous forecast.  

Our revised liftoff assumption is broadly consistent with both the ﬁflashﬂ primary 

dealer survey that was taken after the March FOMC meeting and the latest dealer 
        
   
    
  
     
                     
                                      
                                                           
 survey, and 
it is more consistent with the timing suggested by financial markets. In 
addition, as best we can tell, a September liftoff date does not appear to be sharply at 

odds with FOMC participants™ March SEP submissions, in which the median 

participant 
pointed to the third quarter as the most likely quarter for liftoff.  After 
liftoff
Šand consistent with our usual practiceŠthe projected path for the funds rate 
is set by mechanically applying an inertial version of the Taylor (1999) 
policy rule. 
Panel
 4 gives our projected path for the unemployment rate.  With the level of real 
GDP at the end of the medium term only a little lower relative to March
Šand with no 
change to our supply-side assumptions this roundŠthe unemployment rate is 

expected to be 5.1
 percent at the end of 2017.  T
his is 
one-
tenth 
higher than its level 
in the March Tealbook and one-
tenth 
below our estimate of its natural rate.  The slow 
pace of decline in the unemployment rate reflects both the modest pace of GDP 

growth projected over the medium term and our assumption that the strengthening 

labor market will draw more individuals back into the labor force. 
Panels
 5 and 6 summarize the inflation outlook.  The incoming data on price 
inflation have been a touch above our expectations and supp
ort our projection that 
both total and core inflation will step up in the second quarter.  Further out, the 

inflation projection is little revised
.  A
s in previous Tealbooks, we expect 
that 
inflation 
will 
gradually move higher as resource slack diminishes, 
energy prices rise, 
and prices for imported goods turn up again. 
Finally, I wanted to call 
your attention to a change we 
made this round to how we 
characterize forecast uncertainty 
in the Tealbook.
 Specifically, we have revamped 
the methodology that we use to compute confidence intervals 
based on our historical 
projection errors and have also reworked our presentation of these intervals to include 

a comparison with the historical 
range of key forecast variables.  The new intervals 
are typically a little w
ider than the ones we reported previously, and they tend to 
show 
more asymmetry, which is most notice
able in the prediction 
interval 
surrounding the unemployment forecast.  When we 
miss big on unemployment, it 
tends to be because unemployment turns out to have been much higher 
than expected, 
not much lower.  Additional details 
on this new 
methodology were presented in a box 
and associated technical 
appendix in 
the Risks and Uncertainty section of the 
Tealbook and in Jeremy Nalewaik™s pre
-FOMC briefing.  The
se new intervals 
complement our other methodology of using stochastic simulations from the FRB/US 

model to produce confidence intervals around our projection, and we intend to show 

both sets of 
uncertainty measures in future Tealbooks.  I would note 
that 
the 
confidence 
bands shown in my exhibit today continue 
to use the FRB/US 
measures, 
but our intention is 
to eventually extend the new 
methodology to compute confidence 
intervals 
around our quarterly forecasts as well.  Steve will continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.
4  Thank you, Bill.  The harsh weather we endured last winter left 
many potholes in U.S. roads and, as Bill 
Wascher has described, helped create one 
large pothole in U.S. GDP growth.  Interestingly, as shown in panel 1 
of my 
4 The materials used by Mr. Kamin are appended to this transcript (append
ix 4). 
                
    
        
         
          
  
    
                      
    presentation on the international outlook, a pothole also appears in the path of foreign 

growth in the first quarter.  Incoming data have been surprisingly weak in countries as 

diverse as Canada, which shared our harsh winter
; China, which was 
actually 
warmer 
than usual
; and Malaysia, which arguably has no winter at all.  As shown in panel 2, 
the downturn was also evident in global trade, suggesting some underlying malaise 

that was sweeping the globe. 
As indicated by the yellow bars in panels 1 and 2, we faced a very similar p
icture 
exactly a year ago, with U.S. growth, foreign growth, and global trade all turning 

down in the first quarter of 2014.  Accordingly, I went back and looked at my 

remarks for the April 2014 FOMC meeting for lessons that we might apply here.  

First, I 
found that I used the same tired pothole metaphor a year ago.  [Laughter] 
Second, at that time, I also predicted that foreign economic activity would clamber 

out of its pothole and resume moving along the path to recovery, just as Bill 
Wascher 
did for the United States.  Unusually enough, we both turned out to be right, and we 

are making the same call today. 
Certainly, the fundamentals favor a return to solid growth abroad:  Monetary 
policy is generally very accommodative, oil prices remain low, and most c
urrencies 
have weakened considerably against the dollar since last summer.  Moreover, many 

of the factors that pushed down global growth in the first quarter appear to be 

transitory.  Canada™s economy is estimated to have flatlined on account of unusually 

harsh winter weather and a step
-down in oil investment, but with oil prices bottoming 
out, growth should bounce back in the coming quarters.  Mexican output is estimated 

to have decelerated sharply in the first quarter along with U.S. manufacturing, and we 

anticipate that the projected rebound in U.S. activity will boost growth in Mexico as 

well. 
China also accounts for some of the pothole in foreign growth, but its situation is 
more complicated.  As shown in panel 3, GDP growth fell from 7 percent in the 

fourth quarter to only 5.3 percent in the first, well below expectations, as exports and 

industrial production dropped sharply.  It is difficult to parse out how much of the 

first
-quarter shortfall reflects reduced external demand, how much reflects the 
ongoing correction in the property sector, and how much reflects longer-
term 
developments such as the rebalancing of the economy and decline in potential output 

growth.  In any event, the authorities had been easing monetary policy even before 

the weak GDP 
reading
, and they
 have now stepped up this stimulus, including 
reducing the required reserve ratio 100 basis points.  In our projection, the 

combination of heightened policy stimulus and rising external demand pushes growth 

back up to over 7 percent later th
is year before it edges down thereafter. Like the 

booming Chinese stock market, however, this forecast is somewhat speculative, and 

we have revised down our projection a bit in response to the recent weakness. 
Ironically, nearly the only bright spot in the global economy has been the euro 
area, 
for which strengthening industrial production, retail sales, and PMIs point to a 
rise in first
-quarter GDP growth to 1¾ percent (panel 4).  Notably, financial 

conditions are becoming more of a positive for the econo
my, in part reflecting the 
                        
                          
  
  
     
                     ECB™s asset purchase program.  Bank lending standards are loosening, credit to 

nonfinancial corporations is finally picking up 
a bit
, interest rates are extremely low, 
and the real trade
-weighted euro is at its weakest level sinc
e 2001.  Accordingly, we 
see euro
-area growth firming to 2¼ percent in the next few years, provided that 
spillovers from Greece™s crisis remain contained, as we assume in our baseline. 
That, however, is a big ﬁ
if.
ﬂ  The Greek government is struggling in it
s efforts to 
negotiate additional financial assistance from European authorities and the IMF, even 

as it is running arrears to suppliers and raiding the accounts of local governments in 

order to stay afloat.  More than •10 billion in payments on its medium- and long-
term 
debt are coming due in the next four months.  Although the Greeks have reshuffled 

their negotiating team in an apparent effort to ease tensions with their creditors and 

strike a deal, there is still a good chance that the government could miss one or more 

of these payments.  Such an event could trigger a run on Greek banks, and unless the 

ECB stepped up its liquidity support by a substantial margin, the government would 

have to declare a bank holiday and impose capital controls, with a much-heightened 

chance of Greece eventually exiting the euro area altogether. Had such developments 

occurred at the height of the euro crisis in 2012, spillovers to the rest of the euro area 

would have been very destructive.  However, as Simon noted, the regio
n™s financial, 

institutional, and policy framework has strengthened in recent years.  Accordingly, 

we are building into our euro-
area forecast only a small drag 
due to 
spillovers from 
Greece™s intensifying crisis.  Nevertheless, we recognize that, as descr
ibed in the 
Tealbook, far more dire scenarios are possible, not just for the euro area but for the 

global economy more generally. 
While the pace of economic activity abroad remains quite unsettled, two key 
external drivers of U.S. economic prospects have been a bit more quiescent of late. 
First, oil markets have not yielded any big surprises.  To be sure, spot prices, shown 
in panel 5, are up more than $8 per barrel since the time of the March Tealbook, as 

falling rig counts and other signs of declining in
vestment have led markets to expect 
lower U.S. oil production.  However, prices for futures contracts further out on the 

curve are up by less, so that our projected path for Brent prices has been raised just a 

bit and remains well below 
levels prevailing l
ast summer. 
Second, for the first time since last July, the dollar has come down over the 
intermeeting period, as shown in panel 6.  This depreciation likely reflected weak 

data and the fall in expected policy rates here in the United States.  However, I would 

like to remind you that, starting with the March Tealbook, we decided to deviate from 

our standard random-
walk
-oriented model and project
ed a further rise in the dollar
.  That also must have contributed to the dollar™s subsequent decline.  [Laughter] 
In the 
event, from its lower starting point, we assume the broad real dollar will still move up 

some 2
¼ percent between now and the end of the year as the U.S. economy bounces 
back and markets refocus on the policy divergen
ces among major central banks. 
Your next exhibit puts movements in the dollar and their implications for 
economic growth into broader perspective.  As shown by the black solid line in 

panel 1, even at its projected peak early next year, the broad real dollar would be well 
                           
     
                                                                                                
 below its previous two peaks.  The black solid line in panel 2 shows the contribution 

of net exports to real U.S. 
GDP growth
.  We project it at negative ¾ percentage point 
this year and next.  This is the largest drag on growth since the early 2000s, and it 

almost entirely reflects the appreciation of the dollar.  It may seem strange that the 

dollar should depress the net export contribution to such an extent when it remains so 

far below its previous peaks.  However, what matters for the contribution of net 

exports to GDP
 growth is not the level of the dollar but how much it moves, and the 
dollar has appreciated sharply since last summer.  Additionally, the share of trade in 

the U.S. economy has grown over time, amplifying the effects of dollar movements 

on net exports and growth. 
Were the dollar to rise further than we are currently projecting, it would exert 
even stronger effects on the economy.  Returning to panel 1, the dashed line shows 

the 10 percent rise in the dollar described in the ﬁStronger D
ollar
ﬂ scenario in the 
Tealbook.  As shown below, the contribution of net exports to GDP would fall to its 

lowest level since the early 1980s.  Additionally, as indicated in panel 3, core 

inflation would fall below 1 percent on a four-quarter basis before rebounding.  Josh 

wil
l now continue our presentation. 
MR. GALLIN.
5  Thank you.  My material 
is titled ﬁFinancial Stability 
Developments.ﬂ 
My remarks draw on the recent QS financial stability report.  In sum, valuation 
pressures in asset markets have increased since the January assessment and remain 

notable.  In addition, vulnerabilities related to maturity and liquidity transformation 

remain moderate, but leverage in both the financial and the nonfinancial sectors, 

overall, remains relatively low.  Taken together, we think that 
conditions in the 
financial sector are moder
ately prone to amplify shocks. 
I begin with valuations in fixed-income markets.  The yield on the 10-
year 
Treasury noteŠ
the blue line 
in the upper-
left panel
Šand 
term premium measures
Š the red and black lines
Šhav
e remained quite low since the January 
financial 
stability 
briefing.  The possibility that term premiums will move up sharply remains a focus of 

staff analysis
.  I will return to this issue
 near the end of the briefing. 
In corporate bond markets, yield spr
eads to comparable Treasury securities have 
moved down a bit in recent months.  As shown by the red line in the panel to the 

right, the far
-term forward spread for high-yield corporate bondsŠone measure of 
risk premiumsŠ
remains near the middle of its histo
rical range, which suggests that 
valuations are reasonableŠ
relative, that is, to seemingly richly valued Treasury 

securities.  In addition, as shown by the light blue bars in the middle-left panel, 

issuance of high
-yield bonds, a nonprice measure of hot ma
rkets and thus valuation 
pressures, remained robust through the first quarter of the year.  Somewhat in 

contrast, issuance of leveraged loans
Šthe dark blue portion of the barsŠ
has 
declined
, on net, in recent quarters.  Although supervisory analysis of completed 
5 The materials used by Mr. Gallin are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
              
    
       
               
          
      
   
      
   
 deals suggests a modest improvement in underwriting quality, fairly lax nonprice 

terms were reportedly still prevalent in recent deals. 
Moving to the stock market, the expected real return on 
corporate equities
Šthe 
black line in the middle-right panelŠ
has fallen significantly since the 
previous 
stability briefing, as stock prices have advanced and expectations of corporate 

earnings have been revised down
.  The low expected return suggests that valuations 
are quite high.  The equity risk premium, which is the difference between the 

expected return on stocks and the expected real yield on the 10
-year Treasury note, 
shown in teal, has also moved down sharply, though it remains closer to the middle 
of 
its 30
-year range.  Our overall assessment is that equity valuations are somewhat 
more stretched now than they were just a few months ago. 
A variety of changes in the structure of fixed-income markets may add to the 
volatility of interest rates, and, perhaps, to the volatility of volatility.  FirstŠand I™m 

not referring to any panel quite yetŠ
increased electronification of the Treasury 
market could contribute to occasional and surprising spikes in volatility, such as that 

which occurred on October 15 of last year.  In addition, the continued decline in 

intermediation by dealersŠas illustrated by gross and net dealer borrowing, shown in 

the lower-left panelŠis consistent with anecdotes that new regulations have made 

dealers less willing to provide market
making liquidity, even in normal times.  A bond 

market selloff could also be temporarily amplified if investors in bond mutual funds 

rush for the exits, forcing funds to sell into an illiquid market.  The rapid growth in 

assets under management at such fun
dsŠshown in the lower-right panelŠincluding 
funds that hold less-
liquid assets, suggests that the scope for such an amplification has 
increased in recent years. 
The first panel of the next exhibit shows an estimate of the level of ﬁrunnableﬂ 
private money-
like instruments.  This measure of maturity and liquidity 
transformation includes cross
-holdings of money 
market instruments, such as when a 
money fund holds repo.  It is therefore an indicator of the vulnerability of the 

financial system through intermedi
ation chains that rely
Šat one link or more
Šon short-term funding.  The level of these runnables has been fairly stable at a relatively 

high level during the past two years, as growth in uninsured depositsŠ
the light blue 
regionŠ
has offset a decline in repo
Šin red
Šwhich suggests that the financial 
system remains moderately vulnerable to runs. 
A fairly bright
Šor should I say, 
green
Šspot on the financial-
stability map is 
leverage in the banking system.  As can be seen in the upper-
right panel, capital 
cushions at bank holding companies, as measured by both the Tier 1 common equity 

ratio
Šin blackŠ
and the leverage ratio
Šin red
Šhave increased notably.  This 
reflects both Basel III requirements and the resilience required in annual stress tests. 

As you know, no CCA
R bank fell below the stress test™s quantitative benchmarks in 
the most recent round, although three firms had to adjust their 
planned capital 
distributions. 
                  
    
    
      
        
    
                        
    As far as we can tell
Šwhich
, admittedly
, is not very farŠ
leverage in the 
nonbank financial sector continues to be a vulnerability.  As summarized in the 

middle-left panel, overall margin credit has moved down in recent months but 

remains quite elevated, and hedge funds appear to be using a fairly large amount of 

portfolio margining from prime brokerages to lever up in equity markets.  In addition, 

responses to the March SCOOS provided some evidence that counterparties have 

been demanding more leverage to fund non-agency RMBS, high-yield corporate 

bonds, and securitized CRE loans.  Unfortunately, leverage embedded in derivatives 

is hard to measure, so it remains difficult to assess the overall leverage of hedge 

funds, mutual funds, and other investment vehicles. 
Moving to the private nonfinancial sector, the middle
-right panel provides the big 
picture for
 households: Modest increases in household debt continue to be driven 

mostly by prime borrowersŠ
the orange line
Šthough debt of subprime borrowersŠ 
the black line
Šticked up in the fourth quarter.  Student loans and subprime auto 
lending have remained rapid 
even as 
delinquencies on these kinds of debt have 

moved up.  Although we do not currently consider student and subprime auto debt to 

be direct vulnerabilities for the financial system, we are alert for potential spillovers 

to other debt markets. 
As can be seen in the lower
-left panel, the debt
-to-assets ratio for all nonfinancial 
corporate businesses
Šthe black line
Šand for high-yield and unrated firmsŠthe red 
line
Šmoved up further in the fourth quarter, which suggests a continued buildup of 
the vu
lnerability of this sector. 
The lower-right panel provides a very brief roundup of the potential shocks to the 
financial system
 that appear most proximate.  A sharp rise in term premiums could 
precipitate a sudden drop in a variety of asset prices, especia
lly for those with 
stretched valuations.  Moreover, for reasons mentioned 
previously
, these shocks 
could be temporarily amplified if liquidity were to deteriorate just when it is needed 

most or if bond mutual funds were to experience large and disruptive outflows.  That 

said, the risk of a sustained amplification is mitigated by the apparently modest 

amount of leverage in the financial system.  We are also attuned to the possibility of 

damaging spillovers from a rate spike here to emerging market economies. 
As we 
concluded in a special memo, although blowback to the U
nited States 
through 
financial connections would likely be limited, a significant EME recession and a 

presumed increase in risk aversion would damage the U.S. 
economy as well. It is 

worth noting also that term premiums could, instead, stay low for longer than 

anticipated.  Such an outcome would be a shock to investors who have positioned 

themselves for rising yields and could also lead to a further buildup of vulnerabilities 

if investors are dr
iven to 
ﬁreach for yield
.ﬂ  Other potential shocks of note that have 
been around for 
a while
 include a disorderly Greek exit from the euro zone, 
significant geopolitical disruptions, or distress 
at a large global financial firm brought 
about by, say, 
legal penalties. 
I will conclude my prepared remarks by noting a few policy initiatives that the 
staff are pursuing related to specific financial vulnerabilities
, which appear at the top 
         
           
                       
      
       
     
    
    
       of the final exhibit.  
With regard to interest 
rate risk, 
the 
staff 
are in
dependently 
measuring the risks at banks and working with those banks to manage their 

exposures.  On market liquidity, the 
staff are undertaking a variety of projects to 
better understand changes in the structure of bond markets, including increased 

electr
onification, and are working with other agencies to prepare a public report on 
the Treasury market.
  Regarding 
asset managers, 
the staff have begun evaluating the 
potential for 
the growth of 
managers™ activities, perhaps through the use of leverage 
and 
liquidity transformation, to contribute meaningfully to systemic risk and 
whether 
reforms are needed. 
Finally, on leveraged loans, supervisors continue their 
monitoring efforts and will begin a more comprehensive Shared National Credit 

review in May.  
Tha
nks.  That concludes my remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.
  Questions for any of our presenters? 
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m look
ing 
at 
exhibit 2, 
ﬁAlternative 
Scenario
:  Stronger D
ollar.
ﬂ  What are the confidence bounds around these dotted lines? 
MR. KAMIN. Well, the simulations come from a DSGE model, but it™s not an estimated 
model.  So we don™t compute those, although I assure you that an estimated version of 
SIGMA 
that would allow us to compute those is on our long-
ter
m work agenda. 
The most tenuous thing is whether or not you will actually get a 10 percent additional rise 
in the dollar
.  As you can tell from the chart, that™s not a common occurrence.  That™s something 
that, broadly speaking, we think 
there 
might be a 1 in 10 chance of for a couple of years.  So that, 
in some sense
, is the most tenuous. 
In terms of thinking about the 
effects
 on net exports and then on U.S. 
real 
GDP, that™s 
actually a little bit more straightforward in the 
sense that the results from SIGM
AŠ
particularly 
for what I™m showing here, which is the 
net export 
contribution
Šare broadly consistent with our 
estimated trade models, and those don™t give you very different results.  So the 
effect 
of a higher 
dollar on exports and on imports is relatively straightforward, and obviously there are errors, but 
they™re probably not subject to huge errors. 
A larger area of uncertainty comes in 
when 
translating the effect of the change in net 
exports into GDP
, because there is some uncertainty there about the m
ultipliers
.  And there™s 
           
                       
   
          also some uncertainty about to what extent you want to build in a monetary policy response and 
what 
impact
 that has.  
So, for
 the net export contribution itself, I would guess that, 
relatively 
speaking, 
is 
not a huge confidence error.  The confidence errors would rise as you then translate 
that through 
to 
real 
GDP growth. 
MR. BULLARD.   Let me follow up with a 
slightly
 different question.  Over the p
ast 
25 years
, firms have become more globalized and 
have learned how to handle 
global currency 
fluctuations.  They adopt hedging strategies, and they put production in various countries and 

switch production in response to currency movements.  In light of those changes, should we be 

estimating effects of real exchange rate movements 
using 
data 
for the 1980s and 1990s? 
MR. KAMIN. Well, that™s an excellent question.  Let™s just say we periodically do revise 
our import equations, and we do look for signs of parameter instability.  So we™re alert to that 

issue, and we haven™t found any s
trong evidence of these changes in coefficients. There are 
other 
factor
s that, of course, are naturally parsed in.  They kind of correlate with what you 
mentioned, which is that, over time, 
the share of trad
e in the U.S. economy has grown, and that is 
ful
ly taken into account in our estimations because our models do incorporate the fact that, 
as the 
dollar changes exports and imports, those have a larger 
effect 
on GDP. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.
  Any other questions?  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you.  I have a question for Bill 
Wascher 
related to the Tealbook 
inflation outlook.  I think in your presentation you mentioned that the inflation outlook is 

trending up 
because
ŠI think you saidŠenergy prices are going to be going up, res
ource slack 
will be diminishing, and maybe imported goods pricesŠ
I can™t recall the entire list. 
Could you 
                
   
   
                       
      refresh my memory on the contribution of changes in longer-
term inflation expectations for 
delivering that increase in inflation? 
MR. WASCHER.  So
, over the medium-
term forecast
, our view is that the underlying 
rate of inflation is 1.8 percent, and that 
serves as an attractor for the inflation rate. 
MR. EVANS.  Inflation expectations, is thatŠ 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  We call it underlying inflation, but in some sense you may think 
of it as inflation expectations over the medium term. 
Over the longer run, 
that drifts up to 
2 percent because the FOMC says the target is 
2 percent, and 
because 
tightness in the labor 
market 
is pushing inflation up.  
So it doe
s serve as an attractor
, as one reason inflation moves 
back up toward 1.8 percent in the medium term and toward 2 percent in the longer run.  
But
, in 
addition, these other factors are important in getting there over the medium term. 
MR. EVANS.  All right. That™s helpful.  That is different 
from 
the way I was 
remembering it.  I thought that underlying inflation was pegged to your assessment of longer-
term inflation expectations
, and that they were still about 
1¾ percent
, but you™ve got aŠ 
MR. WASCHER.  That
™s right. I think that™s right.
  But maybe I™m not quite getting 
your question.  Over the longer run, we have those inflation expectations 
drifting
 up from 1¾ 
percent 
to 2 
percent. 
MR. EVANS.
    Right.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Yes, I want to compliment the staff on the new charts on uncertainty.  I 
think they are very helpful in thinking about the uncertainty 
associated with the forecast. 
Now, 
going on from what President Evans 
was asking
, maybe, the PCE inflation in Tealbook A, page 
69Šif I look at that, it looks, 
from
 the way the errors look on that forecast, 
like 
the staff has been 
                        
             
      
      underestimating PCE inflation.  Should I interpret this as being that we have upside risk to the 
staff™s inflation forecast? 
MR. WASC
HER. 
Which chart are you looking at?  The top one? 
MS. MESTER.  I™m looking at PCE inflation. 

MR. WASCHER.  That™s largely because of the energy price run-up in the mid-2000s.  I 
think we didn™t 
projec
t that, and I think that™s why the solid line, 
the median
, is above the data 
there. 
MS. MESTER.  But even the distribution looks likeŠ 

MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  Again, I think that™s because of the energy price shock.  
This is a 
relatively short sample with which 
we calculate standard errors around for PCE inflatio
n, for two 
reasons.  One is
, we don™t have data going back a long way, and two is, 
we think that this is 
a period over which inflation had different propertiesŠ
it was more stable recently 
than in previous 
periods.  
So, because of that, I think the influence of energy prices is more prominent here than 
it might be in the longer run. 
MR. ENGEN.  If I could add just one thing that amplifies that point, if you look in the 
middle right at core PCE, the median and the 
projected
 paths are virtually on top of each other, 
which is another way of showing that the total is being influenced by the run-up in energy prices 

and how it feeds into total inflation. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERL
AKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to follow up on 
President Evans™
s line of questioning.  During the 
intermeeting
 period, President Rosengren 
suggested the possibility 
of rais
ing 
the inflation target. 
If the FOMC were to introduce a new 
                 
           
       
              
     
  
        infla
tion target that was higher, would that have a higher gravitational pull 
in the staff™s model 
that we™d 
be pull
ed back to that higher target? 
MR. WASCHER.  In terms of modeling and the way we do it in 
the 
FRB
/US model, 
I think the answer 
is 
ﬁyes,ﬂ 
because we do have a small term that reflects the FOMC
™s stated target 
relative to current underlying inflation.  I think it would be gradual, but I think in 
the FRB
/US model, it would be a stronger attractor than a 
2 percent target. 
Also, i
f I used the Taylor ru
le, 
I think it would imply a much easier 
policy as well. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That™s true, 
a different
 reaction function.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Okay.  I suggest we take a break 
for 
15 minutes 
to get some 
coffee. 
When we return, we have a few 
people who would like to comment on financial 
stability
, and 
then we™ll go to the economic round. 
[Coffee break
] CHAIR YELLEN.  We now have an opportunity for people to comment on financial 
stability, and 
three
 people have indicated they would like to.  
President Rosengren, do you want 
to start 
us off? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank yo
u, Madam Chair. When I talk to asset managers in 
Boston, the biggest concern raised is the problem of liquidity in the secondary market 
for 
corporate bonds.  They worry that when we b
egin to raise rates
, a rush to sell positions in 
corporate bonds will occur, and a crowded exit with few buyers could lead to a rapid increase in 

the yield on corporate bonds.  At least some elements of this concern probably deserve greater 

attention. 
Firs
t, the average size of trades in corporate bonds has fallen significantly relative to the 
average size of trades prior to the financial crisis.  This may reflect an actual or perceived 
          
                            
   difficulty in transacting large trades 
due to
 weakened liquidity in the 
market.  This raises the 
concern that if a significant portfolio rebalancing were to occur, it may be difficult to sell large 
positions in a timely manner. 
Second, there has been a significant decline in the corporate bond holdings of broker-
dealers.  Acc
ording to the 
SEC™s FOCUS reports
, while J.P. Morgan held $29.5 billion in 
corporate securities in 2007, those holdings had plummeted to only $11.3 billion by the end of 

2014. Similarly, Credit Suisse held 
$30 billion in corporate securities in 2007, and their holdings 
collapsed to only 
$4.4 billion by the end of 2014.  
Such sizable declines in corporate securities 
holdings among these key liquidity providers lends some credence to the concern about potential 

liquidity problems in this market. 
Third, 
bond mutual funds
Šwhich were shown in the earlier charts on financial 
stability
Šand bond exchange-traded funds have grown significantly since the financial crisis.  
The exchange-traded funds pose a particular problem if investors view them as highly liquid.  
At the end of 2008, assets under management at exchange-traded bond funds totaled $57 billion.  
By the end of February this year, 
assets under management at 
exchange-traded bond funds had 
soared to $320 billion.  I
f investors assume that the corporate b
ond market is liquid and, more 
specifically, that their exchange
-traded fund shares will always be liquid
, and if they choose to 
sell as we tighten
, they may be surprised at the price at which they transact. 
In summary, the concerns with corporate bond market liquidity as we approach liftoff 
bear
 watching.  The degree of movement out of bonds is likely to be highly sensitive to the 
projected pace of tightening as well as 
to the timing of tightening.  An oversized reaction in this 
market could result in a bumpy exit from the zero lower bound.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you
.                   
  
        
     
           
   
          MR. TARULLO.  May I ask Eric a question? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sure. 

MR. TARULLO.  Eric, can you take it a step further and 
say what the implications of 
your concerns 
are 
for policy? Is it for monetary policy?  Are you advocating a relaxation of 
capital requirements? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  No, I am not advocating a relaxation of capital requirements.   

MR. TARULLO.  I didn™t think so. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I think it highlights that how we communicate around the time of 
liftoff actually is critically important for whether people decide that this is something they need 

to doŠ
to rebalance their 
portfolios quite quickly.  
I think the way that fi
nancial stability interacts 
with monetary policy is, 
it highlights 
that the communication issues become pretty important. 
MR. TARULLO.  That™s helpful.  Thanks. 

MR. LACKER.  Also, 
if it happens, we can say we talked about it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  All right.  Pre
sident Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to thank the staff for the 
excellent assessment of financial stability.  It™s my reading 
that 
the assessment again indicates 
that current policy has not produced any material signs 
of 
financial instability.
  Indeed, it appears 
that the main 
financial
-instability consideration for monetary policy at the moment is 
that a 
near
-term increase in the target range for the fed
eral
 funds rate could lead to financial instability.  
As the report says, 
ﬁTerm premiums
 in benchmark U.S. and other advanced economy bond yields 
are again near historical lows reached 
before the taper tantrum, raising the risk of similarly 
outsized market reactions at liftoff.
ﬂ             
                  
                        The s
taff also identified 
a vulnerability that could propagate this shock from the increase 
in rates.  Specifically
, page 4 of the assessment notes that changes in the structure of the 
Treasury market could amplify the effects of an initial rate move and lead to sudden swings in 
prices 
and liquidity. 
Now, how can we best mitigate this risk?  President Rosengren, I think, highlight
ed one way to think about this
, which
 is through communication, but I have a slightly different 
perspective on the answer to this question.  To answer this question, I think we have to 

understand why long
-term rates might rise dramatically in response to a small increase in short
-term rates. And here I believe that a key consideration is the policy signal associated with such a 

move in the near term.  Raising t
he fed
eral 
funds rate in the near term would mean 
they™re 
initiating liftoff when inflation is far below target and the growth outlook has been weakening.  

Liftoff in such an environment would indicate 
that the FOMC is considerably less willing to 
provide accommodation to respond to adverse shocks than financial market participants currently 
anticipate. 
As a result, they would expect less accommodation in general but especially so in bad 
times, and this expectation of higher interest rates and lower bond p
rices in bad times translates 
directly into higher term 
premiums
. Now, 
it™s tempting 
to conclude that we can somehow mitigate this potential financial 
instability only through 
reassuring verbal communication at the time of liftoff, but I think it™s 
difficu
lt for words to trump the communication content of our actions.  
So, in my view, 
we can 
best mitigate this financial stability risk by ensuring that our actions are always clearly connected 

to our pursued, 
declared objectives. 
In the current context, that
 would mean deferring liftoff 
until the economic data clearly indicate that raising interest rates is necessary for the FOMC to 

achieve its declared objectives of 
2 percent inflation and maximum employment over the 
       
  
                
    
       
               
  medium 
term. I™ll sa
y more about what this conclusion means for our policy deliberations 
tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I™m going to pick up on the same topic that President Rosengren 
introduced and President Kocherlakota discussed.  However, I will not be expressing my views 

on monetary policy at this time.  [Laughter] 
I think Governor Tarullo asked a great question:  
What do you do with this information? I™m going to go a slightly different direction based on 

something Josh said, which I found very interesting. 
I was struck by two sentences on page 17 of the QS report.  
The
y are 
right 
after each 
other.  O
ne is
 that large banks™ liquidity ratios continue to improve.  The next sentence is 
basically that there is less liqui
dity in markets.
  These two sentences are 
right next to each other, 
and immediately
, when I read this
, I said, ﬁWhat™s the connection here?  To what extent is the 
liquidity requirements or the capital requirements, for that matter, affecting the willingnes
s of 
broker-
dealers to basically make markets and provide market liquidity, especially in 
a stressed 
environment?ﬂ  But it also led me to what Josh pointed out, which 
is that this 
is apparently a 
longer-
term research project 
about market liquidity and understanding what™s happening there, 
and how much amplification we may see
, whether it™s in corporate bond or Treasury bond 

markets
, in response to shocks. 
My comment is that I think this is a really important subject not just for thinking about 
our policy decisions or policy communication, but more generally, to understand what™s 

happening in those markets and understand to what extent it is changes in regulation, changes in 

technology, 
or other things.
  Really
, my comment is wanting to see more on that sooner, 
because 
I think this is a key issue, 
as others have mentioned.
  Thank you. 
                   
         
                    CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Does anyone else want to comment?
  [No response]  Seeing 
no hands, let us begin the economic go-round 
with 
President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Fourth District economy continues to 
expand.  In April, the diffusion index of business contacts reporting better versus worse 
conditions was 23 percent, up from 18 percent in March.  Retail freight and both residential and 

commercial construct
ion firms reported improved conditions.  All manufacturers and energy 
firms reported worse conditions. 
Anecdotal reports suggest some slowing in the pace of growth in the first quarter.  
Factors cited by contacts reporting slower growth earlier this year i
nclude the harsh winter 
weather, spillovers from the 
West Coast port strikes, declining energy prices, and the 
appreciation of the dollar. 
The effects of weather and the strike are transitory.  Almost all of our contacts reported 
that the 
effects
 of the wi
nter weather 
have now passed, although I should note that it snowed in 
Cleveland last week
.  The effects of the port strike are expected to dissipate by the fourth quarter. 
The fall in oil prices continues to challenge firms engaged in energy development or 
extraction as well as their suppliers, like steel producers.  Suppliers of raw materials that use 

petroleum
-based products report a 
falloff
 in orders as customers run down 
their inventories in 
anticipation of further price reductions.  
My business contacts believe that oil prices have likely 

bottomed out, and that the effects of lower oil prices are likely to be temporary for most exposed 

sectors.  Of course
, that remains t
o be seen. 
Conditions in 
District 
labor markets continue 
to follow national trends.  The D
istrict™s 
unemployment rate, at 5.2 percent, 
is below the national rate 
of 5
½ percent and below the 
5.7 percent 
District average over 
the 2001Œ07 expansion.  Contacts 
in all 
sectors except energy 
                    
          
     
   
  
       reported increasing staffing in the previous six to eight weeks, although, except for construction, 
the additions were somewhat smaller than previously reported.  So far, 
wage pressures remain 

limited to occupations such as tr
ucking, skilled construction trades, and quantitative white collar 
jobs.  Prices of finished goods continue to be stable despite more businesses reporting declining 

costs for 
nonlabor inputs. 
Turning to the national economy, we have received a number of disappointing data 
reports since our previous 
meeting across several sectors, including manufacturing, business 
fixed investment, and consumer spending, and including the employment report for March.  
As 
was the case last year, there was very harsh winter we
ather, but this year we also had the port 

strike, the sharp drop in oil prices, and the sharp appreciation of the dollar.  Similar to last year, 

we have seen a growth slowdown in the first quarter, and we are trying to extract the signal about 

future growt
h from the incoming data.  This is difficult to do in real time. 
A good case can be made that this is a temporary setback
, just as it was last year
, and 
that 
is forecast in the Tealbook.  The effects of bad weather and the 
West Coast port strike are 
transi
tory.  Using a Bayesian VAR model augmented to include weather indicators, my staff 

estimates that the unusually cold weather reduced GDP growth by 0.9 percentage point, and 

there will be some rebound in the next couple of quarters. 
We have seen the negative effects of lower oil prices on energy
-related firms but not 
much positive effect on consumer spending, although that is likely to come, and oil prices appear 

to be stabilizing.  Dollar appreciation has been a drag on exports and the profitability of fir
ms with multinational operations.  But as the rate of appreciation slows, the drag can be expected to 

diminish as well.
  The slower growth seen in our trading partners might be a reflection of the 
slower growth in the United States
.  If our growth picks up
, it could be that theirs will as well. 
                     
             
            
      
    In addition, not all of the incoming data were negative.  The rate of job openings reached 
another cyclical high, and initial claims are very low, just below the trough reached in the last 
economic expansion.  
These 
indicators suggest that the weakness in payroll jobs in March could 

be temporary.  Although the Conference Board™s 
consumer confidence measure was down in 
April, consumer sentiment came in high, and underlying fundamentals for consumer spending, 

including improved balance sheets, remain quite good. 
The news on inflation was also a bit better over the intermeeting period. Core inflation is 
modestly firming.  Both headline CPI and core CPI increased 0.2 percent in March for the 

second month in a row, and core CPI inflation edged up to 1.8 percent on a year-
over
-year basis. 
The Cleveland Fed™s median CPI measure, which helps predict headline inflation over the 

medium term, has remained near 2
¼ percent since April of last year.  The Federal Reserve Bank 
ofCleveland™s measure of the 
10-year expected inflation rate was essentially unchanged in April. 
So t
his is the positive view of things.  Of course, there is also the possibility that the 
slower growth will be more persistent and inflation developments will 
worsen.  I don™t believe 

we have enough information right now to reach a firm conclusion today, and we don™t have to.  

We can remain agnostic until we see more data over the next couple of months.  Incoming data 

will help us determine whether the slowdown 
in the first quarter is proving to be temporary, like 

it was last year, or whether it is pointing to something more fundamental. In particular, we are 

going to get two employment reports before our June meeting.  These are going to be quite 

important in m
y own thinking about the economic outlook.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Recent economic data have had a 
distinctly weaker tone since our 
previous 
meeting.  The March emplo
yment report indicated little 
              
       
                      overall improvement in labor markets, the unemployment rate was unchanged, and payroll 
employment growth was surprisingly weak.  Similarly, wage and price data have yet to show a 

clear trend toward our 2 percent inflation goal
. While some of the weakness can be attributed to 
the severe weather in some parts of the country, many of the higher-frequency data before and 

after the harsh winter weather have also been on the soft side. 
As a result, in my view, neither of the conditi
ons for liftoff articulated in the March 
FOMC statement 
has 
been sufficiently met at this time.  The March 
Summary of 
Economic 
Projections reflected some significant changes in longer-
run variables.  The central tendency of 
the longer-run unemployment rate has slipped from a range of 5.2 to 6 percent in June 2012 

down to 5 to 5.2 percent in March.  
Similarly, participant estimates of the long
-run equilibrium 
federal funds rate have declined.  The central tendency in June 2012 ranged from 4 to 

4½ percent, bu
t now it is down to only 3½ to 3¾ 
percent.  Our assessment of these key variables 

has changed significantly, which, 
in retrospect
, is not surprising, 
considering changes in 
demographics and productivity since the financial crisis. 
While I and many other participants have lowered our estimates of one of our dual 
mandate goalsŠthe natural rate of unemploymentŠwe have not engaged in any comprehensive 
discussion of our other goal, the inflation target.  That target has remained unchanged at 

2 percent since it w
as adopted in 2012. 
We have learned a great deal about conducting monetary policy in a low-
inflation 
environment since 2012.  I am fully aware that we should have a high threshold for changing our 

inflation target, 
as frequent changes would undermine its usefulness.  But the accumulated 
weight of economic experience suggests, in my view, that a reexamination of our inflation target 

is warranted for several reasons. 
                          
     
                
         First, the choice of an inflation target was largely b
ased on research both here and abroad, 
indicating that the likelihood of reaching the zero lower bound and the cost of being at the zero 
lower bound was small.  This research suggested a relatively low probability of reaching the zero 

lower bound, typically below 5 percent, and relatively brief spells at the lower bound once 

reached, usually a couple of quarters. 
In part, this optimistic read could have been based on faith 
in the efficiency of alternative monetary policy tools.  However, the experience of 
the past 
decade has been less favorable.  Today most major developed countries are at the zero lower 

bound, and, despite employing alternative policy tools, none has yet exited, even though we are 

now more than six years past the financial crisis. 
In shor
t, the research on the expected cost of 
hitting the zero lower bound has not been consistent with the economic outcomes we have 

observed. 
Second, we have revised our assessment of variables that should affect 
the probability of 
hitting the zero lower bound.  The most obvious example is the lowering of the equilibrium 
federal funds rate.  With the same inflation target, a decline in the equilibrium federal funds rate 
should 
increase
 the probability of hitting the zero lower bound.  
The most recent SEP 
submissions, for example, report a decline in the equilibrium real rate of more than 50 basis 

points, a
nd this assessment is echoed among private forecasters and market participants.  If one 
of the rationales for setting a positive inflation target is to reduce 
the frequency of hitting the 
zero lower bound, a lower equilibrium real rate implies the need for a higher inflation target to 

reduce this probability. 
On a practical note, the fact that Japan, the 
United Kingdom, Europe, 
and the United States have each h
it the zero lower bound and have remained there for a very long 
time should make us wonder whether the global convergence to a value of 2 percent for the 

inflation target was misguided. 
       
  
              
                
      Third, we have learned more about the cost of being at the zero lower bound.  After more 
than six years, we have still not returned to the 5 to 5.2 percent unemployment rate range that the 
SEP central tendency currently indicates is consistent with longer
-run unemployment rates.  
While the new tools of quantitative easingŠpurchasing mortgage-
backed securities and 
lengthening the maturity of our holdingsŠhave resulted in growth faster than we otherwise 

would have experienced, we have missed both elements of our mandate for more than 
six years 

now. 
This is not an acceptable outcome.  The consequences of not being able to exit the zero 
lower bound more quickly have been a long period of underutilized resources and 
below
-target 
inflation that risks eroding the credibility of the central bank.  A higher inflation target would 

surel
y have given us more room to lower real interest rates 
using
 our conventional policy tools, 
likely saving hundreds of thousands of jobs. 
Despite our willingness to alter other variables, we have not recently had a 
comprehensive review of our choice for the 
inflation target.  In light of the accumulating 
evidence that inflation targets globally may have been set too low, this choice may have resulted 

in a great cost to the global economy in terms of lost economic output and employment.  Thus, 

we should have a fuller discussion of our choice for the inflation target before we set our longer-

run strategies at the beginning of next year. 
In addition to the longer-run implications of the inflation goal for monetary policy, a 
higher inflation goal would have more 
immediate policy implications.  Entertaining a higher 
inflation target would imply an even larger inflation shortfall, compelling us to wait even longer 

before lifting off. 
A weaker version of this proposition suggests both that we should delay liftoff 
until we see clear evidence that inflation is increasing, and that we should be willing to entertain 
      
          
      
       
             
      an inflation rate that exceeds our current target. This strategy would
, of course
, be akin to price-
level targeting, a notion that President Evans and other
s have previously discussed. 
In summary, we should recognize that the economy™s performance over the previous six 
years has a bearing not only on our estimates of full employment and the equilibrium federal 
funds rate, which many of us have adjusted in the SEP, but also on the inflation target.  I 

understand the concern with shifting an inflation target that we set after years of deliberation and 

following years of success in bringing inflation down.  
But our failure to hit either of our 

mandated goals for six years and running demonstrates the potential cost of an inflation target 

that is too low.  Recognizing the many complications that a change in the target would entail, I 

believe we should have a more fulsome discussion about what the 
previous 
decade of
 economic 
history has taught us about the optimal inflation rate.  Should we be willing to entertain an 

increase in the inflation goal, this would, of course, 
have implications for the timing of liftoff, 

which we will be discussing tomorrow.  Thank you, Ma
dam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would 
like
 to ask President Rosengren a question.  You 
are implying that the only margin for adjustment is on the inflation target rate.  Presumably there 

is another margin for adjustment, t
aking a lot of steps to make a future financial crisis of the type 
that we experienced in 2007, 2008, and 2009 less likely, right?  Because you could argue that 

one reason why we are in this position is because we had a really, really bad financial crisis.
  So, 
in principle, one could take steps to make the probability of a financial crisis l
ower
, and that 
would presumably lessen the need to change the inflation target.  How do you think about that? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If you think you can significantly change 
the probability or 
amplitude of those shocks, then you are right.  But the equilibrium federal funds rate has come 
              
            
    
   
      
         
         
   down quite a bit.  Our own internal estimates of what that implies for how frequently we will hit 
the zero lower bound are that it is substantially higher given that most of the time the equilibrium 

federal funds rate that many of those models were estimated on was 4
½ percent.  We are now at 
3½ percent
ŠI actually think you could make an argument that it is lower than 3½ percent.  
So if 
you have 
an equilibrium federal funds rate that is lower, the implication is that 
you hit the zero 
lower bound more frequently unless you think you can dramatically alter either the frequency or 

severity of having the kind of shocks that we experienced. 
CHAIR YELL
EN.  Isn™t it the case that some of the steps we would take to reduce the 
odds of a financial crisisŠ
strengthening capital and liquidity
Šmay actually
, by raising the cost 
of intermediation
, lower 
the 
equilibrium real rate? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, I 
think that™s right.  But my point is just that the 
room you need depends on the size of the shocks that you are dealing with.  And if you do other 

things and reduce the size of shocks, that also should be a factor.  
I don™t really disagree with 
a lot of th
e points that you made, but it seems to me that that™s not the only potential marginŠ 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I™d just raise one other countervailing argument 
that
, certainly
, the experience around October 15 of the very sharp movement in financial markets a
t a 
time when no real economic news was 
occurring makes me wonder
ŠI am not convinced yet that 
all of the actions we have taken have necessarily
, dramatically changed the probability or likely 
severity of shocks 
in the future from 
what we experienced before
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
In that shock, though, implications for the real economy 
were 
trivial. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  In that case. 

MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair? 
              
    
                
       
      
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  I appreciate you
r bringing this up, President Rosengren.  Just one 
comment
 about your rhetoric on this.  Missing the inflation target over six yearsŠif you look at 
headline inflation year over year, it was above target in 2011 and 2012, and it came back down.  

I know you like to think in terms of core inflation, but I think this is an issue for that piece of the 

puzzle.  When you 
evaluat
e the Committee over that kind of a 
time 
frame
, I think you have got 
to look at headline. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I would say 
that 
hitting an inflation target temporarily 
because 
of an oil price shock is a P
yrrhic victory.  You care more about the underlying rate of 
inflation. 
MR. BULLARD.  These are the prices people pay. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  No doubt we will return to this.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART. 
Moving right along.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the 
intermeeting
 cycle, my staff conducted 56 interviews separate from our board 
meetings. We 
focused the interviews on any indications in their businesses that would confirm the weakness 

indicated by first
-quarter data and, more to the point, suggest 
that 
first
-quarter weakness might 
persist. 
We found that overall business sentiment remains quite positive, somewhat at odds with 
our reading of the incoming data.  On balance, our contacts and directors portrayed demand a
s continuing to improve at a steady pace.  We noted, however, that compared 
with
 the previous 
cycle, their optimism is accompanied by a hint of caution.  We heard more reports of negative 

effects of the dollar.  Exporters, port operators, and firms with significant foreign operations all 

noted market or other challenges that they attributed to the 
dollar. 
         
  
            
           
           
        
   As expected, we heard reports 
of investment 
pullback and layoffs in oil and gas 
exploration and production firms as well as in 
oil services companies.  That drag is being 
partially offset by greater investment activity in business sectors benefiti
ng from low energy 

prices. 
We also continued to hear reports that firms are trying to hold on 
to margin improvement 
coming from fuel and other commodity cost declines. 
Declines in gasoline prices have yet to translate into a meaningful boost in consumer 
spending.  A director with knowledge of consumer markets commented that product categories 

that historically have been leading indicators of stronger consumer activity
Što wit, apparel, 
eating outside the home, and moviesŠhave not yet signaled an upturn. 
We received positive reports on real estate investment activity, both commercial and 
residential. Architects and contractors indicated improved pipelines.
  Our banking contacts 
report that new mortgage and investment activity is strong. 
Regarding employment, we heard continued concern about turnover and retention.  At the 
same time, we detected little change in reports this round regard
ing wage inflation.  On that 
subject, although most data indicate that the trend in nominal 
wage growth remains flat, a 
measu
re constructed by my staff from the C
urrent 
Population Survey 
does show an acceleration 
in 
year
-over-
year
 wage growth in the first quarter.  Wage growth increased to a 3 
percent pace in 
the first quarter, up from 2.8 percent in the fourth quarter and up fr
om 2.4 percent a year earlier. 
Continuing on employment, I™ll mention something we heard for the first time from three 
large employers in quite different businesses.  All said they have begun shifting their work forces 

away from part time toward full time.
  They all cited the high managerial and logistical cost and 
quality challenges of a large, part-
time workforce. 
              
               
                
             
  We™ve been struggling to reconcile these generally positive anecdotal reports with the 
hard data on the first quarter and early indications of 
second
-quarter performance.  Our tracking 
estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth is just marginally above zero, at the low end of the 
spectrum presented in the Tealbook. 
Our tracking model is a straight statistical model with no 
judgmental overrides.  We wo
uld not claim it™s the most accurate read of the first quarter, but it™s 
what the raw data are telling us, and we™ll have an official reading soon enoughŠtomorrow 

morning.  
At this point
, I™m holding to the view that weather and other factors played a 

sign
ificant role in first
-quarter weakness, and that significant payback can be anticipated in the 
current quarter. 
We also observed
Šand this is nothing more than an observationŠthat weak 
first
-quarter growth has been a pattern during the recovery, normally giving way to a stronger 

rest of the year. 
We™ve made a small adjustment to our full
-year GDP growth forecast to reflect a weaker 
first quarter, but otherwise 
we have kept our forecast for growth and inflation unchanged from 
the March meeting.  We made no m
aterial change to our outlook.  We have growth resuming a 
run rate between 
2½ and 3 
percent
, with second-quarter growth above 3 
percent. 
A strengthening of consumer activity from the first quarter is a key factor in our outlook.   
We currently judge the risk to our growth and inflation outlooks as tilted to the downside.  
With the greater uncertainty I perceive at this juncture, the Tealbook alternative scenario titled 

ﬁPersistent 
Slowdown in 
Economic A
ctivityﬂ captures my concern that my outlook may be 
overly optimistic.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As many have already noted, the recent 
data have been disappointing, but it is worth noting, 
as Preside
nt Lockhart just did, that over the 
                      
               
   
      
past four years, 
first
-quarter GDP growth has averaged more than 2 percentage points lower than 
growth during the rest of the year, and there is no single smoking gun that can explain this string 

of seasonal aberrations
. E
ach year
, the winter slowdowns have proved to be temporary. 
So, if past is prologue, I expect the same pattern will occur this year
, with an anemic Q1 
followed by above-trend growth for the rest of 2015.  
I™m confident that the underlying 

momentum in th
e economy once again will be more apparent as the first quarter fades in our 
rearview mirror. 
This is consistent with what I™ve been hearing from my business contacts.  In particular, 
the fundamentals of the economy remain quite positive.  Solid job growth should lift income and 

consumer confidence further, helping to pave the way for continued consumption growth.  In 

addition, highly accommodative monetary policy will continue to boost spending, and these 

factors are very evident in my 
District.  In fact, 
some sectors of the economy, 
the 12
th District 
economy, are red hot.  An executive in the tech sector recently mentioned that to retain talent, 
some tech firms are now offering 20 percent or more pay raises. 
And if that wasn™t enough, 
they™re also throwin
g in housing for good measure, and in the Bay Area, housing is something 
that is very hard to come by and obviously very dear.  The other thing that we heard was that you 

can be vested
 in stock options 
after 
one month.  So this is an amazing time in the Silicon Valley 
economy, and about half of my staff ran off to apply for jobs. 
In addition, I will mention that some of my contacts in different sectors, including 
commercial real estate
, have emphasized the abundance of financing that can be obtained at very 

generous terms.  It™s an issue that I noticed
 was highlighted in both the S
LOOS
 and the QS 
reports, and we™re hearing about that in our D
istrict, too.
  Of course, continued low inflation 
remains a key issue.  I view the recent low inflation readings as being consistent with an 
                                 
              economy still operating below potential and facing temporary disinflationary factors.  Important 
questions remain.
  In the remainder of my remarks, I™ll focus on two of these issues.  
The first 
is, what signal should we be taking from the market-
implied measures of inflation compensation
?  And, second, what™s the empirical relationship between wage growth and inflation? 
The softness 
in inflation of late would be a lot more troublesome to me if it was also 
accompanied by a clear decline in inflation expectations.  This kind of scenario is discussed in 

the Tealbook alternative scenario simulation.  But so far, the weight of evidence sug
gests that 
this isn™t happening.  Long-run survey expectations from households and professional forecasters 

remain well anchored. 
In addition, as I pointed out in the past, long-run inflation expectations 
implied by a Phillips curve model estimated over the past 15 years, a period during which our 

credibility was firmly established, were also 
well anchored 
at 2 percent. 
Now, of course, the one discordant note comes from the market
-implied measures of 
inflation compensation.  Inflation compensation has fall
en significantly since the middle of last 
year, and while much of the focus has been on longer-
horizon measures
, there™s also a question 
about what signal we should take about the nearer-term inflation outlook. 
My staff looked at this question, and they conducted a forecasting comparison between 
measures of inflation compensation and five other competing forecasts, among them a random 

walk forecast and also the survey from the Survey of Professional Forecasters.
  We wanted to 
avoid liquidity issues that are 
associated with shorter
-term TIPS
, so they looked at inflation 
compensation derived from inflation swap rates
.  T
hese typically move very closely together 
with inflation compensation derived from the 
Treasur
y market, but 
are 
based o
n trading in a 
deeper market.
  Here we™re looking at one- and 
two
-year
-ahead inflation forecasts 
for 
headline 
CPI inflation. 
             
       
  
  
               
    
  
      
         
The striking result, which is very robust in all of their experiments
, is that forecasts based 
on inflation compensation were the worst performers of all 
the measures.  Basically
, inflation 
compensation did not give useful information about where inflation was going relative to survey 
forecasts. 
So, 
really
, looking at inflation compensation for insights into the future path of 
inflation 
is not supported by 
the data. 
One problem with our analysis is 
that 
data limitations preclude doing a similar exercise 
for long-term inflation expectations.  I™m going to go out on a limb here 
and say 
that the results 
we have for one- and two-year inflation compensation not being a useful predictor for future 

inflation will apply 
also to
 longer-term inflation. We don™t have that much data right now, but in 
five years when the transcript come
s out, we™ll see whether I was right or wrong. We™ll wait for 
that. 
Again
, President Kocherlakota has highlighted the factŠin a memo that he co
-authoredŠ
that 
inflation compensation 
is not a 
reliable forecast for inflation because it reflects 
other aspects of risk associated with different inflation outcomes. 
But I want to mention another 
interesting 
finding in our work 
about inflation compensation, and that is that these one
- and two-
year
-ahead inflation compensation measures are 
very highly correlated with recent past inflation, 
especially with pa
st inflation associated with movements in oil prices.
  That 
puts into 
question 
how to interpret this. It is a very similar result that we™ve found in the past when we looked at 

household surveys.  Household surveys of inflation expectations tend to be ver
y sensitive to 
lagged inflation, especially with regard to oil price movements, and for this reason we have 

tended to discount movements in household inflation expectations when the movements are 

driven by energy prices.  M
y staff suggests using a similar 
caution when trying to interpret 
inflation compensation measures as an indicator of people™s views on future inflation. 
      
    
                     
          
       The second issue I™ll discuss briefly is that of 
nominal wage growth.  A
s has already been 
mentioned, wage growth has been stuck around 2 percent for most of the recovery.  And, 
as economic theory would tell us, employee compensation makes up a huge fraction of a firm™s 

cost
s.  Y
ou would expect 
there
 to be a pretty tight relationship between nominal 
wage 
growth 
and price inflation, b
ut thi
s connection has been remarkably hard to find.  Many papers and 

research projects have looked at this, and
, basically, if you look back at the history of the 
literature, in every business cycle there™s a whole bunch of papers written about the relationship 

of nominal 
wage 
growth and price inflation.  T
he consistent finding through this literature is that 
it™s really hard to find any relationship between nominal 
wage 
growth and future price inflation.  

Recent research by Jim Stock and Mark Watson, and also some really nice work done at the 

Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland and elsewhere
, has shown that the additional information on 
wages or labor compensation has 
done little to improve the accuracy of standard inflation 

forecast models.
  My understandin
g is that 
the 
staff™s inflation forecasting models tend to be 
these 

price Phillips curve 
model
s or models that don™t really emphasize 
nominal 
wage 
growth. 
The lack of a close empirical link between 
nominal wage growth and future inflation 
likely refl
ects several factors that have affected labor markets in recent decades
Šsome of which 

I™ve talked about in the past.  
One is that 
nominal 
wage 
growth is probably being held down by 
rigidities in wage setting
 that kept wages from falling during the downturn and have 
been 
restraining wage growth as the economy improvesŠ
that is, there is 
downward nominal wage 
rigidity. 
The second is 
that 
globalization
, changes 
in unionization, and 
changes in technology 
have affected the share of productivity gains that are go
ing to workers, and 
that distorts the 
            
      
   
      
      
      
     
  
      
       relationship between wage growth and price inflation.  Put another way, the labor share 
of 
income 
has fallen dramatically since the 1980s. 
To summarize, based on the evidence accumulated over the past several decades
 of extensive research on this topic, there™s little or no information 
to suggest that 
aggregate wage 
data should inform our medium-term inflation outlook.  Now I™m going to break my rule that I 
stated earlier
ŠI do not view a 
rise in 
nominal wage growth as a necessary condition to be 
confident in the return of inflation to 2 
percent. 
All told, our current low inflation rates, I think, 
are pretty easy to understand in the context of transitory factorsŠ
import prices, energy prices
Š and the fact that there is st
ill some considerabl
e slack in the labor market.  As the labor market 
moves back to maximum employment, and 
as these transitory factors dissipate, I expect inflation 

to move back to 2 
percent. 
President Bullard mentioned 2011.  I think we should learn a lesson from that.  We did 
see inflation rise quite a bit 
as a result of a rise in some special factors.  We were experiencing 
high inflationary pressures due to 
large increases 
in the price of oil and other import prices, and 
what we did then, 
I think
, is the right thing.  We looked past the transitory effects of those and 
looked more broadly 
at the long-term inflation outlook, and that is how I am viewing it, too.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank
 you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask an information question? 
The 
research 
that 
you mention
ed is 
very interesting, but 
I am not sure I followed the details.
  The inflation compensation measures 
were one-
to two
-year horizon expectation
sŠa
nd you also 
had survey measures of inflation 
expectations. 
       
    
  
        
                          
             
          MR. WILLIAMS.  The horse race 
was 
basically 
this:  W
e aligned the inflation swap rate 
one year ahead with 
the swaps of month
s 13 to 24 aheadŠo
ne year ahead
 with one year ahead.  
And then we looked at the 
Survey of Professional Forecasters 
and Blue Chip 
for each year. 
MR. EVANS.  At the same horizons? 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Same horizons. 

MR. EVANS.  I see, and those were helpful? Because
, if I understand some of the Board 
work, they use 
these 
long
-term inflation
 expectations for their modeling because, 
as attractive as 
it is theoretically to use a short
-term expectation, nobody can find a good measure of short-
term 
inflation expectation
s.  
Isn™t that right, Bill? 
MR. WASCHER. 
We use the longer
-term inflation exp
ectations in our models.  That™s 
right. 
MR. WILLIAMS. 
Yes
, but the question I™m asking is:  What do you think inflation is 
going to be over the next four quarters? 
The 
SPF is actually a very good forecast.  This is 
roughly as good as the Tealbook.  I
t™s
 asking what 
inflation 
is going to be over the nextŠ 
MR. EVANS.  Well, but the Tealbook won™t use any short-
term inflation 
measures, 
that™s 
my understanding. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  No, no, no.  I™m just looking at the forecast itself. 

MR. EVANS.  Oh, yes, but thos
e forecasts are lousy.  They might be better than the other 
ones, but they™re all lousy.  
MR. WILLIAMS. Well, I think the research says that the Tealbook is maybe a little bit 
better than the SPF and Blue Chip over the next year or twoŠ 
MR. WASCHER. 
Just 
in terms of forecasting? 
There™s probably not much difference. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  So it™s basically the same. 
                           
   
   
       
           MR. EVANS.  The
 Tealbook does something which is not in line with theory, to use 
long-term inflation expectations for a one-
year
-ahead inflation because, well, it kind of works, 
right? 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes
, we view the anchoring of inflation expectations as best 
approximat
ed by long-
term survey measures of inflation
 expectations. 
MR. 
EVANS
.  Yes
, that™s why I was asking the 
question about 
whether I understood you 
right, you™ve currently got it anchored at 1¾ percent and are hoping to goes up to 2 percent. 
MR. WASCHER.  Right. 
MR. 
EVANS
.  But at any rate, I™m done.  
Well, I mean, it™s interesting. I appreciate that. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Please proceed. 

MR. EVA
NS.  Okay.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  For the most part, my directors and 
business contacts expect that the recent spate of soft economic readings will be short
-lived.  The 
one report that seems to sum it up the best came from the 
chairman of Manpower who, when 
talking about soft first
-quarter numbers, said none of his clients are getting depressed about it.  
The view seems to be that there is enough momentum from last year that growth should pick up 
soon. 
Separately, I didn™t hear of any meaningful reports 
of wage or price pressures from my 
contacts.  My own outlook for the real economy continues to be for 
real 
GDP growth to run 
between 2
½ and 3 percent over the remainder of this year and next.  Our assumptions for 
potential output growth are somewhat strong
er than 
in the Tealbook, so our GDP path translates 
into a very similar reduction in resource gaps as the Tealbook™s.  By the end of 2016, we have 

the unemployment rate down to around 5 percent, which is my current assessment of the natural 

rate. 
           
      
               
                  
 My inflation forecast has not changed.  Like the Tealbook, I do not see inflation reaching 
target until sometime in 2018 or 2019.  I should again point out that my assessment of 
appropriate monetary policy underlying this forecast has lower rates than most people around the 

table. 
Now, I want to spend some time today talking about why this outlook leads me to favor a 
whites
-of-
their
-eyes approach for our policy response to rising inflation.  I have talked about risk 
management many times before.  Today I want to art
iculate three additional reasons the data lead 
me to prefer a cautious approach to raising rates. 
First, forecasting inflation is inherently 
difficult, and that™s the discussion that we were just having.  This implies a high burden of proof 

to say we are 
sufficiently confident that our currently low core inflation will move back to 

2 percent in a reasonable period of time. 
Second, despite near-
zero nominal rates and a large 
balance sheet, I am not convinced our current policy stance is all that accommodat
ive to begin 
with.  And, third, I actually see benefits to risking a modest overshooting of our 2 percent 
inflation target. 
Let me start with why it should take strong evidence to have confidence in an outlook of 
low inflation rising back to 2 percent.  Anyone who has looked at the forecasting performance of 
statistical inflation models knows that everyone™s abilities in this area are limited.  Indeed, there 

is a body of research that shows it is not that easy to be a random walk forecast
.  Even the best-
performing models seldom forecast a rapid change in inflation, and they always imply substantial 

forecast uncertainty.  That said, we do have many analytical reasons to think our current low 

inflation will rise at some point. 
Most of the commentary I hear at this table centers 
on the 
economy regaining traction, resource gaps closing, and the upward gravitational pull of high and 

stable inflation expectations, like in the Tealbook forecast. I also suspect that simple mean 
            
      
                 
  
       
   
          
         reversion probably plays a role in 
these forecasts as well. I agree that these forces will 
eventually deliver.  The question is, when?  Taking until 2019 to reach our target is not 

acceptable to me. 
Given all of these difficulties in forecasting inflation, my own preferred dashboard of 
indicators is mostly a list of factors coincident with rising inflation
.  While measures of labor 
market slack are important, I would not rely on them alone, 
as it is possible something has 

changed in the structure of the economy that makes those historical benchmarks less trustworthy.  

In addition, I will continue to look for increasing core inflation, faster wage growth, and firmer 

market
-based measures of inflation compensation to provide corroborating evidence of stronger 
inflationary pressures. 
As I sai
d, the absence of statistically strong leading indicators 
suggests 
that 
these observations are likely to be more coincident than predictive. But at least once we see 
them, we can have more confidence that inflation is moving up persistently.  Until then, 
I remain 

wary. 
Now, my second pointŠthat current policy is not as accommodative as we might thinkŠ 
comes out of the model analysis.  
A fundamental benchmark for thinking about the level of 
monetary accommodation and inflation pressures is the difference bet
ween the actual real rate of 
interest and the equilibrium
, or Wicks
ellian
, real rate of interest.
  As Milton Friedman said, low 
interest rates alone do not mean monetary policy is accommodat
ive.  The relevant question is 
whether, after adjusting for inflation, our current real federal funds rate is far enough below the 

equilibrium real rate to achieve our policy objectives in a reasonable amount of timeŠ
that is, for 

inflation to actually get up to 2 percent, 
as the forecasts embody. 
I think the answer to th
at question is ﬁno.ﬂ  There are a number of simple observations 
that suggest that the current equilibrium rate is quite low.  Namely, even with our interest rate 
         
        
       
     
  
    
    
       
      
         
and balance sheet policies in place, we still see the continued existence of resource gaps, a lack 
of any meaningful upward movement in inflation, and relatively low levels of capital spending 

despite piles of cash on corporate balance sheets. These cash stockpiles are an indication that 

expected real returns on physical investment are not very hi
gh. 
To put a number out, the Tealbook-
consistent equilibrium real rate shown in 
Book 
B, as 
circulated over the weekend, 
is negative 0.1 percent.  Some might look at the current real funds 
rate of minus 1.18 percent, as reported in the Tealbook, Book B, and 
say we have adequate 

accommodation in place.  I don™t agree.  
Recall that the Tealbook™s equilibrium real rate is 

calibrated to close the output gap in 12 quarters.  It says nothing about inflation.  In the Tealbook 

baseline, the inflation gap is still wi
th us until 2019.  That would mean that inflation would have 

to run below target for more than a decade 
and, t
o me
, that is simply too long to be considered 
the result of appropriate policy. 
I want to mention that President Bullard 
referred to the fact 
tha
t PCE 
inflation rose to 
2 percent in 2011 and 2012 on the strength of commodity price increases.  I think the reason we 

focus on core 
inflation is
 that 
core is a better indicator of what inflation is likely to be next year, 
because th
e shocks in headline PCE often are transitory.  T
he real test
, I would say
, is, when did 
the Tealbook ever forecast inflation two years out as being at 2 percent or above?  I think that 

has 
not been the case for quite some time. 
While we can 
all 
lament the 
fact that there are large uncertainties regarding the value of 
the equilibrium real rate of interest, uncertainty over inflation forecasting and the stance of 

monetary policy accommodation go hand in hand.  Logically, because the equilibrium rate has a 

str
ong bearing on the inflation outlook, uncertainty over it ought to translate into comparable 
uncertainty over inflation itself.
  In other words, how can we declare we are confident that 
         
      
    
   
                   current low inflation is headed back up to 2 percent unless we are also confident that our policy 
setting relative to 
the 
equilibrium real rate is able to return inflation to target
? This brings me to the third reason my outlook is premised on a whites-of-
their
-eyes 
policy approach.  I recognize that the usual policy lags mi
ght mean that a delay in tightening 
could cause inflation to modestly overshoot 2 percent sometime down the road.  But so what?  Is 

that such a big cost?
  No.  On the contrary, it could be a benefit.  Considering how long inflation 

has been below target, adopting a policy that allows the possibility of such an overshoot actually 

seems necessary to support the credibility of our symmetric inflation objective.  If we find 

ourselves with the federal funds rate at 1 percent or a little bit above that while infl
ation is still 
too low, we could easily regret the conservative credibility that we
™ve built up. 
I would 
also 
say that if we are not willing to allow an overshoot of our inflation objective, 
then I think we should definitely 
be having the conversation that
 President Rosengren was 
suggesting we have in terms of the appropriateness of the level of the inflation objective, if it is 
something that we are not allowed to overshoot with any reasonability.  I think that™s important.  
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR Y
ELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb. 

MS. HOLCOMB.  And now for something completely different.  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  The Texas economy has decelerated since I last reported to the Committee.  Continued 

low oil prices, the strong dollar, and a weaker national economy pushed state employment down 

by almost 12,000 jobs in March, the first decline in 40 months.  Over the first three months of the 

year, combined job growth averaged a positive but still dismal 0.7 percent, down from 4.2 

percent d
uring the fall of 2014.  Our forecast for December-over-December job growth, which is 
      
           
                           derived from the Texas Leading Index, now stands at 0.5 percent.  That™
s down from a forecast 
of 1 to 2 percent growth six months ago. 
Besides oil and gas, the manufacturing sector has seen the greatest slowing.  Companies 
in the computer and electronics industry say that they are losing opportunities as the appreciating 
dollar pushes up the relative price of U.S.-made capital equipment.  Chemical producers report 

lower se
lling prices and margins and lower exports.  Producers of primary metals have noted 

increasing import competition, too.  Companies in the professional and business services 

industry have been indirectly affected by both low energy prices and the strong dol
lar, 
particularly those with a significant fraction of their clientele in the energy and manufacturing 

sectors.  There have been some reports of adverse spillovers from energy to financial services as 

well. 
Our most up-
to-date information comes from our Te
xas 
Manufacturing and S
ervice 
Sector 
Outlook Surveys.  The latest manufacturing survey results, 
released only yesterday
, show 
production declining in April for the second straight monthŠ
the first consecutive two
-month 
decline since the recession. 
The 
New 
Orders 
Index, too, has registered its worst two-month 
performance since the recession, posting readings of minus 16.1 and minus 14.0 in March and 

April, respectively.  In contrast, our latest service sector survey 
results
, released this morning
, show the headline revenue index rising to 14.6 in April from 10.7 in March.  April™s reading is 

the highest reported so far this year, but 
it is considerably lower than levels reported through 
most of 2014. 
Despite slower job growth, the Texas unemploymen
t rat
e continues to fall, and at 
4.2 percent in March
, it reached its lowest level since July 2007. We have anecdotal reports of 
laid
-off energy workers shifting into construction, especially along the Gulf Coast, 
where skilled 
         
             
  
   
    
          
      
  
    construction workers remain
 in short supply.  The wage and benefit ind
exes from our 
manufacturing and service sector surveys indicate that upward wage pressures are somewhat less 
intense than they were last year.  Looking ahead, health-
care contacts are concerned about losing 
experienced workers in a coming wave of retirements.  In finance, our bankers report flat 

demand and unchanged standards across all major loan categories. 
Oil prices have moved irregularly upward since last month™s FOMC meeting, with WTI 
closing some of the gap 
with 
Brent.  Y
ear-to-date volatility has been driven by conflicting supply 
developments, including unexpected increases in OPEC output
Šname
ly, Saudi Arabia™s 
production was up 4 percent in MarchŠinventory buildups in the U
nited 
States
, and reports of 
slowe
r growth in U.S. oil production.  If the Iran negotiations successfully conclude in June, that 
country could ramp up its output by more than 700,000 barrels per dayŠ0.7 percentage point 
of 
world supplyŠby the end of 2016, which would be enough to lower the 
price of crude between 
$5 and $15 per barrel in 2016, all else staying constant.  The conflict in Yemen is another source 
of uncertainty.  Yemen itself is a negligible producer of crude oil.  However, the threat of wider 
conflict between Saudi Arabia and 
Iran
, and Yemen™s proximity to the fourth-
busiest ch
okepoint 
for crude oil flows in the world, have created fears of supply disruptions. 
Our energy industry contacts tell us that the number of drilled but uncompleted wells, or 
DUCs, has increased between 33 and 50 percent since the end of last year. These are wells that 

have been drilled but are kept out of production.  They are underground inventory.  
New capital 

projects are difficult to initiate, but spending continues on existing contracts.  U.S. oil production 

is expected to peak within the next two to three months.  We are also likely to hit above-ground 

storage constraints within that time 
frame.  Drilling costs are down 20 percent, partly as a result 
of real efficiency gains and partly as a result o
f cheaper labor and equipment.  
There is cautious 
                                       optimism that the worst is over, coupled with recognition that we
™re unlikely to see a return to 
$100-per-
barrel oil any
 time soon.  Repercussions and adjustments in the broader Texas 
economy are ongoing. 
We are a bit more sanguine about the national economic outlook today than we were a 
couple of meetings ago.  It appears considerably less likely now that we will blow through full 
employment at full throttle.  That revised assessment is based on predictions from a small suite 

of models we use to forecast real activity two to four quarters out.  Although each model relies 

on its own set of financial and policy indicators, all are now telling a consistent story
:  solid if 
unspectacular GDP growth, on average, in the second and third quarters of 2015 and a gradual 

deceleration in employment growth over the course of the year, with the unemployment rate 

leveling off in the neighborhood of 5 percent heading into 2016.  
We expect 
trimmed 
mean PCE 
inflation, our measure of the underlying trend in headline inflation, to average about 1¾ 
percent 

over the next four quarters.  As compared with the Tealbook, we are more optimistic on both 
halves of the dual mandate, b
ut we
™re certainly not only
 in the same ballpark as the Tealbook, 
but in the same outfield.  Hopefully, it™
s not left field. 
Although we are looking forward to tomorrow™s GDP report, we don™t expect to take a 
strong signal from it, whatever the number turns out to be.  The first est
imate relies on a lot of 
guesswork, and in any case, 
GDP growth is volatile from quarter to quarter.  As a result, we
™ve 
not found real-
time estimates of lag
ged GDP growth to be especially helpful for forecasting at 
the horizons that are of interest to us.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Data on economic conditions in the Eighth 
District have improved notably during the 
intermeeting
 period.  The pace of job creation was 
           
           
   
   
     
        revised up for 2014, and preliminary data for 2015 has generally been positive.  
The 
District 
unemployment rate continues to decline and stands at 5.7 percent today, according to the most 
recent reading
Šonly slightly higher than the national rate. 
According to the revised BLS d
ata, 
District job creation occurred at about twice the pace 
in 2014 as compared 
with
 2013, which was itself revised higher.  One of the largest revisions 
was in the Louisville MSA which was revised from an
 original estimated value of 2.3 percent 
growth to an updated value of 3.8 percent.  By sector, notable upward revisions occurred in 

transportation, manufacturing
, and professional and business services.
  Correspondingly, 
Louisville™s average hourly earnings growth is significantly faster than the national 
average. 
On the downside, one of the most notable developments in the local labor market was the 
announcement by U.S. Steel that they would temporarily idle their Granite City, Illinois, 
plant
, laying off over 2,000 employees effective in May.  Media repo
rts suggest that the layoffs are 

due, in part, 
to a rise in imports of relatively inexpensive Chinese steel
Šsteel that
, evidently, the 
Chinese do not need in their home market. 
On this dimension, 
my recent intermeeting visit to China
, combined with discussions 
with CEOs and my interpretation of some hard data, has suggested to me that trend growth in 

China may be notably slower than commonly appreciated.  I think this goes beyond the relatively 

weak reported growth rate 
in the first quarter 
to a trend rate 
of growth as low as 4½ percent.  
Chinese GDP statistics are notably opaque
Ša topic of macroeconomic discussion for the 
past 15 

years or moreŠbut corroborating data and anecdotes now seem to be diverging more sharply 

from official reports, suggesting that a 
Chin
ese slowdown is to be taken far more seriously this 
time.
  The proximate cause of the slowdown is likely the ongoing anticorruption campaign, 
                 
                       
       
     which is reportedly casting a very wide net and is likely creating a chilling effect on new 
business formatio
n and business expansion. 
Turning to the national outlook, I have five main areas for comments on the current 
narrative for the U
nited S
tates, 
as reported in the Tealbook, 
FOMC speeches
, and popular 
commentary.  The comments are in the following areas:
  one, potential over
-interpretation of the 
Q1 slowdown; two, an unemployment forecast that I think is not credible; 
three, assumptions 
about 
r* that may be suspect; four, over-interpretation of the likely effects of the value of the 
dollar on U.S. growth pros
pects;
 and, five, underappreciation of the risks of asset price bubbles 
during the next two to three years as rates remain exceptionally low.
  I™m going to comment on 
the first three of these today.  I™m not commenting directly on inflation because I think
 the 
situation in that dimension has not changed greatly during the inter
meet
ing period.  I continue to 
expect inflation to return to target and eventually overshoot 2 percent in 2016. 
On the first issue, potential over-interpretation of the Q1 slowdown, d
ata 
are 
clearly 
weaker on a tracking basis since our 
previous meeting.  GDP will be reported tomorrow 
morning, and the s
taff has penciled in an estimate close to zero. But suppose we take the median 
of the nowcasting table reported in the Tealbook, which 
is 
an 
approximately 1½ percent annual 

growth rate of GDP in the first quarter.  On that basis
, the year
-over-year growth rate would be 
3.3 percent.  I think this number gives a better sense of the underlying pace of growth in the U.S. 

economy and provides 
a better point of reference 
for 
shaping GDP expectations for the 
remainder of this year. 
In addition
, I think that seasonal factors for Q1 are being called into 
question.  We considered Q1 GDP growth averages versus averages for Q2 through Q4 over 

differe
nt time periods
, excluding recessions
, since the mid
-1990s.  Average Q1 real GDP growth 
        
                           has been notably lower in these subperiods.  This broad-
brush analysis suggest
s that low Q1 
growth rates are not occurring by accident, and that Q1 seasonals may need revamping. 
The second issue is unemployment projections balancing out at about 5 percent over the 
forecast horizon despite easy monetary policy
, by conventional definition.  I do not think that 
such a forecast is credible, and I continue to disagree with th
e labor force participation 
assumption behind it.  A key 
paper in the 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
Šby Aaronson 
and others
, published 
in 
2014Šsuggests that labor force participation has been dropping 
according to demographic factors since 2000, 
and, furthermore, that this downward trend will 
continue through the forecast horizon.  This suggests that, on balance, there will be no sustained 

upward improvement in labor force participation and, therefore, that unemployment will 

continue to drop into 
the 
4½ to 4 percent range over the forecast horizon, barring any major 

disruption in the U.S. economy.  This dynamic would be very similar to what was observed 

during the 1990s expansion and again during the 2000 expansion.  On both of those occasions, 
unemployment moved into the low 4 
percent range. 
Previous staff predictions in this area have emphasized increases in labor force 
participation but have turned out to be wrong.  Indeed, the predictions given in the S
ummary of 
Economic P
rojections have also re
lied
, in part, on this story and have also been wrong.  
The 
median SEP forecast as of September 2012 for unemployment at the end of 2014 was too high 
by more than 1 percentage point.  The same was true of the median SEP September 2013 

forecast for unemploy
ment. 
So what™s the bottom line?  We™re charting a course for very low interest rate monetary 
policy based on an unrealistic assessment of future labor market performance, and this will harm 

FOMC policymaking in the quarters and years ahead.  
We can, of co
urse, cite other labor market 
                         
  
   
  
    
        
         
         indicators and thereby bring to bear more information on overall labor market performance.  The 
Board of Governors™ l
abor 
market 
conditions index does exactly this, conveniently summarizing 
information on many different dimensions of labor market performance.  
The 
Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis calculated that the value of this index is comfortably above its long-run 

average since 1986.  This indicat
es that
, based on the totality of available information, labor 
markets are n
ot weak but instead are relatively strong viewed in historical perspective. 
I like this 
index because it brings all information
 together in one place and avoids cherry-
picking particular 
indicators that may or may not be indicative of overall labor market 
performance. 
The third issue is 
r*.  Some commentary has suggested that 
an r* parameter in a 
Taylor 
rule is 
low based on estimates of 
Laubach 
and Williams, which
, combined with relatively small 
inflation and unemployment gaps, would suggest, through a Taylor-
rule
-type calculation
, that 
current policy is approximately the policy recommended by the rule.  This argument could 

rationalize current policy settings, although it would suggest that polic
y is 
perhaps not as 
accommodative as people woul
d intuitively think. 
One comment is that the value of 
r* is highly 
uncertain
, either from a theoretical perspective or a measurement perspective.  Time
-varying 
r* Taylor rules are relatively untested and do not represent the empirical tradition behind Taylor 

rule estimation and recommended policy outcomes. For this reason
, I am skeptical of using 
time
-varying 
r* as a rationale for current policy settings. 
The value of 
r* from a broader perspective should represent the 
Wicksellian 
natural rate 
of interest
, which one might view as governed by the real rate of interest that would prevail in 
an economy without frictions and without monetary policy influence.  
In a wide class of models, we 

know what the 
real rate of interest would be.  It would be the sum of the rate of productivity 
growth and the rate of labor force growth.  These factors alone would drive the real output 
      
   
            
       
    
             
  growth rate in this class of models.  
My staff calculated an 
r* value based on such a view.  It 
turned out to be 2 percent today, and this seems like a good benchmark for 
r* from which to 
calibrate Taylor rule policy recommendations.  Such recommendations would suggest that policy 
is indeed accommodative today, which would match most people™s intuition about current policy 

settings. Interestin
gly, this value of 
r* has historically been somewhat lower than the 
Laubach
-Williams measure
.  It
 has been near zero in recent years, but as of today has moved above 
zero to 
a value of about 2 
percent. 
The bottom line is that there are many ways to look at this value of 
r*, but a sensible 
guess is that 
r* is 
2 percent or higher, meaning policy today is accommodative, 
as intuition 
suggests.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you. 

MR. TARULLO.  M
adam Chair, if I couldŠ
President Bullard
, I was a little bit confused 
by what you were saying about labor force participation, 
and particularly the staff™s assessment 
of it.  My understanding of what the staff has been saying is that while they project a downward 
trend in labor force participation because of demographics, they also assess the decline in the 

immediate post
-crisis years to have been substantially steeper than that
.  And what they were 
predicting
Šand continue, I think, to predict, 
unless Bill 
corrects me
Šis a less steep decline or a 
flattening
-out of current labor force participation
, which eventually has their projected 
demographic trendŒbased participation rate converging with the actual participation rate.  And 

that, I think, is what™s been
 happening over the p
ast year and a half or so
, during which, 
with a 
little bit of fluctuation up and down, 
the labor force participation rate 
has been 
roughly stable, 
which I think is bearing out the staff™s expectation of the convergence of their projected trend 

with actual labor force participation. 
       
        
         
                 
      MR. WASCHER.  Yes, I think that™s how I interpret it as well.  I don™t think what we 
have in the forecast is at all at odds with the 
Aaronson and others paper of 2014.  The gap we 
have in there is roughly what we estimated in that paper, and as Governor Tarullo indicated, we 
expect the downtrend in the participation rate to continue 
and the actual participation rate to 
close the gap by falling less than the downtrend we have. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  First Vice Presiden
t Prichard. 
MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Economic activity in the Third District 
slowed during the first quarter.  While still expanding, the rate of expansion has been below 

expectations.  However, it appears that the recent slowdown may be tem
porary, and that 
sentiment is widely held among contacts in our region.  Unemployment in the region ticked up to 

5.7percent in March
, with Pennsylvania experiencing a significant decline in employment, 
enough that the first-
quarter job growth in the state 
was actually negative.
  However, both our 
April 
Manufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey 
and 
Nonmanufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey 
indicate that the manufacturing and service sectors expanded employment in April and point to 

further job growth and capital expenditures over the second half of the year.  One prominent 

manufacturer in the region indicated that his businesses are poised to grow rather more robustly 

in the second half of the year once they have worked through the necessary inventory correction.  

Although he doesn™t anticipate 2015 to be as strong as last year, the second half of the year 

should see solid growth. 
In response to a special survey question on the effect of the dollar™s appreciation on the
ir manufacturing activity, respondents who ha
ve exchange rate exposure indicated that the 
appreciation negatively affected their operations. 
However, our District does not overly engage 
in foreign trade, 
with exports
 accounting for only 10 
percent of revenues and imports 
         
   
              
            representing about 5 
percent
 of nonlabor costs.  
Thus, the overall effect of the dollar™s rise was 
fairly small 
for 
Third District manufacturers. 
Both nonresidential and residential construction weakened in March.  We are also seeing 
a softening in multifamily housing.  Reflecting th
e overall weaknesses in this sector, house price 
appreciation is also slower than in the 
nation as a whole, 
with prices
 growing in the 3 
to 3½ percent range.
  Retailers in the region have been report
ing healthy sales over the inter
me
eting 
period and modera
te year
-over-
year sales growth. 
Contacts report th
at sales are starting to be 
bolstered by lower gasoline prices, and consumers in the region remain highly confident.  They 

are also paying down post-holiday debt, and debit and credit card lines are declining.  Bankers in 

the region indicate that the growth in the commercial loan segment of their portfolios has picked 

up substantially, while other loan activity has remained fairly flat. 
Thus, our D
istrict reflects 
fairly well what might be transpiring in ot
her regions 
nationally
Ša bit of a step back in labor markets, 
a falloff in manufacturing activity
, and a lack of 
any significant improvement in residential investment.  This slowdown is well reflected in one of 

the series we produce in our real
-time resear
ch center, the 
Aruoba-Diebold-
Scotti Business 
Conditions Index.  The ADS uses six high-frequency data series to construct an index of current 

economic activity.  Those series include
, one, initial jobless claims through the week ending 

April 11 of this year; two, payroll employment through March; t
hree, industrial production 
through March; four, real personal income through February; five, real manufacturing and trade 

sales through January; 
and, six, real GDP through the 
fourth quarter of last year.
  The index is 
centered on zero, which indicates normal growth rates, and the index has recently turned 

negative.  However, we are receiving indications that the somewhat slower growth we have 
              
      
       
   
   
             
  wit
nessed is a temporary phenomenon, and that economic activity is expected to bounce back to 
trend growth rates. 
As mentioned by President Bullard, we also find that, 
historically
, first
-quarter GDP 
growth may not be adequately adjusted for seasonal variation.  Over the past 30 years, 
seasonally 
adjusted growth 
in first
-quarter GDP has averaged significantly less than growth over the 
remaining three quarters
Š1.8 percent as opposed to 2.7 percent.  Additionally, if one examines 
the timing of the 10 
weakest qua
rters over that span, six occurred in the first quarter and
, 50 percent of the time
, the weakest quarter 
was the first quarter of the year.
  Observations like 
these may point us to placing more weight on GDIŠ
gross domestic income
Šor on GDPplus, 
which incorporates the income side of GDP, in interpreting current economic activity.  GDPplus 

has the advantage that, unlike GDI, it is available with the same timing as expenditure
-side data. 
With that as background, we continue to project that overall economic act
ivity will 
accelerate modestly
, that utilization gaps will continue to progressively narrow
, and that inflation 
will continue to firm. With 
a substantial amount of data forthcoming before our June meeting, I 
expect that we™ll have a clearer view of the em
erging trends and confirmationŠor notŠ
that 
first
-quarter economic performance was, indeed, a poor harbinger of the year to come.  Thank 

you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  
President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming national data suggest that the 
economy hit a soft patch in the first quarter, which is consistent with the recent information on 

economic activity in the Fifth Federal Reserve District. 
At the same time, our reports indicate 
that the weakness is widel
y viewed as temporary.  Our diffusion index of manufacturing activity, 
released this morning
, was slightly negative in April, and that followed a reading of negative 8 
            
  
                       
       
   for March
.  B
ut our index of expected shipments six months ahead was a robust plus 38, a 
level 
that has not been exceeded since 2011.  
Similarly, our 
index 
for nonretail service
-sector activity 
was also slightly negative in April, but the index of expected demand six months ahead held 
steady at a pretty positive rate.  And the indexes for employment remain positive across all 

sectors. Retail revenue rose 
5 points to plus 17. 
More broadly, commentary from our directors and industry roundtable participants was 
more positive this month than last, and we™ve heard numerous reports about transitory factors 

having affected recent activity.  An executive at an engineering firm in West Vir
ginia said that 
ﬁweather has been the primary factor in our business slowdown.ﬂ 
Several other reports cited 
production slowdowns attributable to the West Coast port strike.  For example, a manufacturer of 

industrial safety products stated that production 
was interrupted by delays in receiving shipments 
of just one critical part manufactured in China.  These reports suggest that it™s quite reasonable to 

expect a rebound in growth in Q2. 
As usual, any discussion of labor markets these days turns quickly to the subject of 
shortages of skilled workers.  It does seem as if these shortages are having noticeable effects. 

For example, the CEO of a large building materials company told of a trucking company 

refusing outgoing shipments due to a lack of drivers.  
We also continue to hear about markets 
experiencing wage pressures
, and, while not universal at this point, the scope of these 

observations appears to have broadened of late.  This was most apparent in the reports from 

representatives of several staffing firm
s, both national and regional, who serve on our 
roundtables, including a regional representative from Manpower.  
One large staffing firm is 

telling clients to expect upward wage pressure ﬁin all skill levelsﬂ later this year.  Two grocers in 

Richmond recently announced double-
digit starting
-wage increases, perhaps 
in response to Wal
-         
     
       
     
  
                 
    Mart™s announcement.  A large auto manufacturer plans to raise starting wages for assembly line 
workers at a plant in our District from $13.17 an hour to $15.85 an hourŠabout 20 
percent. 
A lumber company in West Virginia has responded to a shortage by bringing in entry-
level workers 
from Puerto Rico, renting houses for them, and hiring an interpreter, all of which raise the cost of 
labor by 10 to 15 percent.  
These reports suggest that broader wage pressures may be about to 

emerge, although I recognize that wage acceleration is not yet apparent in the monthly figures for 

average hourly earnings. 
Turning to the national economy, as I said, we™
ve clearly hit a soft patch recently. 
Some 
of that softness was due to well
-known temporary factors.  Combined, these transitory factors 
could well explain a large part, if not all, of the first
-quarter slowdown.  
Moreover, this wouldn™t 

be, as many have noted, the first flat quarter we™
ve se
en during this expansion.  So the question 
is how rapidly economic activity picks up again from here as the effect of these transitory factors 

fade. I share th
is Tealbook™s optimism on consumer spending, and that™s based on robust 
income growth, solid consumer sentiment readings, and continued improvement in labor market 

conditions.  The rebound in car sales last month was an important piece of evidence that 

consumers have the confidence to boost spending in the months ahead. 
Turning to inflation, the late
st readings have been a bit firmer than expected.  Core CPI 
inflation averaged 2.3 percent at an annual rate from December to March.  The staff™s translation 

into core PCE inflation is 1.4 percent over the same three months, and that implies that Q4 will 

be the low point for core PCE inflation.  Oil prices appear to have bottomed out and the run-up in 

the dollar seems to have lost steam, so the transitory downward pressures on headline inflation 

are waning. Thus, it seems fairly clear to me that we are eme
rging from this inflation dip
, and 
inflation will be moving towards 2 percent in coming quarters. 
                      
         
             Looking ahead, as several of you have mentioned, we will receive more than the usual 
amount of data over the upcoming intermeeting period, including, importan
tly,
 two employment 
reports and two reports on personal income and consumption.  
If the data come in consistent with 
the Tealbook forecast, we would have solid evidence in hand at our June meeting that consumer 

spending growth had rebounded and that inflation was moving up.  If so, I believe the case for 

raising rates would be strong, s
o it seems premature to make any statements at this meeting or in 
the days immediately ahead, I believe, that could be interpreted as taking June off the table.  

Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Unemployment in the 
Tenth 
District remains 
very low at 4.2 percent, and recent employment growth has been modest but is mixed across 

states and industries.  Several 
District 
states are seeing sizable oil and gas layoffs, and negative 
spillovers are showing up in regional factory and transportation activity as well as in consumer 
spending 
areas 
and 
those that are 
energy dependent.  
Through the first quarter of this year, 
District energy jobs were down 4½ 
percent
, and firms in our latest energy survey expect 
their 
employment to fall by 12 percent this year.  District manufacturing is also feeling the 
effect, as 
the last time our manufacturing survey composite was lower than 
its April reading was in early 
2009. Firms responding to our energy survey, however, note 
that 
breakeven oil prices have 
fallen considerably as services costs have dropped, providing some encouragement for future 

activity as oil prices edge higher.  On the other hand, D
istrict states with virtually no oil and gas 
activity have seen a solid start to 2015.  Colorado, in particular, continues to grow rapidly, driven 

by strong tourism and construction activity.  
As a result, total employment in the region is up 
       
      
       
         
  
     
              slightly this year, and overall services activity in the District continues to grow despite the 
energy layoffs.  In agriculture, drought has worsened, although winter wheat production is 

shaping up to be similar to its recent five-
year average, and corn a
nd soybean planting intentions 
are generally strong.  Still, persistently low crop prices and elevated input costs continue to 

increase farmers™ short
-term financing needs. 
For the national economy, my outlook for growth over the medium term is little chan
ged
.  I assume that 
the softness in first
-quarter GDP proves transitory, as it has for the past several 
years.  Weather effects and the sharp decline in energy investment look to be important factors 

holding down first-quarter growth.  However, more persis
tent factors 
producing softer export 
growth and a broader slowing in new investment bear watching.  
Alternatively, personal 

consumption appears to have some upside potential, 
as there is yet to be a significant boost to 

spending from lower gasoline prices. 
March™s payroll numbers were clearly below expectations, though the labor market 
continues to improve in several aspects.  The services sector continues to perform well.  In the 

first quarter of this year, services added
, on average, 
179,000 additional jo
bs per month.  This is 
better than the 134,000 
average in the first quarter 
of 
last year.
  Overall, I expect average 
monthly payroll growth to drift down from the rapid pace of 260,000 per month last year to 

200,000 this year before settling down to a pace 
of around 150,000 next year as the labor market 
continues to tighten and growth moves to its trend level. 
Research by my staff also indicates improving labor market conditions, 
as reflected by 
the number of workers moving from lower-
to higher
-paying sect
ors
Šthat is, the extent of 
cyclical upgrading.  Their analysis shows that the rise in the quits rate over the past two years is 

primarily due to a higher quits rate in sectors with lower pay, like wholesale/retail trade and 
           
        
               
  
      
   
      
      leisure/hospitality.
  Tracking individual workers in these sectors using C
urrent 
Population 
Survey data shows 
that 
they have recently been moving into higher-
paying sectors, like 
education and health services, at rates similar to those before the recession. 
Turning to inflation, I expect
 inflation to remain somewhat below target due to lagged 
effects from low energy prices and a stronger dollar.  Inflation in some sectors, such as health 
care, have also notably slowed.  In addition, 
because of some of the current factors affecting 

inflation, year-over-year core could drift lower as stronger readings from a year agoŠ
core PCE 
readings from March to June of last year were 
running at a solid 2 
percent pace
Šdrop out of the 
12-month window.  
Such base effects have not affected 
my overall confidence regarding the 
medium
-term outlook for inflation, assuming 
there are 
continued improvement in the labor 

market and stable longer-
term expectations.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  I will start with a few observations 
about the Ninth District economy.  It™s generally robust, but the decline in oil prices is certainly 

creating challenges in some areas.  I will then turn to the national economy, 
where I see 

continued shortfall
s in aggregate demand relative to supply. 
Labor markets are tight in many parts of the Ninth District, 
with contacts reporting 
significant swaths of unfilled openings.  There are signs of growing wage pressures in some 

economic sectors and geographical are
as.  However, overall, wage pressures remain muted. 
Importantly, many businesses report having little or no ability to pass on wage increases to 

consumers in the form of price increases.  So this is actually a flip side of the argument that 

President Will
iams 
offered
Šhe indicated that he didn™t need to see wage increases to feel 
confident in the 
return 
of 
inflation to 2 percent. 
The flip side of this is that we might see wage 
      
       
             
   
    
           
   increases happening and still not see inflation
, because the question is whether those businesses 
experiencing the wage increases have 
the pricing power to pass that on.  The contacts 
that 
we talk
ed to in the intermeeting period suggested they do not. 
Contacts at businesses with an international footprint expressed concern during 
the 
intermeeting period about how the high value of the dollar would affect the demand for their 

products, especially in light of overall softness in global demand conditions.  And so
me of
 the 
comments that 
President Bullard
 offered about China echo things we heard from our contacts 
during the intermeeting period. 
Not surprisingly, economic activity has slowed greatly in the oil-producing areas of 
North Dakota.  However, overall confidence in the B
akken region remains high.  Many, if not 
most, of our contacts r
eport seeing the currently low level of economic activity as a welcome 
opportunity to shore up critical infrastructure needs in the western part of North Dakota. 
Let me turn to the national economy.  Both real and nominal variables are telling us a 
similar story, I believe:  
There is insufficient aggregate demand to use available resources in an 
effective fashion.  In terms of real activity, if we look back over the past five years since the end 

of 2009, real GDP growth has averaged 2.3 percent.  T
here is l
ittle sign of this pace 
quickeningŠl
ast year
, real GDP growth was only 2.4 percent.  H
ere I
™m using annual averages 
to get away from some of the seasonal adjustment factors that have been highlighted in previous 

interventions.  
This year
 now looks like it may be even worse than this weak average 
performance.  In the wake of the data that we
™ve 
received from the first quarter, Tealbook
, Book 
A, has downgraded its outlook for 2015 economic activity, and it now projects growth in this 

calend
ar year to be less than 2 percent.  We will get more information
, of course
, tomorrow 
morning along these lines. 
            
          
            
                      
  The persistence of these patterns has led some to conclude that they reflect a permanent 
downward shift in the productive capabilities of the United States.  I think we should be very 
cautious before accepting these claims. We saw significant improvement in all labor market 

metrics in 2014.  This improvement seems to have had 
little 
effect
 on the excess supply of 
human resources in the economy. 
We saw little upward pressure on compensation or on the 
inflation outlook.  This conjunction of low price pressures and strong employment growth 

suggests 
that the 
ﬁRoom to Growﬂ 
scenario i
n Tealbook, Book A, might be quite relevant.  And 
if you look at th
e implications of that scenario, the weakness of aggregate demand relative to 

supply creates concerns with respect to nominal variables. 
The outlook for inflation in 
Tealbook, Book A, 
is 
that it will be below target until 2019, well over four years from n
ow. 
Just to follow up on some of the discussion we heard earlier about inflation over the past 
few years, headline 
inflation 
did go above 2 percent in 2011, but I think if you go back over 
2008, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013, and 2014, in all of those years, 
it was below 2 percent.  In 2011, it 
was above 2 percent.  On average, over that time frame since the end of 2007, 
it™s been
 about 
1.3 percent. Market
-based longer-
term inflation expectations remain low. 
I want to
 say something about the prediction issue.  It™
s absolutely true
, I think
, that if 
you do horse 
races of th
e kind 
that President Williams talked about
, market-
based measures 
don™t really fare that well. I think it
™s actually because they™re 
of value to policymakers, not just 
to statistical 
forecasters, because we
™re interested in a different loss function.  We
™re not 
interested in just minimizing mean square
d error
, we™
re actually interested in trying to mitigate 
low inflation, especially when it
™s going to be costly to households.  And I th
ink that 
monitoring 
these market
-based measures of inflation expectations 
is helpful along those lines. 
         
             
   
    
  
    
          
     
       
     Tealbook, Book A, notes that we™
ve seen some slippage in Michigan survey measures as 
well
ŠI don™t want to put too much weight on that at this stage, but 
it™s something to watch.
 I think there are signs in these data that we may be facing a prolonged period of inflation running 
substantially below our target.  Now, why should we care about a possible downward slippage in 

inflation and inflation expectatio
ns? 
This builds on some of the remarks that 
President 
Rosengren already made, that p
ersistently lower inflation expectations translate to lower nominal 

interest rates.  Lower nominal interest rates translate into little recession
-fighting capacity for the 
central bank.  And such a reduction 
in policy capacity would be especially troubling because it 
would build on the policy capacity associated with a significant decline in the neutral real 

interest rate noted by President Rosengren.  
So this decline in inflation expectations really 

creates a first
-order loss in terms of what we are trying to accomplish 
because it increases the 
probability of hitting up against the zero lower bound. 
As President Rosengren 
suggested, the decline in the neutral rate of intere
st should lead 
us to consider raising the inflation target.  I see a great deal of possible merit in this
 suggestion.  
More generally, I think that it would be useful to have discussions about the long-
run goals that 
we have established.  We learn 
more 
over time
, and it™
s useful to take 
that
 on board.  
We d
on™t 
want to do it every year, certainly, but I think at intervals we should be taking on information and 

reevaluating the long
er-run goal statement.  
The 
Bank of Canada does this on a five-
year basis
.  Every five years they go back and relook 
at their framework and what they™
ve learned
, and 
I think there
™s something to be gained from that kind of systematic reevaluation of our framework.  
So I would be very supportive of further discussion of President Rosengren™s suggestion. 
With that said, first things first.  We actually need to forestall a possible decline in 
inflation expectations 
today 
generated by a failure to hit the current low target. 
During the 
               
          
           
         
  
  intermeeting period, Governor Haruhiko Ku
roda of 
the Bank of Japan visited Minnesota 
and 
gave an excellent speech.  He described the aggressive efforts of the Bank of Japan to stimulate 
an increase 
in inflation expectations.  As I listened to him, I was reminded yet again of how we 
need to do all that we can to avoid leaving our successors with the kind of tough situation that 

Governor 
Kuroda now faces. 
I don™t see that determination reflected in 
alternative B, but I won™t 
talk about that until tomorrow.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
  In terms of the economic 
outlook, I™m of two minds.  On the one hand, I™m more uncertain about the growth outlook and 

more concerned about the potential downside risks to growth.  On the other hand, I think the 

downside risks on the inflation side have lessened considerably.  A
t the last meeting
, I would 
have said that I expected further labor market improvement but was not yet reasonably confident 

that inflation would return to our 
2 percent objective ov
er the medium term.  Now, I would at 
least partly reverse things.  Conditional on further improvement in the labor market, I™m getting 

closer to being reasonably confident that inflation will return to our 2 
percent objective
, but I am 
less confident about when I will see further labor market improvement and how quickly it will 

occur. 
Turning first to the growth side
, it strikes me 
that 
there 
are 
a lot of crosscurrents right 
now, and it™s really difficult to assess the net 
effect
.  To me, this sharp slowing 
in payroll growth 
in March should not be a big surprise, however.  As I noted in my comments at the March 

FOMC meeting
, a big gap had opened up between payroll growth and GDP growth, so unless 
one thought that the productivity growth trend would remain ex
traordinarily poor, it seemed 

reasonable to expect 
either 
GDP growth to pick up or payroll growth to slow down.  A
s it turns 
      
        
           
   
              
            out, GDP growth slowed rather than picked up, s
o that left payroll growth to bear the brunt of the 
adjustment. 
As I assess the firs
t quarter, I do think there are both transitory and more persistent 
factors responsible for the slowdown.  On the transitory side, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of 
New 
York™s staff analysis
 does suggest 
that 
severe winter weather did have a sizable effect
. We 
put the 
impact
 at about 1½ 
percent on 
the
 annualized growth rate, slightly less than last year.  Having 
said that, I wouldn™t take that point estimate too literally. 
Also
, I do think the West Coast port 
slowdown did disrupt economic activity.  We had a small business advisory group meeting, and I 
was surprised that two out of the eight or nine businesses that attended referenced the port 

slowdown as hurting their businesses 
in the first quarter
Šthis is 
around upstate New York and 
New Jersey, and that™s not really where I would expect 
the 
port slowdown to actually manifest 
itself
, so I thought that was meaningful. 
There 
are
 also some more long-
lasting components as well. As Steve Kamin made clear, 
the dollar™s sharp appreciation has led to a deterioration in U.S. net exports, and the 
Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York staff estimates that a 15 percent appreciation of the broad rea
l trade
-weighted 
dollar, which is a little bit m
ore than we have right now in hand, would cut about 0.6 
percentage point from the level of real GDP after one year, and I think that™s pretty consistent 

with the Tealbook estimates.
  And I think it™
s important because that™s just the partial 
equilibrium effect.  If you have a trade drag, it also drains real income from the economy, so 

there™s also the risk of second-
order effects. 
Now, the second thing 
is that 
oil and gas investment is plunging.  I™m not sure how 
severe the knock
-on 
effects will be, but I d
on™t think we™re done yet.  Firms have been protected, 
in part, this year by hedging their future forward production by selling oil forward, and they™
ll           
        
       
                      
       
     
   
become more exposed to the current oil prices as time passes
, so I expect a downward trend in 
investmen
t to continue.  As Helen Holcomb pointed out in her comments about the Texas 
economy, the effect does seem to be quite a bit larger, I think, than expected.  
Richard Fisher 

said
Šin January, I 
believe it was
Šat th
at time he thought that employment growth in 
Texas, 
which was well above average compared 
with 
the country, would slow down to the national 
average.
  But if you look at the payroll data in March for states on a seasonally adjusted basis, 
payrolls in Texas fell by 25,400 people, which is pretty sizab
le for Texas. 
And it™s interesting 
that Oklahoma was the state with the second
-largest decline in payroll. So
, clearly
, the fall 
in oil 
and gas investment is having a significant 
effect
.  It™s rippling through to incomes
, and i
t™s rippling through into c
ommercial real estate construction
, so I think it actually has a more sizable 
effect than just looking at oil and gas investment itself. 
Third, I think the inventory accumulation, which I don™t think anyone has mentioned, 
looks to me like it™s poised to be a drag on growth.  If you look at the inventory-
to-sales ratios, 
they have been drifting up, and if you look at the rate of inventory accumulation in the first 

quarterŠ
well, we™ll see what we get tomorrow
, but it looks to be on the high side in terms of 
what™s sustainable over the medium term.
  So if you had to ask yourself, 
ﬁAre inventories going 
to contribute positively to growth or negatively to growth over the next year
?ﬂ 
They are 
almost 
certain to be a drag on growth.  In the face of 
all 
of these cro
sscurrents, I think the next few 
months of data are really important.  I™m really looking at what April and May look like.  And 

even if we get strong April and May data, I™m not really sure what to make of itŠi
s this just a 
bounce after first
-quarter weakn
ess, or is this the new trend? 
In contrast to the growth side, I am getting more comfortable that inflation is starting to 
stabilize and is likely to start dri
fting back up toward our 2 percent objective.  When I look at the 
         
                  
  
      
    
     inflation data and all the other factors that feed into the inflation outlook, I think most suggest 
that inflation
Šdespite a stronger dollar, lower energy prices, and still-
sizable slack in the labor 
market
Šactually seems to be stabiliz
ing.  So let me run through the evidence very q
uickly.  If 
you look at the three-month change in the core CPI, it™s now above 2 percent compared 
with 
a 12-month change of 1.8 percent.  Inflation compensation, 
as measured by the five
-by-
five 
forward TIPS versus nominal Treasury has moved up a bit.  
Surv
ey measures of inflation 
expectations are generally stable, and I would argue that wage compensation growth trends are 

stable to slightly higher. 
So the fears I had of inflation getting unanchored to the downside seem to have 
diminished.  I could imagine that things could have worked out quite differently.  We™d have 

lower headline inflation feeding through into core inflation
.  T
hat, 
in turn
, would 
depress 
nominal 
wage 
growth and cause 
inflation expectations to be anchored 
to the downside.  And the 
fact th
at we haven™t seen that at this point, I think, makes that dynamic much less likely.  So I™m 
much more confident now that inflation will return to our 2 percent objective, subject to having 

sufficient growth to continue to close the output gap.  Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This discussion has appropriately focused on 
the significantly weaker
-than-expected incoming data on first-
quarter economic activity.  The 
staff forecasts a r
eturn to higher growth of around 2 percent or more in the second quarter and 
the second half of the year, and we™ve heard similar forecasts during this round of discussion 

from several of the 
Reserve 
Bank presidents.  The Tealbook forecast is, not surprisingly, 
consistent with what we see in the charts given 
to 
us by Bill Wascher
Šin particular, the two real 
GDP forecasts and their fan charts
.  S
o there™s a fair probability that will happen, but it™s not a 
      
    
               
         
       
    guarantee that we™re going to bounce right back in the coming quarter and there 
have been some 
weak data in April. 
In terms of elementary textbooksŠlooking at C + 
I + G + NXŠthe Tealbook forecast
s expect the bulk of the rebound in the second quarter to come from consumption, which is a 
reasonable forecast i
n light of expectations for employment and real disposable income.  
The 
Tealbook also expects government purchases to rebound significantly, net investment to decline 

more slowly than it did in the first quarter, and net exports to decline at the same rate 
as in the 
first quarter.
  This is all very interesting, but of course, we™re waiting for tomorrow™s first 
estimate of first
-quarter growth to clarify
, perhaps, 
what happened in the first quarter. 
When you focus on recent growth rates, you get a fairly pes
simistic picture of what™s 
happening, and we need to remind ourselves that the overall position of the economy is good.  

Let me start with the labor market.  The unemployment rate remains at 5.5 percent, a level that is 

not that much above many estimates of the natural rate today and is not above estimates of the 
natural rate that we had going into the March meeting.  A year ago we didn™t think we™d reach a 
rate that low until 2016
.  A
nd, importantly, some, though not all, 
of the other labor market 
indicato
rs whose behavior suggested that the U-3 unemployment rate understated the extent of 
labor market problems appear to be returning to pre-
recession levels. 
So, from the policy 
viewpoint, the basic question on output and employment is whether employment wil
l continue to 
grow at a rate sufficient to bring further improvement in the labor market in coming quarters. 
The inflation rate remains below target, and that is a problem.  However, one gets the 
impression that while we are committed to looking through tr
ansitory factors
Šparticularly dollar 
appreciation and the decline in oil prices, 
and gasoline prices in particular
Špopular discussion 
both here and in Europe has not focused on what that means.  It does not mean focusing solely 
      
     
           
          
            on core inflation, because both energy and import prices affect core inflation.  Core PCE 
inflation was 1.3 percent over the 12 months through March.  According to Board staff estimates 

in the Tealbook, increases in the dollar, which are very unlikely to persist indefinitel
y, 
are 
holding down that figure by 0.3 percentage point this year, bringing what could be called 

nontransitory core inflation to something like 1.6 percent.  And current energy price changes are 

reducing core inflation by another 0.1 percentage point, which brings you to a nontransitory core 

inflation rate of 1.7 percent. 
Now, you might be concerned about this if the low core numbers were being reflected in 
declining inflation expectations, but the survey measures seem to be relatively well anchored.  

And a
ll this, again, seems consistent with the data presented in the 
bottom two charts in Bill 
Wascher™s handout
, which show inflation coming back rather quickly to just below 2 
percent. 
I expect that the transitory factors
Šwhich are, fundamentally, 
oil and th
e exchange rate, which 
may or may not turn around reasonably soonŠwill gradually abate and possibly begin to reverse 
themselves.  We only need them to abate.  And labor market slack will continue to diminish, 
putting inflation on a path that, over the medi
um term
, will take us very close to our inflation 
target.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  A lot of people have talked about Q1 and 
have posed the question, 
ﬁWas Q1 an aberration?
ﬂ I certainly
 hope that it was an aberration, and 
I expect that it has been an aberration. 
And I don™t think, personally, that 
we™re going to learn 
that much from the GDP number tomorrow morning.  I
f it
™s kind of low or really low, it may not 
tell us very much because
 we had a really low number in the first quarter of 2014, and that didn™t 

seem to mean very much a quarter or two later. 
       
      
  
           
   
         
    
              
         I actually think the question is not so much 
ﬁWas Q1 an aberration?ﬂ 
but more the 
question that was implicit in some of 
Vice Chairman D
udley
™s analysis a minute ago
: ﬁAre 
there 
things at work in the economy that will give us a growth path for the rest of the year that
™s somewhat lower than what many of us expected toward the end of last year
?ﬂ Not that it will in 
any way resemble Q1, bu
t that somehow there are forces that are restraining growth a little bit 
more than we would have anticipated.  
Vice Chairman Dudley
 suggested one in his presentation.  
Another possible explanation of that phenomenon, should it occur, is the one that 
I think lies 
behind the Tealbook™s alternative scenario of a persistent slowdownŠ
that is, 
that there is a kind 
of confidence problem that™s inhibiting consumer spending despite the extended improvement in 

income fundamentals because of job growth and mayb
e a little bit of wage growth
, as well. 
I think for that reason one has to be a little agnostic right now in awaiting data over the 
next couple of months
Šas President Mester
, Vice Chairman Dudley, and several other people 
have said
.  A
lthough, as someoneŠI 
think it was 
Vice Chairman Dudley
Šalso said
, even then, 
it™s not clear how much some of the questions we™
ve been asking will be clarified because 
there
™s going to be a certain degree of snapback.  So instead of trying to speculate about all of 
that, I wan
ted to put on the table in a little bit more detail something 
Simon had an exhibit on in 
his presentation at the beginning of this meeting and that is the phenomenon of negative interest 

rates on European sovereign debt.  This phenomenon may be relevant to 
an assessment of the 
most likely medium
-term U.S. growth trend because of 
its potential 
effects
 on financial markets 
and the dollar, potential downside risks, andŠ
and I
™m not going to talk about this, but it may be 
relevant to the 
great debate about s
ecul
ar stagnation. 
There have been negative interest rates on some shorter
-term European sovereign debt for 
several years now, but the last six months or so have 
seen a qualitative change in the 
       
     
             
   
       
                    phenomenon in a number of respects.  First, negative rates have m
oved down along the yield 
curve in European countries with the strongest credit reputations to the point that, as in the chart 
that Simon distributed, we now see negative interest rates in a nontrivial portion of 5-
to 7
-year 
debt in the stronger European sovereigns.  Second, yield curves, as he mentioned, are quite flat in 

these countries.  I just checked this morning, and the spread between German 
2-year and 10-
year 
government bonds is about 40 basis points.  That compares to a spread of about 140 basis points 

for U.S. T
reasury securities.
  The 30-
year 
bund is still trading positively but 
at 63 basis points, 
which is a pretty low number for a 30-year.  As everybody knows, the Swiss 10-year sovereign 

issue earlier this month went out at negative rates, and 
I believe that™
s the first time 
in history 
that any sovereign debt of that duration has been priced negatively.  
And 
so, as 
far as Thomas 
Jordan knew, he was setting a precedent, or at least his country™s government was setting a 

precedent. 
Currently, 
as S
imon™s chart shows, more than 35 percent of all euro-zone government 
debt carries a negative interest rate. As recently as two weeks ago
, I think
, it was up over 
40 percent. There
™s been a little bit of an interest rate change since then, which has affec
ted the 
yields in some of those medium
-term tenors.
  Substantial portions of some non-euro-zone 
sovereigns, notably Denmark and Switzerland, also are priced at negative rates, and some 

shorter-duration corporate bonds of the highly rated European firms are 
also priced at negative 
rates now. 
Clearly, this is all related to long
-standing European economic problemsŠand, 
more 
immediately, first the prospect and now the reality of the ECB™s QE program.  It
™s also related
, I guess, 
to the relative scarcity of sov
ereign debt instruments 
issued by countries like Germany 
that continue to run tight fiscal policies and large current account surpluses, notwithstanding 
                                 
  
   
  
           
 economic conditions in the euro zone more generally.  
The unprecedented nature of this 
phenomenon has caused most thoughtful analysts to offer only tentative v
iews of the relative 

importance of various 
stories that explain
 why investors would hold longer-
term sovereigns with 
negative yields.  
Logically, I think the explanations fall into three 
categories. 
First is gloom 
about the long
-term prospects for the countries in question.  Now, it™s true, there™s not a whole 

lot of high optimism to be found about European growth prospects, but almost everybody 

discounts this as a dominant explanationŠ
that is, the idea that there
™s going to be negative 
growth 
or deflation
 for 10 years in Europe. 
The s
econd group of explanations are based on investor inertia, basicallyŠwhether 
forced, as in the case of pension funds and some other institutions, which may be required by 
law 
or regulation to hold certain percentages of extremely low-risk bonds, or unforced, as in the case 

of other investors who are themselves unsure of what all 
of 
this negative rate stuff means and are 
waiting right now to see what happens, and maybe 
chan
ge their investment decision if things 
don™t turn around relatively soon. 
The third set of explanations is that, in an environment that doesn™t offer 
a lot of 
appealing investment options, 
there may be some plays available here.  For example, you may 

get capital gains if yields go even further into negative territory, or you may get exchange rate 

gains whether from short-
term developments that cause quick swings in currencies or from 
longer-term appreciations of currencies with very low inflation or even deflation.  That is, if you 

think that there
™s going to be very low inflation in Switzerland for a long time to come and you 
are a U.S. investor, and you think that there™s going to be inflation in the United States, you 

might actually end up profiting by that play.  
As an example of th
is search for an investment 
play, I took note of one analyst™s advice to his clients that the best play may be in bonds with a 
        
           
  
       
           good bit of convexity so as to m
aximize the chances of catching the wave of large market 
movements when these trends reverse. 
To date, as a very good 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Market
Source 
report 
indicated, there have been relatively few discontinuities observed in European debt markets.  But 
I think this is the point at which Herb Stein™s memorable aphorism comes to mind, because 

unless the medium
-term prospects for Europe are a lot worse than most people think, there™
s going to be a reversal of negative rates at some point.  Even 
if there
™s no near
-term reversal 
resulting from sufficiently enhanced growth prospects or from sufficiently significant policy 

moves, a nontrivial number of investors might, over time, 
overcome their inertia and start 

seeking positive nominal yields elsew
here. 
There are 
a lot of potential outcomes here, some of which are relatively benign.  Others, 
though, are of potentially greater concern.  For example, if enough investors were caught flat
-footed by an unexpected change in ECB policyŠand, paradoxically, an unexpected 
improvement in European economic prospectsŠ
there could be some pretty significant turmoil in 
relevant markets, although there we would have to ask ourselves how much the financial turmoil 

would be offset by the prospect of improvement in the real economy.  I think of 
even greater 
concern to us would be a decision by those investors who did not initially move out of European 

sovereign debt that they couldn™t take the uncertainty or the negative rates any longer.  The 

natural destination for the
se investors is
, of course, U.S. T
reasury securities
, and I think that 
some of the dollar strengthening we™
ve seen this year has been attributable to 
the existence of 
investors
 who have already made such a move.  And it is possible, though very hard to judge 
how likely, that many more could follow.  If they were to do so, the recent modest retracing by 

the dollar could itself be halted and reversed pretty significantly. 
                  
       
      
                  On this last possibility, it™s worth mentioning that, notwithstanding the notable spread
s between 
bunds and T
reasury securit
ies, some European investors have apparently concluded that 
the roughly 80 basis point difference between German and U.S. two-
year 
bond rate
s is 
insufficient to compensate for currency
-hedging costs and other risks.  And 
this calculus is
, I think, what may be contributing to some of the otherwise-
hard
-to-explain changes in the yield 
curves of some of the stronger European sovereigns, since fundamentals are not really changing 
there but you™re seeing some movement in those yield curves, which I take to be everybody 

repositioning
, trying to figure out the best defensive place to be right now.  So investors may be 
moving around within bonds that are either euro-denominated or effectively tied to the euro. 
But if that spread b
etween 
U.S. T
reasury interest rates 
and rates on European sovereigns 
were to widen, either because we raise rates or because QE and other developments in the EU 

drove yields down even further there, then more European investors might be tempted to take the 

Atlantic plunge.  And this, in turn, could cause some market dislocation in Europe, a renewed 
unwelcome strengthening of the dollar, or both.  This is pretty speculative right now, but 
certainly in a context in which the trajectory of U.S. economic perfor
mance is at least in some 
question after the 
past few months, I think this situation is another reason for us not to be in a 
hurry to raise rates, at least not until we
™ve had a chance to see how investors are adapting, and, 
most importantly, what their adaptation means for the dollar. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming data for the first quarter have 
been weaker
, overall, than expected, including data for household and business spending, 
industrial production, and housing starts and permitsŠ
a little bit different but quite similar to the 

first quarter of 2014.  In addition, the initial BLS report on the employment situation for March 
              
   
   
        
      
     
       was also much weaker than expected, and 
that™
s different from last year
, when payroll gains 
continued 
to be 
very strong right through the first quarter.  And the question, of course, is how 
much signal to take.  
One reason to discount these data somewhat are the transitory factors that 
are likel
y to reverse, including bad winter weather and the West Coast port disruption 
as well as 
the technical factors that have been discussed.  Another is that GDP data may eventually be 

significantly revised and is a noisy signal
Šand I thought that the new exhibit in Tealbook, 
Book A, on prediction intervals was interesting and useful on that point.  
In any case, it makes 
sense to me to take some signal from this year™s weak first quarter, both for labor markets and 

for GDP
.  I think the baseline staff forecast 
strikes a reasonable balance for the rest of this year 
by assuming higher GDP growth, but not a significant catch-up quarter like we had in the second 

quarter 
of 
2014. On inflation, I would tentatively say I feel a little better about inflation, which is n
ow 
forecast to run at about 1½ 
percent
 for Q2, well above the Q1 readings.  Survey expectations 
remain stable.  Breakevens have moved up modestly across the curve since the March meeting, 

seemingly driven more by oil prices and liquidity rather than changing expectations.  
In light of 
all of the recent market readings that suggest concerns about low inflation, it™
s an improvement
, for a change, 
to read stories that fixed
-income traders are seeing a greater likelihood of inflation 
getting back to mandate-consistent levels and less risk of very low inflation.  
Of course, we may 

overread these market movements, and it may simply be that TIPS got a little cheap relative to 

nominals, and traders acted on that.  The underlying story of a return to 2 percent inflation over 

the medium term, given GDP and labor market outcomes as forecast, continues to make sense to 

me.  And I look forward to gaining more confidence from the incoming data on that.  I would 
      
  
   
    
                        
   worry more about lower inflation in the case that the economy does slip into a lower gear in 
growth and labor markets. 
Looking forward, the positive narrative is that consumer spending will increase to healthy 
levels supported by low energy prices, high confidence, and much better labor market conditions. 

In fact
, going back to 
Stan
™s basic equation, you could say that the U.S. economy has grown at 
about 2.7 percent over the last two years, with net exports at around zero.  With net exports now 

contributing negative 0.7 to negative 0.8 percentage point, you have to ask, where is growth 

going to come from?  It™s not going to come from government spending
, it™s not going to come 
from housing investment, and it™s not going to come from business investment in a world in 

which
 drilling is being significantly reduced.  So it really has to come from consumption.  And, 
in fact, in the medium
-term forecast
, PCE growth accounts for well more than 100 percent of the 
growth.  That narrative, I have to say, makes sense to me, but it does amount to an airplane 

flying on one engine.  S
o far
, the combination of the weak spending data and high consumer 
confidence says that the consumer, 
in effect
, is now 
ebullien
tly saving. 
In terms of the risks, one, of course, is that PCE growth does disappoint.  Another one, 
frankly, is that
, in a 
world of still
-slow growth, a return to stronger growth here could well lead 
to a tightening in financial conditions not so much through the rate channel as through the dollar 

channelŠi
t may not be a rate tantrum that is really the threat this time.
  We will see
, by the time 
of the June meeting, 
whether there is progress in addressing Greece™s fiscal crisis or whether 

Greece, instead, is headed for control
s on capital flows
, sovereign default, and the like, with 
potential disruption for the U.S. economy.  
We™ll see two more
 employment reports and 
a lot 
more data.  And we™ll know, I think, at that point, something about whether the first quarter™s 
      
               
      
  
  
  
   
         
        
    disappointment is transitory
 and anomalous or, instead, marks some kind of real loss of 
momentum. 
Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to reflect briefly on the quarterly 
assessment of financial stability and then turn to the outlook. 
Although overall risks to financial stability in 
the United States remain moderate, one 
area that 
bears 
heightened scrutiny is the potential for spikes 
in volatility due to changes in 
market liquidity.  In particular, we should be asking whether episodes of severe volatility, 
like 
the wild swings we saw
 in T
reasury 
bond yields on the morning of October 15, 
are likely to 
become the new normal.  Bond inventories held by broker-
dealers have declined
, in some part 
due to regulatory changes.  Separately, and predating the onset of Dodd-Frank, changes in 

marke
t structure may be at least as important in some markets
, for which automated and high-
frequency traders may now account for a majority of the activity.  Coupled with the big run-up 
we™ve seen of investments in bond mutual funds, this raises the specter of amplification of 
volatility and fire
-sale dynamics at times when investors looking to cash out could be surprised 
by lower-
than
-expected liquidity.  Together, 
these changes to the structure of financial markets 
could increase the volatility of asset price 
responses. A modest increase in the average 
level of 
volatility shouldn™t be a concern, particularly if market participants respond with more rigorous 
risk management
.  But a lack of liquidity that leads to large and self
-reinforcing swings in prices 
and market freezes during periods of stress could pose threats to financial stability and would be 

especially concerning in the case of the U.S. T
reasury market, with its traditional benchmark 
status. 
                 
          
               
  
   
     I think it
™s premature to draw conclusions for financial 
stability.  Some of the 
preoccupation with the decline in dealer inventories may, 
in fact
, be misplaced, and I think 
focusing too much attention on the critical role of dealers as reliable providers of liquidity during 
severe stress episodes suggests a ver
y high degree of amnesia.  Moreover, bid-
ask spreads are in 
line with historical norms. 
As we
™re learning from the investigation of October 15, we also do 
not yet fully understand the implications of the growing role of high-
frequency traders in these 
mar
kets. 
With heterogeneity across their size, business models, and trading strategies, some of 
their activities may
, in fact
, contribute to market liquidity, 
while 
some 
may be destabilizing. 
And, finally, it™s unclear how much leverage or high-
quality liqu
idity is embedded in bond 
mutual funds and how vulnerable they might be to liquidity mismatch and fire-
sale dynamics. 
The Dodd-
Frank requirement for mutual funds to undertake stress tests holds some promise, but 
only if deployed rigorously.  In short, I a
m very pleased that we are putting intense focus on this 
issue, and I think it will only rise in importance as the date of liftoff approaches. 
Now let me turn briefly to the outlook in the United States.  The recent data on the labor 
market, aggregate spen
ding, and industrial output have been disappointing.  The key question 
that we are wrestling with around this table is how much of this unanticipated weakness 

represents a slowing in the underlying momentum of activity and how much is due to transitory 

dis
turbances
?  The preliminary conclusion I would draw from the surprises in the recent data is 
that the negative impulse to U.S. aggregate demand from the combined effects of the plunge in 

oil prices and the surge in the dollar seem to be at least as strong as we had expected, while the 

expected positive effects have not materialized so far. 
Turning first to the positive effects, recent shocks were expected to be reflected primarily 
in stronger consumption growth, but the recent data have been disappointing.  Some of the 
               
   
  
  
   
            
      
  preliminary indicators of consumer spending are often substantially revised, so we perhaps 
should not take too much signal from them.  Indeed, auto salesŠamong the most reliable of 

indicators
Šrebounded strongly in March.  Nonetheless, subpar data on retail sales have now 
persisted for four months, suggesting that temporary infl
uences or statistical noise 
are 
not fully to 
blame.  On balance, it™s possible that the forces boosting consumer spending may not be as 

strong as we might have hoped.  
Weaker
-than
-expected consumption would be very unfortunate, 
because strength in other ca
tegories of aggregate demand remains elusive.  The recent data on 
housing starts and permits, for example, suggest that this sector continues to struggle. 
On the negative side of the ledger, the drop in oil prices was expected to curtail business 
investment related to drilling, while the dollar™s rise was anticipated to reduce net exports. A 

broad variety of indicators suggests that these effects are materializing with greater force than 

had been anticipated.  Drilling investment looks to have dropped at an annualized rate of 

50 percent in the first quarter
.  And orders and shipments of capital goods, as well as business 
sentiment, have also been weak and suggest that overall business investment will edge lower 

over the first half of this year.  
A variety o
f indicators also suggest 
that the 
stronger dollar is 
weighing significantly on activity.  Net exports subtracted 1 percentage point from growth in the 

fourth quarter, and the staff estimates 
a contribution of minus 
 percentage point in the first 
quarter.
  The national manufacturing purchasing 
managers™
 diffusion index of new export orders 
has been in contractionary territory for the past three months.  Manufacturing production 

declined at an annual rate of 1 percent, and the outlook for internationally or
iented firms has 
worsened significantly in recent days. 
       
               
  
                
       
      
In parallel, the recent labor market data suggest a slowing in the 
take-up 
of slack. 
Average monthly payroll employment gains were 200,000, down about 60,000 from last year™s 
pace
, and all of the indicators of slack have moved sideways in the last month. 
Of course, there™s a danger in reading too much into this data.  It™s entirely possible we™
ll see the stronger trend in underlying activity that was apparent in the second half of the year 

reassert it
self.  But it
™s important to keep in mind the international context.  On the one hand, we 
have seen some encouraging data from the euro area
Šdata on retail sales and industrial 

production, in particularŠwhich holds out some promise that aggregate demand wi
ll strengthen. 
And the dollar™s sharp ascent seems to have stalled, at least for now.  On the other hand, 

negotiations between Greece and its creditors remain challenging.  And although the macro data 

are
 notoriously unreliable, Chinese GDP growth looks to have slowed noticeably in the first 

quarter.
  On balance, the foreign economic outlook suggests continued weak demand in some 
important advanced foreign economies and signs of faltering growth in some important emerging 
market economies.  In this context
, the threat to price stability from stronger demand growth in 
the United States seems quite limited. 
Let me close by touching briefly on inflation.  Recent data have provided some 
reassurance that underlying inflation is not moving lower.  Oil prices have moved up somewhat 
further since March, and the 
3-month moving average of core PCE inflation has increased from 

the very low level reached in January.
  Even so, current estimates of both the 3- and 12-month 
changes in core PCE prices point to an underlying trend rate of only 1.4 percent.  And while it™
s reassuring that survey
-based measures of inflation expectations are remaining stable
, and there 
has been some improvement in market-
based measures, th
e latter 
are still materially below the 
levels 
that preva
iled
 until the middle of last year. 
The overall picture should suggest at least 
              
     
         
        
                
        
some caution about attributing all of the recent softening to transitory factors and puts a high 
premium on incoming data as we assess the timing of liftoff, which is 
the topi
c for tomorrow™s 
discussion.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, thank you.  Thanks to everyone for another interesting and 
thoughtful round of observations.  As usual, I™
ll try to summarize a couple of main themes and 
add a few remarks of my 
own. 
Starting with real activity 
and 
the labor market, everyone agreed that the news has been 
generally disappointing since our last meeting, although views 
differed 
about its implications. 
With respect to employment, the March employment report show
ed unexpected weakness in 
payroll gains, but many of you emphasized 
that 
one shouldn™t make too much out of one month™s 
report.  And, still, average gains in the first three months of the year are running 
at about 
200,000, which is a respectable pace, especiall
y given how weak output growth looks to have 
been in the first quarter. Other labor market indicators during the intermeeting period were 
mixed but generally, 
I think
, imply little change in resource utilization.  The unemployment rate 
stayed at 5.5 percent.  Broader measures of labor underutilization ticked down one-tenth, but 
the 
labor force participation rate fell 
one-tenth, and the employment-
to-population ratio was 
unchanged.  You noted that 
the JOLTS
 job openings rate ticked up slightly, but there wa
s also a 
slight decline in quits and hires, and 
at least 
the Board™s labor market condition
s index was 
unchanged.  I noted some reports from business contacts about increases in turnover and the fact, 
as President George mentioned, that people who are 
ﬁtur
ning over
ﬂŠwho are quittingŠ
appear 
to be moving to jobs 
in which
 they™
re receiving wage gains. 
On wages, I think everyone agreed that aggregate measures suggest very little pickup in 
wage growth, although some of you suggested that the reports you™
re recei
ving from your 
       
      
    
                  
        
    
  business contacts are beginning to hint at a broader acceleration in wage gains and labor market 
pressures.
  That said, many of you noted that wage pressures are confined to particular regions 
and sectors
, such as high-
tech 
in Silicon Valley
 and San Francisco.  But, 
as President Williams 
noted, the implications of movements in wages for inflation and 
for 
our criterion of wanting to 
have reasonable confidence that inflation will move back 
are 
debatable, and at least in recent 
years it doesn™t 
look like there
™s that much of a close link between 
nominal wages and inflation. 
With respect to spending, everyone remarked on the unexpected weakness we™
ve seen in 
a broad range of spending and production indicators, including retail sales, housing start
s, orders 
and shipments of capital goods, nonresidential construction, drilling, exports, and industrial 

output.  And, of course, tomorrow morning we receive the first-
quarter GDP preliminary 
estimate.
  The underlying cause of the Q1 slowdown and its implications for future growth is 
obviously very important and unclear at this point.  Many of you mentioned, and cited evidence 

from your business contacts, 
of the importance of bad winter weather and the West Coast port 
dispute.  A number of you mentione
d the fact that we have a pattern here
Šover many yearsŠ
of 
Q1 being unusually weak, suggesting some residual seasonality in the GDP figures.  
Views on 
the size of these transitory effects differ, but if they are substantial
, then the prospects for a quick 
return to moderate growth should be good. 
On the other hand, a number of you mentioned that other explanations for weaker growth 
that may be relevant in the first quarter could have implications 
for the remainder of the year.  In 
particular, the dollar rece
ived a good deal of mention.  It looks like the dollar may be having a 
significant negative effect
 and that many of your business contacts mentioned the negative 
effect 
they™re seeing from the stronger dollar.  In addition, the decline in oil prices does seem to be 

having a significant effect
Šmaybe larger than we anticipated on business investment and 
       
      
                       
                
    drilling activity, and we haven™t yet seenŠ
surprisingly
, perhapsŠmuch evidence of a positive 
effect
 on consumer spending.  The anecdotes that you reported fro
m your business contacts were 
somewhat mixed, but I interpreted those as being reasonably positive in terms of not seeing any 
really significant changes in business prospects. 
On the international side, a number of risks 
were mentioned: 
Greece
; China, 
whose growth looks like it slowed more than expected
; geopolitical risks that bear on oil prices
; and 
a very interesting discussion, I thought, of what™s happening in global financial markets, 
with 

negative rates in Europe and the potential for a 
global reshu
ffling of portfolios that could raise 
volatility or could have very significant effects either on the dollar or interest rates and could be 

triggered by a shift in U.S. monetary policy. 
On the inflation front, incoming data came in pretty much as the 
staff
 had expected.  Core 
inflation was a touch higher than expected.  Oil prices were up somewhat since our last meeting, 

and the broad dollar exchange rate actually fell a little bit during the intermeeting period.  S
ome 
of you noted that these are welcome developments from an inflation perspective, as they indicate 

that the downward impetus 
provided by 
oil and the dollar to 
inflation is ebbing and shouldn™t 
continue. We had a nice discussion of measures of inflation expectations, with survey measures 

generally remaining stable and market-based measures of inflation compensation moving up 

slightly, although 
they are 
still bel
ow where they were last summer. 
President Williams™
s discussion about the relevance of these inflation expectations to inflation forecasts was 

interesting.  They don™t seem to be very good forecasts of inflation, and it is interesting 
that 
we have, 
I thin
k, 
repeatedly noticed that these measures are more heavily influenced by oil prices 
and movements in oil prices than, 
it would seem
, is reasonable. 
             
  
            
                   On the other hand, with respect to inflation and the outlook for inflation, a number of you 
suggested
, I thi
nk, that we could be in for a period in which inflation undershoots our objective 
for many, many years to come
 and, crossing over into the policy domain, suggested quite a bit of 
concern that we may be in for a very long period of an inflation undershoot.  That took us to 
some interesting observations on the question of 
what the equilibrium real rate is
; the possibility 
that it may be persistently depressed or not, as some think
; a debate about what
™s happening with 
the equilibrium real rate
; and the possib
ility 
that 
if the equilibrium real rate really is depressed
, what 
that implies for our monetary policy, and particularly for our inflation target, which is 
something that maybe we want to get back to and consider. 
Okay.  Let me just stop there as 
a summary
 of what I heard.  Are there any comments or 
corrections anyone wants to offer?  [No response] 
Then
 I™d like to offer some comments of my 
own, then we can quit and go to dinner.  I, of course, was also disappointed in incoming data on 

employment, spending, and production.  I recognize this may be just another soft spot, akin to 
what we saw last year and in a number of years past
, and I definitely think we should be careful 
not to overreact to what is a few weeks™ worth of news.  I find it reassuring that indicators of 
consumer confidence remain pretty upbeat, and I really haven™t altered my modal outlook for 

employment and output over the medium term.  I guess if I were updating my SEP forecast now, 

I would mark down projected growth this year, but modestly.  That said, I do find the widespread 

nature of the recent negative surprises disconcerting
, and, at a minimum, I am more worried 
about downside risk and 
am 
more uncertain about the outlook. 
In March my concerns focused on the external sector, and now I see question marks 
pertaining to the underlying strength of domestic aggregate demand as well.  I find it particularly 

disturbing that the slowdown in business investment appears to have become more widespread. 
                  
     
    
                In March the weakness appeared concentrated i
n drilling activity, and I think now we are seeing 
outright declines in real equipment outlays and nondrilling, nonresidential construction as well.  
The Tealbook assumes 
that investment in intangibles is still growing at a solid pace, but we 
actually have no idea what
™s happening there because reliable source data won™t be available for 
some time.  The broad weakness in business fixed investment may be partly explained by the 

slowdown in aggregate sale
s and output via an accelerat
or effect, but conceivably other factors 
that may prove to be more persistent may also be at work, and I worry about that. 
I™
m also concerned that we may not see a pickup in residential investment nearly as large 
as the Tealbook forecast
s this year.  Housing starts and permits have been incredibly weak even 
though mortgage rates are low, employment and income are rising, and demographic trends seem 

to call for a faster pace of building.  
According to staff calculations, 
if housi
ng remains weak 
it could shave 
¼ percentage 
point or so off the Tealbook projection of real GDP in the second half 
of this year and in 2016. 
I worry most about retail sales having been soft for several months now.  Savings rates 
moved up 1 
full percentage 
point since the fourth quarter despite large gains in employment, a 

sharp decline in oil prices, record equity prices, 
a solid increase in house prices, and low 
borrowing costs.  I suppose one could explain this by saying that bad winter weather and other 

transitory factors are at work here
.  I suppose supporting such an explanation is 
the fact that 
we did see strong auto sales in March, and consumer sentiment, even though the C
onference 
Board 
number fell today, is still pretty high.
  And I suppose, for tho
se reasons
, the Tealbook forecast 
seems reasonable to me, but I must say my confidence in the Tealbook forecast that projects that 

PCE growth is going to pick up to 4 percent really, 
to me
, is a leap of faith, and I worry that we 
may not see a pickup that™
s that 
large.
  And as several of you have mentioned, at this point the 
                          
         
             
    
  only real source of strength in the economy is consumer spending.  I
f there are question marks 
associated with
 consumer spending, that puts a lot of question marks on the outlook overal
l. I don™t think the risks from the external sector have diminished.  Maybe they have even 
increased to some degree. 
The s
taff has marked down estimates of export growth in the first 
quarter 
appreciably
.  It may well be that the drag 
generated by
 past dol
lar appreciation and slow 
foreign economic growth could be greater than previously assumed.  I also worry about the 
Greek debt situation
.  If Greece were to put in place controls on capital movements 
or, worse, 
exit the euro, 
I think it
™s hard to know what 
effect
 that would have on the dollar.  I™m not sure 
whether it would cause the dollar to appreciate or depreciate
, and 
I think there are reasonable 
stories either way. 
I certainly am hopeful that information between now and June will help us resolve some 
of these uncertainties. We will see
, certainly
, two more employment reports and a range of 
indicators on spending and production that could tell us whether we™ve been through a soft patch 
or if there
™s a more significant loss in momentum.
  But by June, 
the spending data for the second 
quarter will still be incomplete, and we shouldn™t underestimate the possibility that new data will 
confuse rather than clarify our assessments of the state of the economy. 
As for inflation, I don™t really have anything to add to what
™s been said.  Even though 
core CPI inflation came in a touch higher than expected, overall, the incoming data on wages and 

prices has been roughly in line with expectations.  My own outlook is little changed.  Both core 

and headline PCE 
inflation 
rates 
are running well below 2 percent and are likely to do so for the 
rest of the year, barring some major surprise in oil prices or a fall in the dollar.
  And the April 
Tealbook projects that headline inflation will be under 1 percent this year on a Q4-over-Q4 basis, 
                              and th
at core inflation this year is only going to run at 1¼ 
percent.  Those forecasts seem quite 
reasonable. 
Given this inflation outlook, the likelihood that employment and output will expand at 
only a moderate pace in coming quarters, and uncertainties about the global economy, I 
personally think it™s unlikely that the 
conditions we
™ve set out for a firming of policy will be met 
by June, but I have an open mind.  We™ve agreed to be data dependent, and that assessment could 

certainly change 
as we receive additional data on real activity and inflation in coming weeks. 
So let me stop there
.  We should probably break for dinner.  Tomorrow, 
Thomas will 
give his briefing. We may have to make some changes in the statement when we see what
™s in 
the GDP report, but I think we have enough time tomorrow morning to do that.  We™ll begin 
tomorrow 
at 9:00 a.m. 
[Meeting recessed] 
         
   
                       
            
          
   
    
              
  
   
                                                             
  
 April 29 Session 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  I guess 
we should get started
, and 
I™d like 
to first turn to Bill
 Wascher to give us an update on this morning™s GDP announcements. 
MR. WASCHER.
6  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll be referring to the handout 
titled ﬁMaterial for Gross Domestic Product Update.ﬂ  You 
have a table that 
summarizes some of the key aspects of this morning™s GDP data, and the first thing I 

would say is that it™s nice to be lucky once in a while.  [Laughter] 
As you can see 
from the first line of the table, the BEA™s advance estimate of real GDP 
growth in the 
first quarter was 0.2 percent at an annual rate.  That™s 
one-
tenth of 
1 percentage point 
higher than 
our estimate
 in the Ap
ril Tealbook. 
Among the major spending categories, 
real PCE growth slowed from 4.4 percent 
in the fourth quarter to 1.9 
percent in the first quarter, about as we had expected. 

Business fixed investment, which is labeled here by its official title, 
nonresidential 
private 
fixed 
investment, fell 3.4 percent, and residential investment edged up 
1.3 percent.  Again, both of th
ose were close to our expectations. 
The next three lines show some offsetting misses that turned out not to have much 
effect on the top-line GDP number.  In particular, government spending fell by less 

than we were expecting
, net exports fell by more, and 
there was a greater 
accumulation of inventories than we™d written down.  
In terms of their contributions 

to growth, net exports were estimated to have subtracted 1¼ 
percentage points 
from 
GDP growth in the first quarter, while inventories added 
¾ percentag
e point to 
growth.  I should note that, 
for these two categories in particular
, the BEA does not 
have complete data for the 
first 
quarter
.  In the advance GDP estimate
, inventories 
and net exports are based on two months of data and BEA™s 
assumed values fo
r the 
third monthŠin this case, for 
March. 
Our staff had a chance to look at the monthly assumptions and other details of 
both of these components, and Steve mentioned to me that his colleagues in the 

Division of I
nternational 
Finance 
are inclined to disc
ount some of the negative miss 
in net exports between their forecast and the BEA™s estimate.
  Going the other way, it 
looks as though the BEA wrote down a very high assumption for inventories in 

March, and we might be inclined to discount a little bit of that.  So I don™t know that 

it would have much effect on the top line.  B
ut I 
believe
 our thinking at this point 
would be that net exports aren™t quite as weak as the BEA has estimated, and 
that 
inventories may not be quite as large. 
The bottom of the table shows 
the BEA™s estimate of consumer price inflation. 
Total PCE prices fell 
2 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter, the same as our 
6 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
           
        
     
                
                                                                               
  
 Tealbook estimate, while core PCE prices rose 
nine
-tenths 
of 
1 percent, 
one
-tenth 
more than we were expecting. 
Finally, I
™ll
 just mention that real disposable personal income rose at an annual 
rate of 6.2 percent in the first quarter, while the saving rate came in at 
5.5 percent.  

Both of those figures were also close to our expectations.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Are there questions for Bill?  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. Bill, is the staff embarrassed that you missed this by 50 percent? 
[Laughter]  No, congratulations on this.  This is a good call, and I think it was useful information 
to bring to the Committ
ee.  It™s a tough job, and when you get something right, you should 
definitely take some credit for it. 
MR. WASCHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great.  Then let™s turn to Thomas, who is going to brief us on 
our monetary policy decisions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.7  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™ll be referring to the handout 
labelled ﬁMaterial for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.ﬂ 
At previous meetings and, indeed, yesterday, several of you discussed the 
possibility of market turbulence in the run-up to, or following, the onset of policy 
tightening.  Although the Committee now has communications tools, including the 
SEP, that it did not have at the start of previous tightening cycles, unexpected 

movements in yields and volatility, up or down, may nevertheless occur even if the 

expected policy 
rate 
path does not shift markedly.  The upper-
left panel of your first 
exhibit provides some perspective by showing the staff™s estimate of the 10-
year 
Treasury term premium over the past 25 years.  The vertical bars high
light three 
episodes:  the beginning of the tightening cycles in 1994 and 2004 and the taper 

tantrum in 2013.  Within the shaded 18-month windows around these events, term 

premiums moved substantially.  But they also did so at other timesŠ
and likely in 

res
ponse to factors other than monetary policy. 
The upper-
right panel isolates the episodes associated with the three shaded 
regions and, for reference, the current episode conditional on the staff™s assumption of 

liftoff at the September meeting.  As shown by the red line, in 1994, the term 

premium rose substantially in the months following the onset of tightening.  By 

contrast, in 2004, in blue, it moved up several months before the federal funds rate in 

response to stronger economic data that moved up the expected timing of policy 
7 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
                       
     
  
       
           
   
    
  
             
 tightening.  But the term premium then began to decline and continued to do so over 

the remainder of 2004Š
the well
-known ﬁconundrumﬂ episode.  Finally, in 2013, the 
term premium began to rise around the time of Chairman Bernanke™s JEC testimony 

in late May, apparently reflecting market participants™ reassessment of the outlook for 

asset purchases and possibly policy rates.  As shown in the middle-
left panel, these 
term premium movements may, to some extent, have reflected uncertainty about the 

future course of monetary policy.  The panel shows the width of the 90 percent 

confidence interval for the federal funds rate 12 months ahead, derived from options 

on federal funds futures. The term premiums are highly correlated with this pro
xy for 
policy uncertainty in the 1994 and 2004 episodes, but less so in 2013, presumably 

because uncertainty in that episode was driven less by the path of the federal funds 

rate over the next 12 months than by the course of asset purchases and longer
-term 
rates. 
These experiences suggest that, even in a context in which the FOMC™s policy 
communications tools are more extensive than in the 1994 and 2004 cycles, it may be 

prudent for the Committee to consider its likely response to unexpected changes in 

term
 premiums that might occur around the time when it begins policy firming.  A 
special exhibit in the ﬁMonetary Policy Strategiesﬂ section of the Tealbook, Book B, 

provides some background that might be useful.  As shown by the dotted black line in 

the middle-right panel, the staff projects that the 10-
year term premium will rise at a 
modest pace after the Committee is assumed to start raising the federal funds rate. 

This slow projected rise in the term premium reflects in part the waning effects on 

longer-t
erm yields of the Committee™s asset holdings.  The magenta line presents the 
path for the term premium in a scenario, labeled ﬁTightening Tantrum,ﬂ that is similar 

in magnitude to, albeit less persistent than, the rise in the term premium that began in 
May 2013 (the green line).  As shown in the lower-
left panel, in the ﬁtantrumﬂ case, 
optimal control would call for a more gradual increase in the federal funds rate for 
several quarters, with the federal funds rate running, on average, 35 basis points 

below 
the optimal control path associated with the Tealbook baseline (the black line) 
over the four years following the shock. 
Recent public discourse has largely focused on the specter of another market 
tantrum.  However, a repeat of the 2004 experience, in whi
ch term premiums 
remained surprisingly low for a while, is also a possibility.  For example, such an 

outcome might occur through the effects of the very large asset purchase programs 

that are under way in Europe and Japan.  The yellow line in the middle-
right panel 
shows a scenario for the path of the term premium that is similar to the 2004 

conundrum episode.  In this instance, optimal control would call for a federal funds 

rate path that is 40 basis points higher, on average, over the next four years. 
The 
lower
-right panel highlights a few caveats. The tantrum scenario abstracts 
from the possibility of widespread liquidity or solvency problems, a point worth 

mentioning in light of recent commentary about reduced liquidity in key markets, 

which Simon discussed in his briefing.  More generally, the scenarios do not examine 

the consequences of term premium movements that are associated with other 

disturbances.  If, for example, the term premium fell because of weaker economic 
           
                   
        
       
         
          
    
  
  activity abroad and associated fl
ight-
to-safety flows, the optimal policy response 
could be to keep the federal funds rate lower, not higher, than in the baseline.  Finally, 

the appropriate policy response to either scenario depends importantly on the 

persistence of the deviation of the t
erm premium from its baseline path, which will be 
known only in retrospect.  In response to such scenarios, policymakers may wish to 

emphasize that they will respond to financial conditions that are judged inconsistent 

with the achievement of the FOMC™s objectives. 
Turning to the draft policy alternatives, thanks to the excellent work of Bill 
Wascher and his colleagues, I can discuss the alternatives as distributed yesterday. A 

key issue for your decision today is how to convey the implications of recent and 

incoming economic information for the likely timing of policy normalization.  First, 

as indicated at the top of exhibit 2, assuming that the Committee decides to remove 

time
-based forward guidance from the statement, it will primarily rely on paragraphs 
1 and 2 to speak to its assessment of whether its criteria for liftoff
 have been met or 
when they are likely to be met.  In broad terms, with alternative B, the Committee 

would communicate that the conditions for an increase in the federal funds rate are 

not yet in place, while alternative C would suggest that those conditions will likely be 

in place in the near future.  Alternative A would indicate that the preconditions for 

liftoff are unlikely to be met in the near future. 
The second set of bullets summ
arizes how each of the three alternatives may 
shape expectations for the timing of liftoff.  On the Committee™s criterion that it 

would need to see ﬁfurther improvement in the labor market,ﬂ alternative B states that 

ﬁunderutilization of labor resources wa
s little changedﬂ over the intermeeting period, 
citing the moderation in the pace of job gains and the steady unemployment rate.  

Regarding the second criterion, that the Committee would need to be ﬁreasonably 
confident that inflation will move back to its
 2 percent objective over the medium 
term,ﬂ alternative 
B updates the description of recent data in paragraph 1 and retains, 
in paragraph 2, the expectation that inflation will 
ﬁrise gradually toward 2 percent 
over the medium term.ﬂ  Thus, alternative B does not signal a change in confidence 
about the inflation outlook. 
In addition, the Committee noted in the March minutes that the timing of the first 
increase in the federal funds rate would also depend on the evolution of economic 

conditions and the outloo
k.  In that regard, alternative B provides the judgment that 

the Committee sees the recent weakness in economic activity either 
ﬁin part
ﬂ or ﬁat 
least in partﬂ as transitory and indicates that, despite the first
-quarter slowdown, the 
Committee still expect
s economic growth at a pace that will lead to further 

improvement in labor market conditions.  Under alternative B, the Committee would 

remain fully data dependent and offer no time-based guidance about how soon the 

conditions for liftoff are likely to be 
met. 
By contrast, alternative C would communicate the Committee™s readiness to begin 
policy normalization in the near term.  Paragraph 1 indicates that, despite a steady 

jobless rate, ﬁsome labor market indicators suggest that underutilization of labor 

resources continued to diminish.ﬂ  It expresses a more positive reading of recent news 
               
    
    
    
           
    
    
              
                   
         
on inflation and notes that, although inflation remained below the Committee™s 

objective, ﬁit was no longer declining.ﬂ  In addition, paragraph 
1 of alternative C 

attributes this winter™s economic slowdown largely to transitory factors. Paragraph
 2 suggests not only that the Committee continues to anticipate moderate economic 

growth and further improvement in labor market conditions, but also that it now has 

become more (or perhaps somewhat more) confident that inflation ﬁwill rise 

gradually to 2 percent over the medium term.ﬂ  Having made those assessments of 

recent developments and the outlook, the Committee would adopt new guidance in 

paragraph 3.  Rather than repeating t
he criteria for liftoff adopted in the March 
statement, the Committee would announce that ﬁeconomic conditions mayﬂ or ﬁlikely 

will soon warrant an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate.ﬂ  While 

alternative C reintroduces a time dimension 
to the forward guidance, it also retains 
the more general data
-dependent statement that the timing of the adjustment would 
depend on realized and expected progress toward the Committee™s objectives of 

maximum employment and 2 
percent inflation. 
Finally, with alternative A, the Committee would express heightened concerns 
about the underlying strength of the economic expansion, downside risks to the 

outlook for the labor market, and possible persistence of below-
target inflation. 
In paragraph 1, in 
alternat
ive A, 
as in alternative B, the Committee describes 
underutilization of labor resources as ﬁlittle changed,ﬂ but it stresses that inflation 

ﬁcontinued to run well below the Committee™s longer
-run objective.ﬂ  It does not 

offer any judgment on how much of this winter™s slowdown may have been 

transitory. Additionally
, in 
paragraph 2™s assessment of 
the outlook, 
under 
alternative 
A it would be report
ed that the Committee now sees the risks to economic activity 
and the labor market as ﬁtilted to the downside.ﬂ And the statement would voice 
concern that ﬁinflation could run substantially belowﬂ 2 percent for a protracted 
period, and possibly that ﬁthe pace of improvement in the labor market could remain 

slow.ﬂ 
Given these risks to the outlook, alternative A 
introduces a somewhat more 
stringent precondition for the initiation of policy firming, stating in paragraph 3 that 

the Committee would need to see inflation ﬁclearly moving up towardﬂ the 

Committee™s 2 percent objective rather than being ﬁreasonably confi
dentﬂ that it will 
do so.  In addition, alternative A emphasizes concern about the inflation outlook by 

indicating that ﬁthe Committee is prepared to use all of its tools as necessary to return 

inflation to 2
 percent within one to two years.ﬂ All told, alternative A would 
communicate that liftoff appears unlikely for some time. 
Thank you, Madam Chair.  That concludes my prepared remarks, and I will be 
glad to take any questions. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there questions for Thomas?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHA
RT.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Thomas, I™d like to ask you about your 
thinking as you drafted 
alternative C.  Specifically
, I™m referring to the bracketed choices in 
                  
             
            
             paragraph
s 2 and
 3, and I™m interested in how the staff is thinking about the choice of the 
ﬁhas 
become somewhat more confidentﬂ
 and 
ﬁmay soon warrant an increaseﬂ language
, as opposed to 
the 
ﬁhas become more confidentﬂ 
and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ language. 
These two language options could be seen as a sequence of statements over, say, two 
meetings.  They could convey increasing certainty on the part of the Committee or increasing 

probability of a liftoff decision.  Alternatively, I can imagine choosing between these two 

language options 
at the 
meeting ahead 
of liftoff
, with the choice depending on the probability of 
the 
liftoff decision. 
So I can see a case for both of these interpretations of the alt
-C bracketed 
language as something we might consider in the future, and 
I wonder if the staff had either of 
these ideas in mind or 
if 
it™s just providing an option for this meeting alone. 
MR. LAUBACH. 
We also explored the choice between ﬁmayﬂ and ﬁlikely willﬂ 
in 
previous drafts of a
lternative C and in other materials that
, if I remember correctly
, were sent to 
the Committee ahead of the January meeting.
  In my view, just focusing for now on that, one key 
question is how the Committee wants to strike a balance between, on the one hand, sending some 

advance notice and, on the other hand, emphasizing data dependence.  So I think one key 

question for you at some point will be, how firmly do you want to express that the next meeting 

might be likely for liftoff
, and how do you 
balance that against 
the fact 
that
, of course, over
 any 
intermeeting
 period, yo
u will receive data that may change the 
course of policy?  T
hat™s some 
of 
the thinking that went into the considerations about 
ﬁmay
ﬂ and ﬁ
likely will.
ﬂ As to the ﬁsomewhatﬂ in 
paragraph 2, you
™re right that you can see a pair between
Š ﬁsomewhatﬂ in 
paragraph 2 could perhaps fit better with ﬁmayﬂ in p
aragraph 3 because it still 
emphasizes a little bit more that you™re reserving judgment.  So that™s certainly a possibility. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
          
   
    
     
          
     
      
           
     MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes
Šthank you, Madam C
hair.
  I had a question and a 
comment.  The comment is on page 1 of the handout that you provided, ﬁMarket Expectations 
and Policy Issues.ﬂ  I thought that was a very nice set of experiments, and 
I like the idea of 

having these three possible cases
 and 
lay
ing them out.
  My own thinking is, focus more on the 
tantrum case, but, 
certainly
, it™s useful for us to keep in mind 
the conundrum case as well. 
My comment is about the use of optimal control as a way to evaluate the appropriate 
policy response here.  
Whe
n I think about what was going on in these episodes
, it wa
s really that 
there were uncertainties in markets about what the 
Committee was trying to achieve with policy 
Šand you used 
the same language, I believe
, when I was listening to you. 
But
 optimal con
trol, 
of course, involves the 
assum
ption that 
what we were trying to achieve 
with
 policy 
is all pretty 
much common knowledge. 
For example, 
in the tantrum case, we might want a more aggressive response in order to 
rebuild lost reputation, 
in some sense
, abo
ut what we™re actually trying to achieve. In the 
conundrum case
, the same is true
Šwe might want to be even tighter than what™s built in here, 
because we™re actually trying to convince markets that we are really concerned about inflation 
getting too high.  
But
 in the tantrum case, 
we might 
be even easier than what™s described by 
optimal control, because we have this need to rebuild reputation in 
the eyes of the markets 
about 

the fact that 
we really
 care about getting inflation back up to 2 
percent. 
That™s a comment.  The question I had actually builds, 
I think
, on what Dennis was 
asking about alternative C.  I™ll ask the same question about a
lter
native B.  As you described on 
page 2, which was a great way to summarize 
what™s in the various alternatives, we™re really 

relying on p
aragraphs 1 and 2 to speak to the Committee™s assessment of 
the 
criteria for liftoff.
 I         
  
   
            
       
             
         guess we™re relying on the evolution of the data over time to allow the public to figure out what 
we think 
is relevant. 
Another way to proceed is to actually be more explicit about, 
ﬁOkay, we™ve had some 
incoming dataŠparagraphs 1 and 2.  We just saw GDP now.  H
ow does that affect the li
kelihood 
of liftoff in, say, June?
ﬂ  So we could have provided more explicit guidance about that in the 
statement in 
alternative B.
  And I guess my question is, what were you thinking in not doing 
this? 
MR. LAUBACH. 
I have 
two thoughts, perhaps, on that, and maybe Simon can also 
weigh in on 
at least one of them
.  N
amely
, as Simon showed you yesterday, there was a question 
in the primary 
dealer survey on which factors market participants view as most relevant for the 
achievement of reasonable confidence.
  So there is an indirect route in the sense that what you 
say in the statement will be evaluated even though you may not have a direct statement in there 

about how 
the Committee is no
w more or less confident than before.  Presumably, 
market 
participants will
 look at your characterization of these various factors and draw conclusions from 

that about how your confidence has shifted. 
I™m not quite sure how easy it would be to try 
to come up with a summary statement for 
the degree of confidence because, well, my 
guess is that various participants rank different 
criteria differently, and I think that
™s evident from your comments.  Therefore, I believe 
this is a 
step that™s left to market participants and the public in general to draw conclusions about this. 
MR. POTTER. 
Prior to the GDP release, I think 
the 
dealers put an average 
probability of 
13 percent on liftoff in June.  Let™s assume that™s moved down to 8 
percent 
or something 
right 
now based on the 
GDP release
.  If you felt that that 
8 percent 
was way t
oo low compared 
with 
the likelihood that you might lift off in June, then you might want to try 
to indicate something.  
                                          
    
      Before it was way too high, but it 
seems a little bit 
less likely that you would want to indicate 
something at 8 percent. 
MR. KOCHERLAKO
TA.  That™s helpful.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Are there other comments or questions?  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thomas, I wonder if you could, to help us understand these scenarios, 
refresh the Committee™s memory about the extent to which overnight 
short-
term interest rates 
that we influence directly through the federal funds rate target can affect economic activity in 
the 
FRB
/US model 
independently of the value
s of the 
5-, 7-, and 10-
year interest rates
, which appear 
to figure prominently in th
ese scenario
s. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  Monetary policy transmission 
in the 
FRB/US 
model 
is largely through 
long-
term rates
, so I™m
Šlet me think. 
MR. LACKER.  Entirely? 

MR. LAUBACH
.  Largely
Šwell, to varying degrees.  F
or example, there are some rates 
in there
, like
 the rate on auto loans, that arguably are not quite as long term.  So they are not only 
a 10-year Treasury 
yield
. But it™s true that the funds rate
, in and of itself, doesn™t carry a whole 
lot of weight in monetary policy transmission, but only through its ef
fects on longer
-term yields. 
By implication, 
these shifts in term premiums that we are considering in the scenarios are 

actually quite powerful.  So they do have 
a substantial macroeconomic effect
s. 
MR. LACKER. Well, 
I have two follow-ups.  One is, when I think about this, 
I have 
difficulty reconciling that structure with the impression that a sizable volume of bank lending 

among 
the bankers I talk to seems to be priced off LIBOR and other short
-term interest rates. 
The s
econd thing is, what would this imply for Taylor r
ules? 
Have we been wrong for 
years?  Should we have been including a ter
m premium thing that we accommodate in the Taylor 
           
  
       
   
     
      
  
  
    
  
  
               rules? 
Should we think about policy differently now that we™
ve got this transmission 
mechanism 
whose 
strength varies
 depending on what the term premium does? 
MR. LAUBACH
.  There are two separate aspects to this.  One is, what if monetar
y policy 
transmission also importantly works through term premiums?  That means that term premiums 
systematically vary with the path of short-
term interest rates. 
To some extent, that is actually the 
case in 
the 
FRB
/US model
Šnamely
, that the term premium is an endogenous function of 
expected future output gaps.  So to the extent that choices about the path of the funds rate affect 

the outlook for future output gaps, that has an added effect by moving term premiums 

endogenously 
as well. 
A separate ques
tion is, should a Taylor r
ule also take into account other financial 
conditions more broadly?
 And there, arguably, a Taylor rule that responds only to current 
economic conditions may have a shortcoming because it responds only to current inflation and, 

say, the current output gap, whereas financial conditions that you observe today, like movements 
in the dollar and things like that, clearly affect your outlook in the future.  So that is not an asp
ect 
that is captured by Taylor r
ules that
 just mechanically respond to current conditions.  Of course, 
for example, if you look at optimal control, 
it obviously knows about these things because it™
s run under 
perfect 
foresight.  Therefore, agents anticipate that changes in financial conditions 
today more broadly, including changes in term premiums, will affect the future outlook. 
MR. LACKER. 
Let me follow up further.  When I look at the plot in the upper-
left
-hand 
corner, if I took Taylor rules and incorporate this term premium, d
oesn™t that mean that an 

augmented Taylor r
ule should now predict interest rates 
2 percentage points higher 
for
 1994 than 
would a Taylor r
ule without that augmentation
?                            
         
    
          VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  That™s a
ssuming you have a time-constant equilibrium 
real rate, but the equilibrium real rate could be moving, too. 
MR. LACKER.  Yes, there
™s that.
  There™s the gap.  There™s inflation.  But now we add 
the term premium
, and that™
s poi
nting in the other direction by 2 percentage points. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  If you look just at, say, the lower-frequency movement, it now seems 
as though, 
on a
n almost secular or at least a highly persistent basis, the term premium seems 
about 2 percentage points 
lower than it was back then.
  That is an effect that arguably ought to be 
reflected already in current conditions. 
MR. LACKER.  Current conditions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  If you thought about a sudden drop right nowŠ 

MR. LACKER. 
What about the current Taylor r
ule?
  Shouldn
™t it be in the current 
Taylor r
ule, too
?  We should include 
it. MR. EVANS.  It™s in the current Taylor rule through current conditions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  W
ell, I think the point I
™m trying to make is that this 
is a 
secular 
downshift 
in the term premium from a mean of what looks like around 2 percent in the 1990s to 
about close to 
zero
 now.  But that™
s not a recent development
, that™
s been persistent since
 the 
mid
-2000s.  T
he decline in the term premium
, in and of itself, arguably had, at some point, 
a stimulative effect
.  Assuming that this really occurred in isolation
, as I referred to in my briefing, 
you could seeŠ 
MR. LACKER.  So it
™s affected the current gap and the current inflation rate. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  Exactly. 
MR. LACKER.  But your optimal control says that, even given the current gap and the 
current inflation rate
, there should be some response of the funds rate to the term premium. 
               
  
   
     
                         MR. LAUBACH. Yes
, but those are projected future changes in the term premium, not 
where it is today
.  So my point is, if you had just observed 
in recent history a 
2 percentage point 
decline in the term premium, then if that had happened in isolation, 
that should indeed affect 
your outlook.  Your outlook should be stronger, all else being equalŠagain, wit
h the caveat ﬁall 
else 
being equal.ﬂ  If the 2 percentage point decline occurred in the context of a flight to safety, 

that™s no longer so obvious.  But if that had recently occurred, then, indeed, 
there is a little bit of 

a discrepancy in terms of your standard Taylor rule response only to current conditions.  If these 

current conditions haven™t responded yet to that decline in the term premium, then there is a bit 

of 
a tension since 
you project that 
that decline in the term premium, in itself
, actually is going to 
provide a boost. 
If you think, for example, about the staff projection, 
it is, very importantly, driven by our 
assessment of financial conditions today and over the projection period.  So the Taylor r
ule does 
take account of that over the projection period. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Governor Fischer, do you have a two-hander? 
MR. FISCHER. 
Yes, it™
s a two
-hander.  
What is the correlation between the term 
premium and the difference between the short
-term rate and the long-
term rate?  Is it high? 
MR. 
LAUBACH
.  The correlation between the term premium and the slopeŠ
sadly, I do 
not know this right off the top ofŠ 
MR. 
POTTER
.  It has to be high on a daily basis. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It has to be high. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Yes, i
t would be high. 
MR. POTTER. 
That™s because the short
-term
 rate is not moving that much
, because the 
FOMC
 is not moving 
it, but the 10-year is moving around every day. 
                                      
    
         
         
  
         MR. EVANS.  Yes, arithmetic, I guess. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS. 
My question is related to P
resident Lacker™s topic, but I guess it
™s really more about how we think about movements in the term premium in general.  A
s I understand 
the 
FRB
/US model and 
the way you described it, Thomas, is that these 
movements 
have very powerful effects because they affect all asset prices. 
They 
affect mortgage rates, the 
stock market, and the 
exchange rate. These 
movements are really spilling over throughout 
financial conditions, 
and 
so have a very powerful effect on GDP, employment, and inflation. 
The research on the effects of QE
ŠI™m thinking of the work of 
Vis
sing-Jorgensen 
and 
KrishnamurthyŠa lot of the research has looked at this and 
seems to have called into question 

whether there
™s this full pass
-through of T
reasury term premi
um effects onto private rates, 
such 
as corporate bond rates 
and 
mortgage rates, 
as well as asset prices in general.
  I guess the 
question is, to what extent are you buying into the story that maybe the term premium doesn™t 
affect financial conditions as fully as the FRB
/US model would tell you? 
Or how do we think 
about some of the more recent research in terms of these simulations? 
MR. LAUBACH
.  I think the short answer to that is, what I have here on the handout and 
what is being shown in the 
ﬁMonetary Policy S
trateg
iesﬂ section of Teal
book, Book B, of course, 
buys fully into the FRB
/US view that, to the extent that long rates matter for re
al a
ctivity, 
changes in the term premium are in 
long-
term
 rates.  So no distinction 
is drawn between
 whether 
the movement 
is in the expectations compo
nent or in the 
term
-premium component
. We could certainly 
try 
to look at how the results will change.  Broadly speaking, my 
expectation would be 
that 
the lines 
you see in the lower-
left 
panel 
are based on 100 
percent
Šthat 
                     
     
                 
        is, t
erm premiums are worth 
exactly 
as much as changes in expected future interest rates
.  Then 
you can shave that if you thought that a more reasonable estimate was, say, 50 percent. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you.  The second comment is really to President Lacker.  
This 
is why you have a 
time
-varying 
r*. In my view, this is the argument for thinking about the fact 
that the term premium changes over decades.  Other factors
, such as 
risk premi
ums
, the equity 
premium, 
and the sovereign risk premiumŠlots of things change in the 
economy
, whic
h is 
basically the argument not to have a constant 
r*. Your point is exactly right.  On its own, the term premium going down would argue for a 
higher 
r*. So what™
s really striking is that 
Laubach
-Williams, which just tries to let the data 
decide, has 
r* falling all 
of 
the way to zero, despite the fact that QE and other factors have 
pushed the term premium down.  T
he way I view this is
, there are these factors pushing 
r* up, but the other factors, the headwinds and the other things, are just so much more po
werful that
, on net, they push 
r* down.  Through the lens of 
r*, everything makes sense.  [Laughter]  Thank 
you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Why don™t we begin our round now?  O
ur first speaker is 
President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m looking forward to hearing 
President Williams™
s remarks through the lens of 
r*. [Laughter]  We™
ll see how that goes. 
Madam Chair, I favor alternative A.  My rationale for alternative A is based on the modal 
outlook for prices and employment, the risks to that outlook, and the zero lower bound.  On the 

benchmark outlook in 
the 
Tealbook
, Book
 A, you see 
that inflation does not return to the 
FOMC™s target of 2 percent until 2019, which is four years from now.  We should take steps to 

facilitate a fas
ter return of inflation to target.  These additional steps would also help boost 
           
   
    
                          
  
   
    employment over the medium term.  
Our congressional mandate calls for us to achieve 
maximum employment and stable prices.  If we are able to simultaneously create more jobs an
d impro
ve our performance on the price-stability goal, we should do so. 
That™
s the argument 
just 
based on the modal outlook alone.  It provides a clear 
justification for the policy course described in a
lternative A. 
I think this argument is enhanced 
by consideration of the risks to the outlook.  I agree with the Tealbook, Book AŠthe risks to the 
outlook for prices and employment are to the downside.  The standa
rd risk
-management 
considerations that are often advanced by the Committee suggest that these fut
ure downside risks 
bolster the case for current accommodation. 
When we think about the zero lower bound, as recent Brookings 
conference paper 
by 
President Evans 
and his colleagues 
makes crystal clear, these risk
-management considerations 
are significantly 
enhanced by the presence of the zero lower bound.  The past five years have 
taught us that when we™
re close to the zero lower bound, as we expect to be over the medium 
term, we will not be able to mitigate downside risks as effectively
 as we would like.  A
s President Evans™
s paper points out, this means that we should make policy choices so as to 
strengthen the economy in advance of these shocks hitting.  That, again, argues in favor of the 

kind of stance described in a
lternative 
A. So I see three arguments
 in favor of a
lternative A
Šthe modal outlook, the risks to the 
outlook, and the constraints on policy imposed by the zero lower bound. 
As I
™ve indicated in the past, I believe that it is important for monetary policy decisions 
to take account of the macroe
conomic risks created by potential financial instability.  My own 

reading of the QS report is that the main financial stability risk we face right now is actually 
          
         
      
     
   
                
associated with higher, not lower, interest rates. This will build on some of the work that 
Thomas was showing us earlier this morning. 
In May 2013, we began to tighten policy while we were still apparently several years 
away from achieving our macroeconomic objectives.  Market participants lost confidence in the 

willingness of the FOMC to buffer the economy against adverse shocks, and we saw a rapid 

increase in the term premium. If we raise the target range for the federal 
funds rate when 
headline inflation and core inflation are both running so low, we risk sending the same message 

that we did in 2013, and, accordingly, 
we risk seeing the same rapid run-
up in the term premium. 
Madam Chair, the modal outlook for inflation is too low.  We can best address this 
deficiency and simultaneously create more jobs by making clear, as 
alternative A does, that we 

are willing to use all 
of 
our tools to return inflation to target within one to two years, and that 
such a determined approach
 in 
the pursuit of our mandated objectives is also the best way to 
manage the risks we face, especially
 near the zero lower bound. 
I™d like to conclude by suggesting a topic for a possible research briefing
.  I
t builds on 
President Bullard™s comments yesterday and
, actually
, the conversation we were just having 
among 
President Williams, President Lacker, an
d Thomas.  I think it would be really useful for 
us to understand the work going on in the System on 
r*Šwhat™s determining it and 
what
™s moving it around.  It plays, actually, a pretty critical role, even in the statement itself.  So I 

believe
 exposing the Committee to the research going on in the System on this would be very 

valuable.  
With that, I
™ll conclude.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Today™
s GDP report confirms what we 
alr
eady knewŠ
that GDP growth slowed significantly in the first quarter. It™s too early to 
       
                  
   
  
       
      
     
 determine whether that slowdown will be persistent or whether it will be t
emporary, as last 
year™s first
-quarter slowdown turned out to be.  With no decision on the table, we don™t have to 
make that determination today.  
June™s decision is going to be data dependent, 
and we™ll be receiving important 
information
, including two monthly employment reports, 
to help
 come to a decision about liftoff 
in June.  Thus, I think it™s important not to signal anything today about a June decision.  
I support the spirit of a
lternative B today because
, at this point
, I favor data dependence 
and the meeting-by-meeting nature of the decision of liftoff.  
I believe it is appropriate to 

acknowledge the slowdown in growth and employment in paragraph 2, but then to maintain the 

characterization of the risk
s to the outlook for economic activity and 
the labor market as nearly 
balanced.
  However, in my view, the tone of the first paragraph on inter
meet
ing developments is 
too negative.  I think some of that negativity comes from focusing too much on short-
term 
changes 
in economic indicators instead of providing the Committee™s assessment of changes in 
economic cond
itions that matter for a policy decision. 
I do appreciate some of the changes that 
were made between the first draft of statement language that was circulated and the draft on the 

table today that addressed this issue of tone, but we have to remember that the public doesn™t see 

the evolution of our drafts. 
The 
Tealbook, Book B, 
tells us that the intention of 
alternative B is to avoid any date
-based guidance and ret
ain the option of beginning policy normalization in June if the data and 
outlook justify it.  
My concern is that 
alternative B doesn™t seem to achieve this.  My concern is, 
it™ll be read as our signaling that we™ve taken June off the table when that™s not the case, and it 

would be inconsistent with our data-dependent approach. 
             
  
    
           
                      Since our 
March meet
ing
, market expectations have shifted to a later liftoff and 
a flatter 
policy 
rate 
path.  In normal times, 
such a shift would be reflecting their assessment of the 
incoming data for the economic outlook, and we might want to take some signal from it.  
But 
as we prepare for liftoff, markets are particularly sensitive to our communications.  The shift in the 
expected policy 
rate 
path may not be providing any independent assessment of the economy.  
Instead
, it might be reflecting the market™s view of the Committee™s view. 
As former Chairman Alan Greenspan once said when discussing how difficult policy 
communications are, ﬁPeople hear what they want to hear.ﬂ  In such an environment, 
we must be 

even more careful than usual not to say things that could be misinte
rpreted
, even if they™re 
factually true.
  Of course, anticipating how the market might react to anything 
we do say is a 
difficult task. 
Turning to language specifics, in paragraph 1, I would opt to say ﬁgrowth slowed . . . , in 
part reflecting transitory f
actors,
ﬂ rather than ﬁ
at least in part.
ﬂ  And at this point, I understand 
that the rest of the language is pretty well locked down, but I would like to suggest one change.  

Instead of 
ﬁGrowth in household spending declined,ﬂ 
can we say ﬁH
ousehold spending 
continued to grow
, although at a slower pace
ﬂ? Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  So you said 
that, 
instead of 
ﬁGrowth in household spending 
decline
dﬂŠwhat did you want? Just review what you wanted to say instead. 
MS. MESTER.  Ye
s.  ﬁHousehold spending continued to grow, although at a slower 
pace.
ﬂ CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  
President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I support 
alternative B, including the 
statement and President Mester
™s suggestion concerning ﬁin part.ﬂ 
                 
        
                    
I see t
he decision 
at this meeting on both policy and statement as straightforward.  So I™d 
like to spend a few minutes looking ahead and thinking aloud about statement language 
possibilities in alternative economic scenarios, obviously evidence
d by incoming data, and 

alternative liftoff decision scenarios. 
I expect it will be evident in this round that there is some desire to keep June an active 
option.  In any event, I think having various communication strategies in mind could help the 

Committee achieve as smooth a policy transition as possible and reduce the chances of avoidable 

and unwanted market volatility associated with liftoff.  For my part, I™m not so optimistic that by 

June we will be able to make a clear and plausible case that the economy is on track 
in terms of 
our two decision criteria.  Having repeatedly emphasized the data dependency of our liftoff 

decision, I think it™s important that we not cause impartial observers to scratch their heads about 

the data on which we™re basing a liftoff decision.  I expect 
that the data picture will be 
sufficiently inconclusive by the time of our next meeting to justify waiting a bit longer. 
As my earlier question to Thomas indicated, I™m trying to think through how 
communication might evolve in the coming meetings should we decide not to move in June.  As 

I suggested in framing the question for Thomas, there are a couple of ways the language options 

in this meeting™s 
alternative C might serve as a template. 
The ﬁ
has become 
somewhat more 
confidentﬂ and 
ﬁmay soon war
rant an increaseﬂ language option
, combined with the ﬁhas become 
more confidentﬂ and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ version
, could be viewed as a 
sequence of statements o
ver two meetings in advance of the liftoff decision.  
Alternatively, the 
two v
ersions could be viewed as distinct choices
, with one or the other selected depending on the 
degree of certainty or probability the Committee wishes to convey, presumably in a statement of 

the meeting just ahead of the liftoff meeting. 
         
             
             
          
        Having said all 
of 
that
, my sense of 
opinion in 
the Committee is that there is not a lot of 
appetite for signaling liftoff two meetings in advance, even if couched in very tentative terms.  I 
also doubt there™s much support for a move to language along the lines of a
lternativ
e C unless 
the liftoff decision is highly probable.  So I have difficulty actually envisioning circumstances in 

which we might choose to use the softer ﬁ
has become 
somewhat more confident
ﬂ and 
ﬁmay soon 
warrant an increase
ﬂ version in a
lternative C. 
Where 
this leaves me is the view that the most 
feasible approach to some amount of guidance in advance of a liftoff decision is the ﬁhas become 

more confidentﬂ and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ choice.
  I apologize for walking 
everyone through my tortu
red thought process.  [Laughter] 
It™s certainly possible that we will receive a string of data reports between now and June 
that is strong enough to justify pulling the trigger.  If we were to move in June, 
the advance
-
signal decision will be moot, of cour
se.  In that case
, the question becomes whether the June 
statement ought to address what comes next
Šthat is, provide some more concrete guidance on 
what is the Committee™s expected path of policy over the subsequent meetings. 
As I said at the top of my remarks, 
I just want to air some communications 
considerations.  I think it would be helpful to further discuss the question of whether to provide 

advance guidance and, if so, how to phrase it.  And it™s not too early to start thinking about ways 

to prepare the public for the path of policy 
after 
liftoff. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
alternative
 B.  The data to 
date have 
not 
met the conditions we provided in the Marc
h statement for raising rates.  I am very 
skeptical that these conditions can be met by June.  
With t
wo quarters of weak real GDP growth, 
        
  
             
  
              
  
  
   
  
       
we once again are faced with a forecast of improvement
Šthe data reflect broader
-based 
weakness. 
In addition, interna
tional conditions since the 
March meeting have become more 
worrisome.  The frustration among Greek leaders when talking with European policymakers is 
palpable, while the European policymakers I spoke with seem
ed to have more confidence that 
any problems as
sociated with a Gree
k default could be readily contained. 
I am less confident 
that a smooth resolution will be achieved.  Moreover, I worry that this misplaced confidence 
in the likely 
containment of spillovers arising 
from a possible Greek default may ge
nerate 
conditions that make default even more likely. 
As I discussed yesterday, it is possible our inflation target is too low, given the 
accumulating evidence that we set the target based on research that underestimated both the 

likelihood and severity of being at the zero lower bound.  If we are willing to entertain a higher 

target, then a later liftoff would be further justified.
  In part, this would also indicate a higher 
standard for moving, shifting from reasonable confidence that we are moving toward our 

inflation target to just plain confidence that we are moving toward our inflation target. 
As the 
data to date should not make us even reasonably confident, this distinction will become more 

relevant at future meetings, presumably in the fall. 
In term
s of language, I would take out the ﬁat least,ﬂ and I would keep ﬁin part reflecting 
transitory factors.ﬂ
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
First Vice President Holcomb. 

MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
There
™s no denying that the bulk of data 
on real activity released since our March meeting has disappointed expectations.  However, a 
                              
       
      
    
     review of what has happened and what may be revealed to have happened argues for maintaining 
flexibility with respect to the tim
ing of liftoff. 
Labor market conditions continue to improve, albeit at a slow pace.  We™ve also seen the 
trade
-weighted exchange value of the dollar fall slightly against other major currencies and the 
price of oil move irregularly upward.  So we have some reason to think that the two main forces 

that have driven down headline inflation and which might pose a threat to long-
term inflation 
expectations are abating. 
Measures of core inflation have ticked upward. 
In the University of 
Michigan survey, longer-term inflation expectations edged downward in April™s preliminary 

report but remain within their recent range. 
Between now and the June meeting, the information that we will receive may shed new 
light on jobs, retail sales, consumer sentiment, and the overall health of the manufacturing and 

nonmanufacturing sectors.  We will also have two new reports on trimmed mean PCE inflation 

and household inflation expectations. Several of the current uncertainties hanging over the world 
economy may be at least partia
lly resolved.  It seems to me to be well within the realm of 
possibility that the information we receive between now and June will warrant a policy response. 
I believe it is important, therefore, that a June liftoff remain on the table. 
While
, technically
, there is nothing in the language of a
lternative B that takes June liftoff 
off the table, I do have some concern.  I can readily imagine people in the financial markets and 

business press drawing the conclusion that June action is all but impossible, given the lack of 

foreshadowing in a
lternative B.
  This move in market expectations could prove to be an 
impediment to Committee action.  Therefore, the language in paragraph 3 of a
lternative C with 
the ﬁmay soonﬂ option is attractive, 
as it more clearly indic
ates that June remains a viable option. 
On the other hand, a
lternative B states the Committee™s intention to take timely action once its 
         
            
    
                 
  criteria have been met
.  With the possibility of continued uncertainty on both fronts, 
I support 
alternative B.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, although with a 
language change, which I will get to toward the end of my remarks. 
I first wanted to say that I agree with people that once w
e have removed the forward 
guidance, as we™ve now done, every meeting should be a live meeting in which the possibility of 

a change in the federal funds rate can be on the table.
  Having said that, though, we still have 
different assessments as to how like
ly it is that we think we
™re going to want to raise the federal 
funds rate target range in the next couple of meetings.  I, for one, don™t think it™
s very likely at 
all.  But I do 
believe
 that we should not do anything that formally takes it off the table. 
I wasn™t going to comment on this, but 
President Lockhart
™s 
thoughtful observations did 
provoke me to say a couple of things on how to begin moving forward.  I think I™m coming out 
in a somewhat different place, although only in a tentative way, and would 
like to hear other 
people™s views on this.  I™d be reluctant to put back into paragraph 3 at some point an indication 

that, one or two meetings from now, we are more likely to move.  T
he reason 
is, I think that 
becomes a form of calendar guidance of its o
wn.  J
ust as
, when we put in the quasi-
calendar 
guidance before, saying, ﬁWell, 
this isn™t really calendar
Šit™s all data dependent,ﬂ the markets 
all read it as calendar guidance
, I think the same thing is going to happen now if we put in 

language such as t
hat included in paragraph 3 of a
lternative C. 
My preference would be that we use paragraph 2 as the vehicle for beginning to 
communicate a change in the Committee™s collective view as to where the economy is headed, 

which
, it™s hoped, actually begins to, I would say, 
increase some volatility a little bit as people 
        
           
         
  
      
  
       begin to think 
liftoff
 is more likely but is not a done deal.  T
hat 
way, we don™t have a surprise at 
the meeting in which we eventually lift the target range, but it is not de facto occurring just by 
the inclusion of language in paragraph 3 at a meeting before we™
ve actually decided to lift the 
target range. 
As I said, my current view is that June is very unlikely as an appropriate time to increase 
the target range.  I thought that paragraph 1 as originally circulated a week or two ago actually 

hit about right the factual characterization of the economy.  It™
s fairly
 hard to argue with the 
proposition that the data w
ere 
rather 
disappointing and pretty bad, yet paragraph 1 began with 
something sayin
g that it was 
ﬁin part reflecting transitory factors.ﬂ  M
ost important, 
I think, the 
beginning of paragraph 2 communicates that ﬁAlthough growth in output and employment 

slowed during the first quarter, the Committee continues to expect
–ﬂ In other words, 
the basic 

direction of the 
Committee™s expectations ha
sn™t changed, notwithstanding the disappointing 
developments reported in paragraph 1. 
Notwithstanding the fact that I thought the original paragraph 1 got it about right, I
™m okay with most of the chang
es that have been made since the original language was circulated, 

although I wouldn™t want to see us going too much further to try to look for the cheery in a way 

that would obscure what™
s actually happened.
  The one exception, Madam Chair, is the 
sentence 
on inflation, which is the second-
to-last sentence in paragraph 1.  Back in March, that sentence 
said ﬁInflation has declined further below the Committee™s longer-run objective, largely 

reflecting declines in energy prices.ﬂ So the phrase 
ﬁlargel
y reflecting declines in energy pricesﬂ 
was, in effect, explaining how the decline had gone further below.  It was an explanation of the 

delta. 
                                
       
  
       
 I think the language that was circulated 
originally to the Committee a week or two ago is 
now in a
lternative A
, and the language is as follows: 
ﬁInflation continued to run well below the 
Committee™s longer
-run objective, largely reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and 
decreasing prices of non
-energy imports.ﬂ  There, the way I read it when that language wa
s circulated was that now this 
phrase 
ﬁlargely reflectingﬂ in effect explains the ﬁwellﬂ part
Šwhy 
it is ﬁwellﬂ below.  But as it
™s been modified, the sentence now reads ﬁInflation continued to run 
below the Committee™s longer-run objective, largely reflect
ing earlier declines in energy prices 
and decreasing prices of non-
energy imports.ﬂ 
I don™t think it
™s the case that all of the difference between the Committee™s target and 
where we are right now is explained based on the earlier declines in energy prices 
and decreasing 
prices of non-energy imports.  On the contrary, as many people pointed out yesterday and a little 
bit today already, we haven™t been hitting the inflation target for quite some time now.  And if 

you pull out housing inflationŠ
which
, of cour
se, is largely a function of rents imputed to 
homeownersŠthen you have an awful lot of continuing questions 
about how much inflation 
there is. 
As a factual matter, I think we should modify that sentence to say something like the 
following: 
ﬁInflation cont
inued to run below the Committee™s longer-
run objective, partly 
reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non
-energy importsﬂŠ
or something just making clear that that second phrase does not account for all of the difference 

betw
een the Committee™s target and where we are right now. 
Finally, like those who have gone before me, I would prefer removing ﬁat leastﬂ in the 
first sentence.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 
                   
                             MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Our March statement provided forward 
guidance only as far ahead as this meeting, and it effectively said we were going to go to a 
meeting
-by-
meeting
, data-dependent approach to decisionmaking.  From now on, that™
s the right 
thing to do, and I think 
tha
t™
s imp
ortant.
  This means we will not be in the business of 
telegraphing interest rate moves in the previous meeting™s
 statement.  I support the observations 
President Lockhart made on this.  A
n important corollary 
of that is that we should not be 
encouraging pe
ople to believe we won™t raise rates without having sent a telegraph on the issue 
in the previous meeting™s 
statement. 
Concerning 
alternative 
C as a stalking
-horse for future statements, I don™t feel the need to 
include language like that in paragraphs 2 or 3 
at a meeting prior to liftoff
.  So I agree with 
Governor TarulloŠevery meeting should be live, and we should, to the extent that we have the 

opportunity, condition people to expect that we could move without forewarning, perhaps.  
A critical aspect is today™s characterization of the economy
, especial
ly in the first 
paragraph.  As I said in the earlier round, a substantial amount of data is scheduled to arrive 

between now and our June meeting.  If those reports are reasonably close to what the Tealbook is 

forecasting, they
™re going to show a rebound in consumer spending growth, and they™re going to 

show a firming in the monthly inflation figures. 
In that case, there could well be a strong argument for raising rates in June.  Now, we 
don™t know for sure the data will come in that way, and we don™t know for sure there won™t be 

some looming concerns on the horizon that alter the outlook. We could find we™ve hit a more 

prolonged soft patch.  I
n that case
, we may be inclined to delay raising rates when we get to 
June, and I™m open to that possibility.  But, in view of the information we™
re going to get, I think 
it™s very important not to take June off the table. 
        
  
                 
   
         
          As I said, the critical aspect is how the statement characterizes the data, and that focuses 
attention on the first paragraph.  T
he revisions that were made between 
the 
beginning of last 
week and the end of last week in the first paragraph were good, important, and 
necessary
.  But I 
agree with President Mester that the first paragraph still has somewhat of a ﬁglass half
-empty
ﬂ tone, emphasizing the empty half of the glass I guess you™d say.  I support her suggestion for 
changing the characterization of household spending.  I 
also 
support Governor Tarullo™s change 
of ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpartl
y.ﬂ I think he™
s right on there. 
But I 
believe 
that the inflation sentence in 
alternative 
C is more balanced and fair
, as it acknowledges that inflation is no longer declining.  
It calls that out. 
Central bank communication i
s all about what you choose to call out, and I 
think it would be fair to call out that inflation isn™t declining
.  S
o I™d put that suggestion on the 
table. 
Regarding 
the phrase ﬁat least,ﬂ 
I™ve 
been wrestling with that in my mind.  Certainly, in 
a broad-brush kind of way, you can see how including it might make things a little more dour than 
they ought to be, as President Mester argued.  But, on the other hand, ﬁat least in partﬂ means 
that the amount that™
s attributable to transitory factors is 
ﬁin part
ﬂ or ﬁgreater than in part.ﬂ  F
rom 
that point of view, 
ﬁat least in partﬂ seems to me like a more upbeat assessment than just ﬁin part 

reflecting.ﬂ But I could be persuaded either way on that.  Those are my comments on language, 

Madam Chair.  Thank you very much. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank y
ou.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m going to make three comments here.  
First of all, I support President Kocherlakota™s call for a symposium on 
r*.  We could probably 
benefit from getting a lot of views on the table about th
is important parameter in our models
Š         
  
    
                 
    
        
  
  
   how we
™re thinking about it and how that thinking shapes policy choices.  So that would be an 
excellent thing to do, if we could fit that in at some point. 
That leaves me with two comments.  One is about building credib
ility for data
-dependent 
policy, and the other is about shading policy to prevent asset price bubbles.  On the credibility 
question, as we all discussed yesterday, recent data ha
ve been relatively weak.
  We have been 
trying to build credibility 
regarding 
a data-dependent policy 
being the basis for rate decisions 
as we go forward.  
I guess my assessment so far is that we have indeed built some credibility, even 
considerable credibility, 
regarding 
a data
-dependent policy rate for the period ahead
, despite the 
fact that we haven™t moved the policy rate for six and a half years.  And that™
s an achievement. 
Markets
Šappropriately
, in my viewŠmoved the likely date of liftoff back in response to 
weaker
-than-expected readings on the U.S. economy during the intermeeting period.  That™
s exactly what you™d expect to observe if policy is data dependent.  If we can maintain this type of 

credibility as the 
data wax and wane during 2015, we™
ll be in excellent shape at the time of 
policy liftoff, whenever that should arrive, in the sense that there will be few surprises in the 

markets at that juncture. 
The more we can do to convince people that we™re going to 
react to the data
 and be clear 
about what data we™re going to react to, the better off we™
ll be
.  I™m hopeful that the day of the 
first move will be an anticlimactic event because we have credibility that that
™s what we 
were 
going to do.  T
hen we make the 
move, and it™s pretty smooth.  I think we™
re well on the way to 
that, but we probably have more work to do during the spring. 
Let me turn to the second comment on the shading 
of 
policy.  The staff™s forecast is that 
there will be a smooth glide to the steady state.  This forecast envisions unemployment only a 

few ticks lower at the end of the forecast horizon in 2017 than it is today.  This is not my 
        
                   
          
    
     
    baseline forecast. 
I envision unemployment falling well into the 4 percent range over the 
forecast horizon,
 barring any large negative shock to the U.S. economy.  This is what happened 
in the 1990s and in the 2000s, and I think it™
s a good baseline forecast of what
™s going to happen 
again this time. 
Simultaneously, the labor market conditions index, which takes 
into account all aspects 
of labor market performance, will continue to rise far above its average value
.  So we
™ll be 
talking about, 
in the years ahead
, a very robust labor market performance when compared 
with 
metrics on past labor market performance in 
the U
nited S
tates
.  This is going to constitute a 
boom phase for the U.S. economy, notwithstanding this morning™s GDP report, which I think is 
going to prove to be temporary. 
The boom will be associated with about 3 percent growth, at least for a time, in the U.S. 
economy.  That 3 percent growth, while not stellar, is still about 1 percent higher than the 

potential growth rate for the U.S. economy.  T
his is very similar to the 1990s
, when we had years 
in which 
we were at 4
 percent in an economy that had a 3 
percent potential growth rate. We
™ll be growing at 3 
percent for a time in an economy that has a 2 
percent potential growth rate. 
Inflation will rise
, go through the inflation target, and be higher than 2 percent over parts of the 
forecast horizon. 
Duri
ng this period, interest rates will remain exceptionally low by historical standards. 
We™ve already committed ourselves to that by saying 
that
, even 
when 
we start to normalize, it 
would be very small and very gradual.  You could throw in that my view is t
hat this policy rate, 
as we
™re envisioning it over the next couple of years, 
will be below the likely natural rate of 

interest, the 
r* value.  I
n this sense
, we™re going to provide accommodation as currently 
                         
        
        
      envisioned all 
of 
the way through this boom phase for the U.S. economy.  This is how I™
m thinking about it. 
Now, the boom period, combined with exceptionally low policy rate settings, is a recipe 
for asset price bubbles.  Asset price bubbles have plagued the U.S. economy during the 1990s 
and 2000s and have been a major point of debate at this Committee over the p
ast 20 years. 

These bubbles are not in our models.  They were not in the past 20 years, they™
re not in our 
models today, and we don™t see any component of this in our standard presentations on w
hat we 
should do about monetary policy.  So we do not have a good understanding of where these 

bubbles come from or how to control them when they occur.  Furthermore, bursting asset price 

bubbles can have devastating consequences for the U
nited S
tates
 and the global economy.  It™
s no small matter if this thing gets going and develops. 
The basic strategy, in my view, should be to head off this kind of possibility.  We™ve had 
boom-and-bust cycles during the 1990s and the 2000s.  What you™d like to do this time around is 
not to 
have that boom
-and-bust cycle
.  Then you™ll get a longer expansion, and you
™ll 
get better 
outcomes for everybody. 
It™s true that we have an improved macroprudential stance today, and that 
will help 
mitigate some of the more severe consequences of a bursting bubble.  But untested 
macroprudential tools alone are, in my view, insufficient to rely on, given the exceptionally dire 

consequences of bursting asset bubbles not just for the U.S. economy, but 
also 
for the global 
economy. 
The prudent policy, in my view, is to combine our efforts on macroprudential policy with 
a sensible monetary policy that hedges our bets in the direction of prevention of the kind of asset 

price boom-and-bust cycles 
that we
™ve
 experienced during the 1990s and 2000s.  I think we 
      
   
                    
       
    
     
  
  
      should be shading in the direction of slightly higher interest rates than we would otherwise have, 
on the grounds that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure on this dimension.  We do
n™t 

have very good knowledge of what these bubbles are or how they form, so we should be hedging 

our bets on this.  This is an important reason to get going on a modest normalization program 

when the opportunity ar
riv
es, which I expect it will later this y
ear. 
Let me turn just to alternative
 B for a minute.  I support 
alternative
 B, 
as written, for 
today, without the ﬁat leastﬂ phrase 
in the first paragraph.  T
he ﬁin partﬂ covers the bases there, 
and I don™t think we need to add anything more to that. 
I do 
agree with President Mester™s suggested change. 
The wording ﬁG
rowth in 
household spending declined; household
s™ real incomes rose stronglyﬂ is a little bit jarring, and I 
like President Mester™s suggestion there that would smooth that out a little bit. 
I agree with Governor Tarullo and President Lacker that we should not try to reintroduce 
calendar
-dependent language as liftoff nears.  We™re trying to get away from that, so we should 
not try to do that.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  P
resident Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  President Kocherlakota made a good case for 
alternative 
A, and I™m sympathetic to his view, but I can support a
lternative B.  I continue to 
believe that economic conditions will most likely be consistent 
with an appropriate time for 
liftoff being sometime in 2016.  I currently think, based on data, that it will take until then for me 

to be reasonably confident that we™re on course to achieve our inflation objective within an 

acceptable time 
frame. 
The information we™
ve received since our 
March 
meeting has not changed my opinion on 
this.  Indeed, I™
m a little nervous over the latest data on activity and their implications for further 
                    
                            
             slower reductions 
in resource slack. The recent stabilization of energy p
rices and 
the 
dollar are 
positives.  But, 
as I discussed yesterday, I need to see a good deal more broad
-based, concrete 
evidence before being confident that underlying inflation trends actually are heading up with 
adequate momentum.  But, having said that
, we
™ll see how the data evolve. 
Let me make a couple of comments about other things people have mentioned.  I agree 
completely that we have moved to the point 
at which 
it™s a meeting
-by-meeting decision.  
They
™re all live decisions on the rate increase, 
so data conditionality, by itself, is all we need.  I 
don™t think we need special language, 
either
, to signal our intent. 
I agree completely with Governor Tarullo on the paragraph 1 language on inflation.  I had 
noted that myself.  T
he problem is that the 
previous iteration had talked about the gradientŠ 
inflation declining
Šand now it
™s a level concept
Šﬁcontinued to runﬂŠ
but it leaves the same 
factors in place. 
So if you add, as I think you said, ﬁ
part
ly reflecting earlier declines,
ﬂ that would 
take care of 
that.
  Alternatively, if you leave the language, you could also add ﬁand resource 
slackﬂ as part of the explanation, but the more minimal ﬁpart
lyﬂ would probably be better there. 
I™m indifferent on the language about 
household spending
 growth that Preside
nt Mester 
indicated.  I™
m a little worried that it
™s going to sound like 
the message you communicate 
when 
you go out and say, ﬁI support so-and-so 1,000 percent.ﬂ  When you say, ﬁHousehold spending 

continued to grow,ﬂ the alternative to that is a recession.  If household spending doesn™t grow, 

it™s a recession, so I
™m not quite sureŠbut, 
at any rate, that
™s fine. 
On ﬁ
consumer sentiment remains high
,ﬂ these are factually correct observations, 
but
 I™
m a little worried that it might be risky.  After all, we
™re thinking that the energy price declines are 
transitory.  Gas prices are going to go up, and we know that sentiment goes down when gasoline 

prices go up.  
So we might be providing a different bright line for people looking for a bright 
            
  
    
      
                 
     
  
  
    sign here.  Then, if you see that one go down, 
it might have a little more of an implication than 
we intend
.  B
ut otherwise, I don™t have a problem with that.  I support a
lternative B. 
Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B and the latitude it 
offers the Committee to consider a change in policy at its next meeting. 
In terms of guidance that we can glean from policy rules, the benchmarks in the 
Tealbook, Book B, continue to generally suggest 
that 
the funds rate should be higher than its 
current setting. Granted, the equilibrium real rate, or 
r*, we
™ve been discussing remains 
depressed and raises 
questions as to whether these benchmarks are providing appropriate 

guid
ance today. 
At the same time, common frameworks used to estimate 
r* also provide an estimate of 
potential GDP in which 
declines in 
r* go hand in hand with lower potential.  
For example, the 
current Laubach
-Williams framework indicates that 
the equilibrium real rate is negative, though 
it also implies that output is actually above potential.  So
, while policy should incorporate a 
lower equilibrium real rate into the appropriate setting of the funds rate, it also should not neglect 

the implications for potential GDP and the output gap.  For example, using the lower 
r* measure 
and positive output gap in the Taylor (1999) rule with inertia suggests a higher current funds 

rate.  The Taylor (1993) r
ule indicates a setting above 1 percent, even with the lower equil
ibrium 
real rate.
  I don™t take the positive output gap to completely reflect current conditions by any 
means, since some labor market slack remains.  However, this example illustrates 
that 
taking on 
board a lower equilibrium real rate may also imply a sma
ller output gap. 
      
              
          
              Finally, although this is not a decision for today, I note increasing uncertainty about the 
timing and effects of ceasing reinvestments.  I
™m a bit concerned in looking at the market 
participant surveys and noting that expectations on the 
timing of when reinvestments will be 
ended are quite diffuse. For example, a slight majority of dealers expect 
Treasury reinvestments 
to end in the first quarter of 2016, but then expectations are spread over the next four quarters 
into 2017.  This is somewhat concerning, especially given the risk highlighted in the QS report 

and recent IMF financial stability reports that longer
-term rates could increase sharply 
approaching liftoff.  Or the Committee could be facing another conundrum in which longer-
term 
rates 
remain low.
  I think we should try to manage some of this risk by providing more guidance 
on the timing of reinvestment, perhaps incorporating 
it into the SEP or perhaps just 
distributing it 
on an internal basis for our own use, to think about 
expectations on when we anticipate ceasing 
reinvestments.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Prichard. 
MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I view the evolution of the draft 
alternative 
B to finally contain entirely data-dependent language.  This is a very positive 
development and, 
I believe
, an essential step on the path to policy normalization.  I also interpret 
the language in alternative B as leaving our options open for beginning normalization at any 
future meeting 
as we are
 informed by incoming data. 
My biggest concern with a
lternative B is its overly weak interpretation of the current 
economic environment.  As I mentioned yesterday, expenditure-side data for Q1 over the past 

30 years appears to be suffering from poor and pe
rhaps incorrect seasonal adjustment.  An 
ind
icator that incorporates income
-side data, GDPplus, which was posted to 
the website of 
our Real-T
ime 
Data Research 
Center this morning, indicates that the first quarter may not be nearly 
             
              
     
    
          
   as weak as many of the 
nowcasts
 being reported.  GDPplus grew at 1.65 percent in the first 
quarter after growing 3.3 percent 
on a year
-over-
year 
basis
 in 2014:
Q4. 
Further, 
I suggest that the Committee consider
, now or in the future, 
simplifying its 
assessment of the labor market. 
Many labor market indicators paint a relatively healthy picture 
of the labor market.  F
or that reason
, I would favor deleting the third full sentence in 
paragraph
 1Šagain, either now or in the futureŠand simplifying it.  T
hat sentence begins with 
ﬁA range of labor market indicators–
ﬂ  This sentence is fairly imprecise, and it adds little to the 

meaning that is already embodied in the preceding sentence.  The idea would be to seek every 

opportunity to boil the FOMC statement down to its essence by eliminating sentences that don™t 

add particularly to meaning or understanding. 
I am otherwise supportive of the suggestion to eliminate ﬁat leastﬂ and 
of the other 
suggestions that have been made.
  Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Presid
ent Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B.
  Let me respond to 
some of the language suggestions first.  Like others, I would not include the phrase ﬁat leastﬂ in 

the opening paragraph.  That™s not needed.  It™s even unclear. 
On Governor Tarullo™s suggestion, I think he™s absolutely right.  I would put ﬁpartly 
reflecting earlier declines in energy pricesﬂ in the penultimate sentence in 
paragraph 1. 
That™s 
exactly right.  In the recent data, core is running about 1 per
cent.  O
verall 
inflation
 is running 
at around zero over the past couple of quarters, but 
it was 
obviously negative in 
the first quarter
.  There are a lot of factors going onŠPresident Lacker made this point, too.  T
hat™s just accurate 
and, 
I think
, better.
  Paragraph 2 is really 
the place in which we do the heavy lifting and explain 
how we interpret things. Paragraph 1 is really about the data. 
         
                              
  
    
   
     
   I™ll 
make a comment about data dependence in 
paragraph 1.  T
his is part of life. We™re in 
the data-dependent mode.  Paragraph 1 is going to describe the data.  We had only a month, 
really
, of data here.  This is a very small sample, but these are the data we have, and I think we 
have to just describe them accurately. 
The part of the statement 
in which we try to expl
ain how we interpret 
them 
is 
paragraph 
2. In that respect, 
I thought 
paragraph 2 did a nice job of making the point that, yes, the data 
have been weaker.  Yes, we™ve had th
ese 
factors in terms of inflation
.  But, basically
, our outlook 
hasn™t changed much.  I™m not concerned so much about the weakness or the signaling in 

paragraph 
1 as currently stated
, because I think that™s the way the data have been.  It™s just a 
small sample, and
, of course, we™ll get a lot more data bef
ore our next meeting.  So I™m fine with 
that. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo and others who™ve commented on where the future 
statements should go, obviously President Lockhart started us down that road.  I strongly agree 
with Governor Tarullo and, 
I think
, P
resident Evans 
as well as
 some others that we shouldn™t be 
going back to trying to put some quasi-
date
-based guidance in there.  That whole thing of how 
we have to take a couple 
of 
steps before we act is a kind of straightjacket we don™t want to get 
ourselves in. We™re in a good place now on our statements, and I wouldn™t want to see us move 
back to that. 
Now, my own view in terms of the outlook hasn™t really changed based on the data we™ve 
seen in the 
past month, 
which is similar to what 
others have mentioned.  
First
-quarter 
data seem 
to be distorted by some seasonal factors and other factors.  We™ve been down this road before.  

In terms of the inflation data, I haven™t changed my view there, 
either. I still have 
the 
view that 
inflation 
will come back over the next couple of years to our target. 
                    
                               
  But this is 
all 
forecast
, and we™re now in the data-dependent mode.  When I™m asked 
when I think we™ll be raising rate
s, I say,
 ﬁI might have a view on this, but I don™t know.ﬂ 
I try to avoid tal
king about June, September, December, or whichever year because it really depends 
on how the data 
come in
, how they influence our outlook, and what the right policy is. 
That™s a hard message for us to get across
, because we™ve been focused on June versus 
September versus December or whatever.  So I™ve been thinking a little bit outside the box here 
about how we can, beyond this statement, get to a more data-dependent approach.  
Madam 
Chair, I have a suggestion for you.  I made you a special T-
shirt 
[Laughte
r].  The message reads 
ﬁMonetary P
olicy Is
 Data 
Dependent.ﬂ 
CHAIR YELLEN.  How about one for everybody? 

MR. WILLIAMS.  I have a whole box of them.  You wear this around, and then I think 
that™
ll make the point pretty clear
.  We won™t have to worry so much aboutŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Fantastic. 
Love it. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you. 

MR. 
TARULLO. 
Have the softball team wear th
ose. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Another great idea.  Oh, I have one 
last comment I want to make
Š sorry
.  [Laughter] 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You can™t top that, 
John. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  No, I know.  Actually, 
President Kocherlakota
, I can
Šin this way.  I 
would like to second the comments of 
President Kocherlakota
 and 
President Bullard about 
having more of a discussion 
regarding 
the natural rate of interest, 
with 
r* e
stimates
 obviously 
being at the center of this.  I get a lot of feedback, pro and con, about this, and there is some 
                    
              
      
  
           literature developing on 
this besides just the Laubach
-Williams 
model.  So I really do think that 
having a further discussion about 
that wo
uld be helpful. 
The basic logic of Laubach
-Williams is actually pretty simple.  Over the 
past five years
, output growth 
has been averaging 2.3 percent
ŠI™m picking up on President Kocherlakota™s 
point yesterday about 
how L
aubach
-W
illiams
 works.  The 
trend
 growth in our model is 2.0 
percent
.  I think that™s consistent with most people™s views. So we™re getting growth of 
0.3 percentage point above trend over five years, while the real federal funds rate has been about 
minus 1.7.  The only way you can interp
ret this statistically is 
to think 
that the real rate gap
Š basically
, the 
amount of monetary stimulusŠis very modest over the p
ast five years, and this 
hasn™t changed in our model. 
What 
Laubach
-Williams is telling you is simple.  We™ve had negative real rat
es for five 
straight years.  Output growth has been just a smidgen above potential.  Therefore, 
there™s really 

not much monetary stimulus relative to the neutral rate going on.  This is something we should 
discuss further, but, 
basically
, that™s how the mo
del interprets the data.  If the equilibrium real 
rate really were 
2, growth would have been a lot faster than 2.3.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I had read about the T-
shirt in the 
media, and I™m glad to see the real thing in front of us. 
But the 
more 
serious thing 
is, President Williams summarized a number of people™s 
comments that we want to get away from being date 
dependent.  One challenge 
with regard to 
that is the way the 
Summary of 
Econom
ic 
Projections presents our policy outlooks.  That™s very 
date dependent.  In fact, that™s what I™m often asked about
:  ﬁBoy, it looks as though everyone™s 
saying 2015. What do you think about that?ﬂ  So it™s something to be thought about
.  I
f we™re 
        
         
    
                       really trying to get away from date dependence, I think that says something about how we want 
to be talking about interest rates in the 
Summary of 
Economic P
rojections as well. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  That™s a good suggestion.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FIS
CHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d like to first discuss briefly the inflation 
target issue that arose yesterday
, and then turn to the monetary policy decision and explain why I 
support 
alternative 
B. Yesterday President Rosengren
, supported by President Kocherlakota and one or two 
others, 
suggested raising the target inflation rate, a suggestion that™s also be
en made by 
Olivier 
Blanchard.  I believe 
that 
we should constantly be reexamining all 
of 
our assumptions about 
monetary policy and the behavior of the economy, but that, 
particularly in the case of targets, we 

need to be very careful about our public stance. 
With regard to our public stance, we fixed a target inflation rate in 2011 and announced a 
2 percent target in 2012.  The setting of a 
target inf
lation rate was a major achievement and
, to 
those outside the S
ystem
, a major surprise
.  We need to be very careful indeed about reopening 
that decision and that discussion. 
The argument for raising the target inflation rate is that the higher target would permit 
normal monetary policy to attain a more negative real rate of interest than is now possible.  That 

is true, but there™s not so far been public discussion of the negative aspects of a higher inflation 

target. 
The main cost, I believe, relates to Al
an Greenspan™s definition of the desired inflation 
rate as a rate such that inflation is not taken into account in routine economic decisions.
  In 
particular, at around 4 
percent inflation
, we very likely would see the return of indexation into 

relatively 
short
-term contracts, including labor contracts.  Monetary policy becomes much more 
difficult in heavily indexed economies, in part because the inflation rate typically becomes more 
                  
        
    
  
      
               
  variable the higher the indexation rate and 
because 
the probability that t
he dynamics of inflation 
become unstable increases. 
A second cost relates to the credibility of the inflation target and of the F
OMC
.  It is possible that we should, at some future point, 
raise the inflation target
.  But if we 
go out now and 
start a public discussion about the inflation target, we will undoubtedly be asked why we™re 
raising the target and what the effects of doing so are likely to be.  
There are answers to these 

questions, but the answers may well reduce our credibility precisely at a time when reasonable 

people regard us as the most credible and most professional of the macro policymaking 

institutions in the United States. 
WeŠthat is, the participants in this meeting
Šshould not take that risk.  We should not 
go public with any doubts that we might have about the goals of monetary policy.  At the 

moment
, we™re in the middle of the process of trying to normalize monetary policy.  We should 
always be reconsidering our policy framework, but there are times to go public and times not to 
do so.  That is why our discussions of the target inflation rate should continue within the Federal 
Reserve System and within the Committee, and that is why it is fine that Eric raised the issue in 

yesterday™s go
-round, but we should not go public with that discussion. 
Turning now to the monetary policy decision, yesterday™s discussion, 
in which almost 
every participant said, 
rightly
, that 
the key issue is whether first
-quarter weakness i
s transitory or 
a signal of a longer-term weakening of growth, and this morning™s announcement 
of the first 
estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth make it clear that we should wait before making a decision 
to change the interest rate. I say that while bearing in mind an almost true maxim I once heard:  

ﬁThe situation is never clearer in the future.  It™s just unclear in a different way.
ﬂ  [Laughter] 
         
      
       
       
        
           
    I support 
alternative
 B, in which the first three paragraphs do a good job of showing that 
we are watching the data carefully
, and that the probability of a June liftoff has declined, but that 
June remains on the table. As weak as the incoming data have been and as threatening as 
the 
many black clouds that are out there 
are, it remains important to keep June as a possible liftoff 
date.  How could it be possible?  Well, we™ll receive two more employment reports before the 

June meeting.  If we see very high payroll gains in April and May and if the unemployment rate 

comes down to, say, 5.3 percent while the spending data firm as expected, it would be reasonable 

to argue 
for liftoff. 
Some might suggest that we should wait just a little longer to be sure
, since September 
isn™t really that different from June
, to perfect our communications about liftoff or to reexamine 
the tools we intend to use to raise the interest rate.
  That would mean that even in the face of very 
good data, the June versus September decision would be a close call.  But in making that call, 
we 
need also to take into account the importance of our credibility, which would require us to act 
when the conditions for acting that we have set out are fulfilled. 
Turning to the bigger picture, my views on when to lift off were influenced by the very 
helpful paper that was sent to this Committee in January by 
Oliver d
e Gr
oot, 
Etienne 
Gagnon, and Robert 
Tetlow
, whose results I quoted in the March FOMC meeting.  In that paper, they 
compared the probabilities that policymakers might regret their decisions under early and late 
liftoff scenarios.
  Using random draws from historical shocks, they show that the probability that 
we would fall behind the curve and wish that we had tightened sooner was negligible if we go on 

the early side but 
was close to 
10 percent if we wait a year longer
.  In contrast
, the difference 
between the probabilities that we would need to retrace our steps if we go earlier, 10 
percent, 

rather than later, 
5 percent, w
as not as great. 
        
        
              
           
       
Now, it™s a very good paper, but it™s not obvious where we are today relative to going 
early or
 going late.  Nonetheless, all in all, I found that analysis very useful, and it helped 
persuade me that we should seriously be contemplating lifting off soon.  It further helped 
convince me that ﬁ
early and gradual
ﬂ is a much better approach to raising the 
interest rate than 
ﬁlate and steep.
ﬂ  Of course, in the event, 
we may have to raise the rate faster or slower than we 
anticipate, but, 
at this stage
, we have to work with expectations. 
I™d also like to relate to the argument that we™re only in this relati
vely good position on 
employment and 
this 
potentially good position on inflation because the interest rate is so low, 
and that, therefore, we should not move anytime soon.  It™s undoubtedly true that the U.S. 

economy would not be in this relatively favorable position if the F
OMC
 had not moved rapidly 
after Lehman Brothers to the zero lower bound and then undertaken three rounds of QE 
as well 
as Operation Twist.  I believe history will show that the 
Federal Reserve
Štogether with the 
decision to recapitalize 
the banking system, in which the Treasury and the Congress played 
critical roles
Šsaved the United States from a second Great Depression. But we need to realize 
that, at some point, we have to put the interest rate back into action as a tool of monetary policy.  

In so doing, 
we™ll not only begin to activate a more normal way of undertaking monetary policy, 
but we™ll also be sending an extremely important signal to businesses and households that, 
after 

seven years
, the American economy is ready to exit the Great Recession and begin the return to 

normal. 
When should we do this?  The answer is, we should do it w
hen an interest rate higher 
than we have now is still consistent with 
the closing of the output gap.  I believe that, on the 
inflation rate
, the 
staff 
forecasts we heard yesterday from Bill Wascher are far less pessimistic 
than what I™ve heard around this table this morning.  I
t™s true we™ve got negative inflation in the 
          
           
  
    
                         
  
   first quarter, but it™s very important to note that forecasts of core PCE inflation 
are somewhere 
well above 1 
percent, and that when you take the special factors into account, it™s expected to 
rise not to 0.7 percent, but to 1.7 percent, which is very close to target. 
We should also note that even the 
r* in the Tealbook, Book B, is about 110 basis points 
above our current real federal funds rate, suggesting that a sooner liftoff would not be 
incompatible with further progress toward our goals if the situation improves.  Or, to put the 

criterion in the words of 
alternative 
B, we should move when the Committee ﬁ
has seen further 
improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 

2 percent objective over the medium term
.ﬂ  And I expect that will happen reasonably soon.  
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B.  On the 
statement
, I support taking out ﬁat leastﬂ and changing ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpartly.ﬂ 
More broadly, paragraph 1 initially struck me, and continues 
to strike me
, as fairly 
downbeat.  But what saves it for me is this comment about how household real income is rising 

strongly, which I think really sets out our narrative for just how much we™re counting on 

consumer spending and is a pretty strong statement in a context of weak spending.  
So, overall, 
it achieves a level of balance, and I™m fine with it with those changes. 
In terms of forward guidance, I™ll just add that I 
believe 
it™s a very bad idea to surprise 
the market with l
iftoff.  I would avoid calendar-based guidance.  I would let the data speak.  I 

would let the statement
, the minutes, 
and the speeches speak. 
I do think the market will get it. 
It™s very unlikely that the people in this room would be approaching a decision to lift off the 

interes
t rate
, with all 
of 
the attention we™re getting, and that this would be a surprise to the 
        
         
     
   
                    
  
   
          
   market.  T
hat™s incredibly unlikely. 
In fact, my guess 
is, as we approach that, it™s not going to be 
a surprise to the market, 
in light of 
all of 
the transparency and all of the attention being paid. 
More broadly, I think that policy is right where it™s supposed to beŠlooking at incoming 
data to see whether the liftoff narrative still holds together, that narrative being reasonable 
growth that is strong enough to support further improvement in the labor market at a meaningful 

pace and inflation moving up to 2 
percent in the medium term. 
The sense I had at the beginning of the year was that the labor market would continue to 
heal fairly quickly in a context of moderate growth, and I thin
k there™s a better
-than-
even chance 
that something like that narrative will reemerge as we leave the first quarter behind, just 
as it did 

in 2014.  
So, as I said yesterday, I feel good about where the current Tealbook forecast is, and 
I consider that to be still on the same path we were on
Ša little bit slower, but a reasonable path. 
I do have to admit I have a concern now, though, that the speed limit on U.S. growth may 
now be closer to 2 percent than 3 percent, because of the drag gen
erated by
 the behavior of net 
exports, and that improvement in the labor market will also slow down as a result.  TimeŠand 

dataŠ
will tell
.  Monetary policy can respond and really has already done so through 

expectations.  It may 
limit further tightening bu
t doesn™t feel 
as though 
it can reverse 
the 
tightening 
in financial conditions that we have already experienced. 
In the case of returning closer to the old path that had strong job growth, we™re close to 
the natural rate.  Monetary policy works with long lags.  Zero isn™t the right number.  This 

remains for me a very satisfying approach if we do get back to that path, and, 
again, that™s my 

modal case. 
The lower path is just much tougher. We™re still close to the natural rate. We™re still 
eliminating slack
, but at a much slower pace, and I think 
that, 
more important, 
the economy is 
       
                      
              more vulnerable to an unwanted tightening 
in financial conditions and probably in a nonlinear 
way. 
I would still want to lift off, just a little bit later
.  But I would point 
out that the 
communication challenges and the risks are much less attractive. 
I™d be very happy to see data come in that would justify liftoff in June or at any meeting 
subsequent to that
.  But, 
having resisted predictions so far for the most part, I™ll co
ntinue to do so 
today.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  I support a
lternative B.  It seems appropriate for the 
statement to recognize that incoming data ha
ve shown softness across a range of 
spending 
categories
, in industrial production as well as in labor market conditions. 
Although there is reason to believe that some of the weakness reflects transitory factors 
or statistical noise, my best guess is that some of it also reflects a more persi
stent slowing in 
economic momentum.  In particular, the negative effects of dollar appreciation and weakness in 
activity abroad on net exports and business investment, as well as the negative effects of earlier 
oil price declines on drilling and mining, appear to be greater than expected, and the boost to 

consumption has not materialized. 
This softness of recent data
, along with the advance estimate of GDP, 
leads me to favor 
removing the bracketed ﬁat leastﬂ language from the first sentence. 
I also support Governor 
Tarullo™s modification to the sentence on inflation.  T
hat is simply a more accurate statement. 
By the same token, reflecting our uncertainty about the persistence of these effects, it is 
appropriate to include mention of some continuing positive economic signals, such as the 

relatively high level of consumer sentiment.  For that reason, I support the additional words in 
        
  
           
            
        
       paragraph 2, which stress that, 
despite the weaker data, the Committee continues to expect the 
economy to expand at a moderate p
ace. 
For those who worry 
that p
aragraph 1 is too downbeat, I would note this is significantly 
counterbalanced by the fact that a
lternative B makes few changes to 
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the 
March statement, including importantly reiterating that the risks to
 the outlook and the labor 
market are nearly balanced rather than emphasizing downside risks in light of recent data. 
In my view, the incoming data, on balance, do not suggest we™re appreciably closer to our 
two conditions for liftoff.  The incoming data on the labor market do not provide evidence of 

further improvement.  If anything, the softer tone of the aggregate spending data raises the 

possibility that labor market improvement may stall this year.
  My reading of the data on 
unemployment, labor force p
articipation
, and the number of employees working part time for 
economic reasons is that slack remains.
  Nonetheless, we™ll have two additional labor market 
rea
ding
s to help with our assessment before the June FOMC deliberations. 
Meanwhile
, the modest improvement we™ve seen in putting a floor under inflation falls 
short of our standard of reasonable confidence.  We™ve seen some encouraging movement in 

core CPI, although core PCE remains persistently soft relative to our 2 
percent target. 
The recent 
firming
 of oil prices and the recent 
plateauing 
in dollar appreciation raise the possibility that we 
might be seeing an inflection point
, but further appreciation seems likely
, accelerating wage 
growth has 
yet to materialize, and market
-based measures of 
inflation expectations remain soft, 
although they™ve shown some improvement as the price of oil has firmed. 
It™s possible that the data we 
will 
receive 
in the coming months 
will reveal the weakness 
in the data to have been a temporary aberration, and that momentum in underlying activity is 

undiminished.  It could also be that incoming data and economic developments abroad will show 
                  
     
                  
       
 foreign activity to be on more stable footing than now appears to be the case.  
If so and if price 
inflation 
and 
measures of in
flation expectation
s show further signs of firming, then liftoff could 
be appropriate.  On balance, my assessment is that
, although June should remain on the table, the 
probability of liftoff has shifted from June to later in the year.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLE
N.  Thank you.  
Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.
  I support a
lternative B.  Given the 
slowdown in growth, the weaker payroll trend, and a host of other weak economic data, I think 

it™s unlikely, speaking for myself, that I™m going to see su
fficient news in the next seven weeks 

that™
ll cause me to want to lift off at the June FOMC meeting.
  That said, I wouldn™t rule it out 
completely
, because, as 
Governor 
Fischer makes clear, it™s possible that we could see two strong 
employment reports and a big upturn in economic activity.  So we could get there.  I just don™t 

think that™s very likely at this point. 
I hope the economy is going to cooperate and is going to make a September liftoff 
feasible, but I 
don™t even 
really have that much confidence about that, 
either. 
The Tealbook 
forecast is actually interesting now in the sense of how flat the unemployment rate trajectory is. 

So modest shortfalls in growth could actually cause the unemployment rate trajectory to be 

completely flat or even tick up.  In that case, we might not find ourselves yet 
able to pass the 
ﬁfurther improvement in the labor market
ﬂ test. 
I think that 
ﬁfurther improvement in the labor marketﬂ and ﬁreasonably confident [about] 
inflation
ﬂ are really good tests, and I feel very comf
ortable using those 
when 
speaking about my 
own views in terms of the tim
ing 
of liftoff
.  We should talk about that in speeches and make 
those our criteria, and that will help the market participants think along with us. 
       
                                
   
     
             
In terms of language, I™m with every
one else. I would delete ﬁat least.ﬂ  I™m not that 
confident that it™s all due to transitory factors
, so 
I think ﬁat leastﬂ goes a little too far. 
With respect to President Mester™s suggestion to change the sentence about consumption, 
I believe 
the meanin
g is the same. 
MS. MESTER.  The meaning is the same. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Given 
that 
the meaning is the same, I guess I prefer to go 
with the more parsimonious number of wordsŠ
a more direct approach.  So I think 
I prefer what 
we have. 
MS. MESTER.  I 
think second derivatives are harder to understand. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo™s ﬁpartlyﬂ versus ﬁlargely,ﬂ 
I think you really could go either way.  You think about the gap between our target of 2 
percent 

for inflation and where we 
are. 
My judgment would be 
that
 about two-thirds of that gap is due to 
lower energy prices and the stronger dollar, so about one-third is due to other things.  You could 
call that ﬁlargelyﬂ if you wanted to
, or you could call that ﬁpartly.ﬂ 
It™s really wh
at the 
Committee wants to communicate in terms of how concerned they are about inflation being low 
that should drive whether you want to be ﬁ
largely
ﬂ or ﬁ
partly.
ﬂ  I would slightly favor ﬁ
partly
ﬂ because I™m not as concerned about inflation today as I was six weeks ago, but I™m happy to 

accept the judgment of the Committee. 
With respect to the statement, I™m really glad that we™
re now in a data-dependent place, 
and I don™t feel bad about that in the slightest.  The market should be able to think along with us 

as they see the data
, as long as they can interpret them through the prism of labor market 

improvement and 
whether we are
 becoming reasonably confident about the inflation outlook 

over the medium term.  
If the market starts to diverge from what our expe
ctations are, there 
are 
                    
     
                        
       
 plenty of forums in which to remind people of what the data mean to us in terms of those two 
criteria.  I think we can easily pull the market back. 
Lastly, Chair 
Yellen 
opened the meeting by recognizing Chris Cummings
, so I want to 
close my remarks similarly.  I want to acknowledge Chris™
s service to the New York Fed
, the 
Federal Reserve System
, and this Committee.  On several occasions during the crisis
, Chris was 
forced to sit in this chair and provide the New York Fed™s views on monetary policy, and she did 

that very ably.  We hope that will never have to happen again. 
In terms of Chris™
s contributions to the 
System, they™re very large.  She™s been a great 
colleague to me and to many others throughout the Federal Reserve System.  I™ve heard many 

people comment to me over the past few days and weeks about how much they™re going to miss 

her and how important she™s been in contributing to the Federal Reserve System writ 
large, as 
opposed to just the New York Fed.  She embodies, in my mind, the modern central banker 
in that 
she has a 
very deep and broad portfolio, ranging from 
serving as p
roduct d
irector for the 
Wholesale Product Office to chairing the Financial Stability Board™s Cross
-Border Crisis 
Management Group.  That™s a pretty wide span of responsibilities. 
I want to thank her personally for her wise counsel and support during my tenure.  And, 
of course, I wish you the best in all 
of your future endeavors.  [Applause] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thanks, everybody.  
First of all, 
let me acknowledge 
that I 
heard the support for 
a Committee discussion about 
r* and the factors influencing it, and I also 
think that™s a good idea
.  W
e™ll work with Thomas and others to see if we can put that together.  
It™s a great idea. 
I heard
, in gene
ral
, broad-based support for 
alternative 
B for today, and we have a few 
language issues to review.
  First, starting at the top of 
paragraph 1, we have the bracketed ﬁat 
         
       
               
   
               least,ﬂ and I actually heard a large number of people who suggested we not include the bracketed 
ﬁat least.ﬂ
  Let me give anybody who wants it in there an opportunity to say 
so.  President 
Lacker
, I heard you support putting it in there, but are there others?  [No response] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Then I will
Š MR. LACKER.  I c
ould support deleting 
it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great. 
So we will remove the bracketed ﬁat least.ﬂ
  The next 
change suggested was President Mester™s recommend
ed change in the language about household 
spending.  Just to remind you, she suggested changing the words ﬁGrowth in household spending 

decline
dﬂ to ﬁ
Household spending continued to grow
, although at a s
lower pace.ﬂ 
I heard a little 
bit of support, not a great deal, and a couple of people 
were opposed.  Let me just ask
ŠI think I 
heard two supporters in addition to 
President Mester.  Is there widespread support for that 

change?  If so, please indicate if you support that change. 
MR. FISCHER.  I do. 
PARTICIPANT.  I support the change. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I see 
three
 people who are supportive.  And how many are 
opposed?
  [Show of hands]  Okay.  I™m going toŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Chair™s prerogative. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Chair™s prerogative
.  I think leaving it as is
, rather than going with the 
suggestion, is, frankly, my own preference. 
Finally
, we have Governor Tarullo™s 
suggested change
.  That would be in the ﬁinflationﬂ 
sentence, the next
-to-last sentence in 
paragraph 1, and the suggestion is to change ﬁlargely 
reflectingﬂ to ﬁpartly reflecting.ﬂ 
I did hear quite a bit of support for that.  Personally
, I™m also 
               
  
   
      
                
   open to making that change, but let me see what people think who didn™t weigh in on that.  H
ow 
many people wouldŠ
President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  C
ould I ask a clarifying question? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sur
e. 
MR. EVANS. 
Vice Chair
man
 Dudley, you mentioned two-
thirds o
fŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  That would be my characterization. 

MR. EVANS. Was that 
of 
headline inflation or 
core? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Headline 
is zero
.  Core is running about 1.3-ish on a 
year
-over
-year basis
. MR. EVANS.  So you™re saying two-thirds of the low headline inflation. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Yes, exactly. 

MR. EVANS.  Ye
s.  That™s fair. I agree. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It refers to inflation.  It doesn™t refer to core inflation. I 
think you can argue it either way, frankly. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Inflation is running about ¼ 
percent.
  Core is running about 1.4 or 
something like that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.  So about two
-thirds of the gap is in these transitory 
factors
, and about one
-third is
Š MR. EVANS.  When I s
ay inflation
, I™m thinking underlying inflationŠ
something closer 
to coreŠso that™s why I 
believe 
ﬁpartlyﬂ is important
.  But you™re right.  If this was nailed down 
and 
it said headline inflation
, that would be okay.  At any rate, I support Governor Tarullo™s 
recommenda
tion. 
             
          
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
            CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. 
Let me see support for Governor Tarullo™s suggestion.  [Show 
of hands] 
I see broad
-based support.  Is there anyone who feels strongly opposed?  Okay.  So let 
us also make that change. We will change the word ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpart
ly.ﬂ
  And those are all 
of 
the suggestions that we need to review, s
o I think we™re ready, Matt
. MR. LU
ECKE.  The vote will be on a
lternative B 
as depicted 
on pages 7 and 8 of 
Thomas™
s handout, with the changes of taking out the words ﬁat leastﬂ in the fir
st sentence and 
replac
ing ﬁlargelyﬂ 
with 
ﬁpartlyﬂ in the penultimate sentence in 
paragraph 1
.  It will also cover 
the directive on page 12 of Thomas™s handout. 
Cha
ir Yellen 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
Governor Brainard 
Yes 
President Evans 
Yes 
Governor Fischer 
Yes 
President Lacker 
Yes 
President Lockhart 
Yes 
Governor Powell 
Yes 
Governor Tarullo 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You should have your gavel.  [Laughter] 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
Okay.  
We need 
to confirm the date of the next meeting, which is 
Tuesday and Wednesday, June 16 and 17.  Thanks, everybody, for your participation.  The 

meeting is adjourned. 
END OF MEETING 
      
                                                                
    
 ________________ Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on 
April 28
Œ29, 2015 A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 28, 2015, at 

1:00 p.m. 
and continued on Wednesda
y, April 29, 2015, at 9:00 a.m.  Those present were the 
following: 
Janet L. Yellen, Chair 

William 
C. 
Dudley, Vice Chairman 
Lael Brainard 

Charles L. Evans 

Stanley Fischer 

Jeffrey M. Lacker 

Dennis P. Lockhart 

Jerome H. Powell 

Danie
l K. Tarullo 
John C. Williams 
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, and Eric 
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee 
Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Helen E. Holcomb and Blake Prichard, First Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of 
Dallas and Philadelphia, respectively 

Thomas Laubach, Secretary and Economist 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary 

David 
W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary 
Michelle 
A. Smith, 
Assistant Secretary 
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Eric M. Engen, Michael P. Leahy, and William 
Wascher, Associate Economists 
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 

Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account 

Robert deV. Frierson,
1 Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market Committee and t
he Board of Governors. 
                             
                           
  
       
         
   
 ________________ Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of 

Governors 
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Governors 
James A. Clouse and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors 
William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, 
Board of Governors 
Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider, and Stacey Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board, 
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of 

Governors 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 

Michael T. Kiley, Senior Adviser, 
Division of Research and Statistics, and Senior 
Associate Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 

Governors 
Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, 
Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and 

Statistics, Board of Governors 
Joshua Gallin, Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci,
2 Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board 
of Governors; Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, 

Board of Governors 
Jane E. Ihrig
1 and David López
-Salido, Deputy Associate Directors, Division of 
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

Edward Nelson, Assistant Director, Division
 of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Eric 
C. Engstrom, Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Penelope A. Beattie,
1 Assistant to the Secretary, Of
fice of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
2 Attended the portion of the meeting following the joint session of the Federal Open Market Committee 
and the Board of Governors. 
                                    Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Katie Ross,
1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors 
Jonathan E. Goldberg, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 

James M. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

James J. McAndrews, Executive Vice President, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 
Troy Davig, Michael Dotsey, Evan F. Koenig, and Spencer Krane, Senior 
Vice 
Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, 
respectively 

Todd E. Clark, Sylvain Leduc, Giovanni Olivei, Douglas Tillett, and David C. Wheelock, 
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, San Francisco, Boston, Chicago, 

and St. Louis, respectively 
Kei
-Mu Yi, 
Special Policy Advisor to the President, Federal 
Reserve Ba
nk of 
Minneapolis 

Matthew D. Raskin, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Jame
s M. Egelhof,
1 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York 
                   
             
  
      Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on 
April 28
Œ29, 2015 April 28 Session 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Good afternoon, everyone.  I™d like to welcome back First Vice 
President
s Holcomb and Prichard, who will again be representing Dallas and Philadelphia, 
respectively. 
On a sad note, my understanding is that this is the last FOMC meeting for New York 
First Vice President Chris Cumming.  Chris has attended 92 FOMC meetings, 70 of which she 
attended as an alternate voter
.  And, as all of you know, Chris has been involved in a wide array 
of 
System work over many years in all facets of what we do and has been a very wonderful 

colleague.  Chris, I really thank you for your service and want you to know that you will be very 

much missed.
  [Applause] 
Next, I™m pleased to let you know that Brian Madigan has agreed to return to the Board™s 
Division of Monetary Affairs as 
deputy d
irector
, reporting to Thomas, effective June 1.  I think 
all of
 you know that Brian served as d
irector 
of the 
division 
and as FOMC 
secretary
 from 2007 
to 2010.  
Since he retired from the Board, Brian has been a visiting professor in the Department 

of Economics at Georgetown 
University
. Now, as I think many of you know
, in recent years
, the job of 
director 
of 
the Division of 
Monetary Affairs has become increasingly burdensome.  It has entailed serving as the 

Committee™s chief monetary policy advisor, as s
ecretary of the FOMC, and as leader of a large 
organization with c
ritical responsibilities.
  As part of a strategy to create a more sustainable 
situation, Brian will have oversight responsibility for the FOMC Secretariat and will play a key 

role in the production of the minutes and transcripts of FOMC meetings.  Obviously, 
these are 
things he has done superbly well in the past and for which he is eminently well qualified. 
                           
                               
                                                           
  Accordingly, I intend to propose that Brian be appointed by the FOMC as its s
ecretary
.  Unless there are objections, I will 
ask the 
FOMC 
Secretariat to send out a request 
in early June 
for notation 
votes to select Brian 
as our 
secretary
.  Under this 
arrangement, Thomas will 
continue 
to serve as 
the 
Committee™s primary advisor on monetary policy and will also be able 
to 
dedicate more of his 
energy to ensuring that 
the Division of 
Monetary Affairs fulfills its critical 
role 
in supporting our monetary policy and other responsibilities. 
Okay.  Now, 
the first two items 
on our agenda 
today will be 
considered in a joint meeting 
of the FOMC and the Board of Governors, and, accordingly, I need a motion to close the Board 
meeting. 
MR. FISCHER.  So moved. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection.  O
ur first item is financial 
developments and open market operations, and let me call on Simon to delive
r the 
Desk report. 
MR. POTTER.
1  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Lorie and I will split the briefing into 
three parts. 
First, I will review financial market developments. Next, Lorie will 
review Desk operations.
 Finally, I will discuss staff work on enhancing 
the 
calculation methodology for the federal funds effective rate. 
Over the intermeeting period, domestic financial conditions eased following 
more
-accommodative-
than
-expected U.S. monetary policy communications and 
weaker
-than-
expected
 economic data, including the March employment report.  
On net, nominal Treasury rates declined by as many as 25 basis points, the S&P 500 
index gained 2 percent, and the DXY dollar index decreased nearly 3 percent. 
A substantial portion of these changes came around 
the time o
f the March FOMC 
events, which were characterized as 
being 
more
 accommodative than expected 
despite the removal of ﬁpatientﬂ language from the statement. 
Investors pointed, in 
particular, to the large downward shift in the target 
federal funds 
rate projections 
in 
the SEP 
and, to a lesser extent, the downward revisions to Committee participants
™ projections of inflation, GDP growth, and the longer-run unemployment rate.  
The 

left column of your top-
left panel shows 
that nominal and real interest 
rates declined 
in the one-hour window around the statement and SEP releases
, while measures of 
inflation compensation rose, equity prices increased, and the dollar weakened. 
As shown in the right column of the table, the absolute magnitudes of these moves 
were 
1 The materials used by Mr. Potter and Ms. Logan are appended to this tran
script (appendix 1). 
             
            
    
         
           
     
         
     very large relative to changes in one-hour windows around FOMC statement releases 

over the past decade. 
One hypothesis for seeing moves of this magnitude could be decreased market 
liquidity. Indeed
, late in the trading session outside the window use
d to measure 
these FOMC announcement effects, there was a very large move in the euro
dollar 
currency pair.  The move pushed the intraday trading range for the currency pair to 

over 4 percent, a 5 standard deviation move over the period since 2004, as shown in 

the top-right panel.  The size of the move is comparable to the 6 standard deviation 

range in the 10
-year Treasury yield on October 15, both of which took place amid 

very high volumes.  
The March FOMC events shifted out expectations for the timing of 
liftoff 
according to the Desk surveys, as shown in the middle-left panel.  
The ﬁflashﬂ survey, 

taken 
three 
business days after the March FOMC meeting
, suggests that most of the 
shift occurred in response to the meeting and the large price moves in the hou
r 
following the March FOMC 
statement release
, therefore likely reflect
ing shifting 
policy expectations as opposed to outsized liquidity 
effects
.  Since the flash survey, 

soft domestic economic data and speeches from Federal Reserve officials appear to 

have further solidified this shift in policy expectations. 
The April surveys also showed a notably slower expected pace of policy 
normalization after liftoff. 
The middle
-right panel shows that the probability 
distribution for the pace of tightening in the fir
st year after liftoff, assuming no return 
to the zero bound, shifted toward a slower pace over the period, the first notable shift 

in these views since 
the question was originally asked last September.  
A similar shift 
occurred in the distribution of the expected pace of tightening in the second year after 

liftoff. 
In considering when the Federal Reserve will begin to normalize monetary policy, 
market participants are particularly focused on the outlook for inflation and the 

Committee™s reasonable confidenc
e that inflation will move back to its 2 percent 

objective.  
We asked survey respondents to score the importance of various factors 
they believe the Committee will use in assessing whether reasonable confidence in 

the inflation outlook has been achieved.  As shown in the bottom-left panel, 

respondents assigned the most importance to a further improvement in the labor 

market and the absence of weakening in realized core inflation.  
Over the intermeeting period, market-
based measures of inflation compensation 
increased alongside higher energy prices and a weaker U.S. dollar, as shown in the 

bottom-right panel.  Forward measures of inflation compensation increased at both 

shorter-
and longer
-dated horizons but remain below levels at the end of 2013.  
The 
increa
ses over the period were attributed to the March FOMC communications, 
somewhat higher-
than
-expected 
realized inflation, the increase in oil prices, and 
positioning dynamics in the TIPS market.  Longer-
term inflation expectations from 
Desk surveys were little changed over the period.  Meanwhile, front-month Brent 

crude increased nearly 22 percent but remains more than 40 percent lower since the 
      
   
               
          
            
       
   
                        
  end of 2013.  
As I noted, the DXY dollar index declin
ed nearly 3 percent over the 
intermeeting 
period but is over 20 percent higher since the end of 2013. 
Despite the depreciation over the period, market participants expect the exchange 
value of the U.S. dollar to continue its broad appreciation amid ongoing monetary 

policy divergence across major economies.
 Desk dealer survey respondents reported 
that dollar appreciation seen since last summer has prompted them to revise lower 

their forecasts for 2015 growth and inflation, with the median markdowns to 2015 

GDP growth and core PCE inflation of roughly 40 basis points and 20 basis points, 

respectively. 
A key factor contributing to broad dollar strength has been widening global 
interest rate differentials, especially between the 
United States
 and the 
euro area. 
These interest rate differentials became more pronounced as 
euro-
area sovereign rates 
have traded increasingly negative and yield curves have flattened substantially. 
The 
top-left panel of your next exhibit shows the extent of 
negative rate trading
 by country and maturity. 
 Red indicates that 100 percent of the bonds in that category 
trade at a negative yield, while green indicates that none trade negative. 
Despite the continued decline in 
euro
-area rates and the increasing universe of 
securities trading at negative yields, there have been few market
-functioning issues, 
and the ECB has stated that it has had little trouble achieving its purchase targets thus 

far.
 Even so, it is possible that market functioning strains will emerge over time, and 
to help address such strains, the ECB unveiled details of an augmented 
securities
-lending program aimed at supporting bond and repo market liquidity. 
The declines in 
euro-area rates, coupled with the very large currency depreciation 
and increase in equities, have s
ubstantially eased European financial conditions since 

President Draghi™s remarks at 
the 
Jackson Hole symposium last August.  
It is interesting to compare the asset price reaction 
with
 recent LSAP programs.  Using the 
price changes from when asset purchase
 expectations began to form until three 

months after the purchase programs were announced, the 
ECB™s PSPP and B
OJ™s 
QQE, shown in the left and middle columns of the top-
right panel, 
respectively, 
contributed to significant currency depreciation and meaningful equity price 

increases. The ECB™s program resulted in large declines in German nominal forward 

rates, but 
it has not been accompanied by an increase in longer
-dated 
forward 
inflation measures
.  In comparison, Japanese policies supported a large rise in 
forward inflation compensation and a pronounced increase in equities, perhaps 

stemming from the focus on reaching the new higher inflation target.  By contrast, 

U.S. asset price reaction
s to 
LSAP3 
were
 more limited, as the right column showsŠ 
though it did have a large effect in the mortgage markets, which is not included in the 

panel. 
One potential flashpoint for 
financial markets is the highly fluid situation in 
Greece. While Greek asset prices
 have responded sharply to recent developments, the 

broader market reaction to perceived downside risks in Greece has been relatively 

muted and perhaps a bit complacent.  
Market participants attribute the lack of 
          
  
                  
               
    
     
                
       
  
             spillovers to institutional improvements in 
the euro area, reduced 
private
-sector 
exposure to Greece, and the effects of ECB asset purchases. 
Reflecting the mounting 
liquidity pressure from deposit flight and bank funding strains, Greek banks have also 

increased their borrowing via the emergency liquidity assistance program to 

•76 billion in April from •69 billion in March.  
As would be expected, Greece™s 

Target2 liability, which represents balances owed to others in the E
urosystem
, rose in 
March, shown in the middle-
left panel. This level is near Greece™s prior peak Target2 
liability in June 2012.  It is uncertain how long the Greek government will be able to 

meet its debt obligations. 
Some market participants still expect an agreement 
between Greece and its creditors to be reached but only after
 a high-
stakes game of 
brinkmanship.  
Steve will further discuss Greece in his briefing. 
Shifting to emerging markets, there has been a very sharp increase in Chinese 
equities over recent months, shown in the middle-
right panel. Over the intermeeting 
period, mainland Chinese and Hong Kong equities rose by 23 
percent 
and 16 percent, 
respectively, and, 
over the past year
, the Shanghai Composite has more than doubled.  
Mainland equity outperformance 
came despite a worsening domestic economic 
outlook and proba
bly involved some speculative dynamics, though it was supported 
by expected and actual monetary policy easing.  
During the intermeeting period
, the 
People™s Bank of China 
cut their reserve requirement ratio 
by a larger
-than
-expected 
100 basis points; most contacts expect additional cuts to reserve requirements or 

decreases in lending and deposit rates in the near 
term. 
Equity prices in other emerging markets also increased
, and, as shown in the 
bottom-
left panel, broader EM asset prices rose, partially retr
acing prior period 
declines.
 The moves were supported by the accommodative March FOMC 
communication as well as a moderate abatement of risks in a number of countries, 
including Brazil and Russia.  
This partial retracement of emerging market asset prices 
came despite continued markdowns of expected growth in several countries.  
These 

markdowns and recent U.S. dollar strength have contributed to a broader trend of 

emerging market currency depreciation since the May 2013 JEC testimony or 
so-called 
taper tantr
um. 
Some market participants are concerned that taper tantrum
Œlike volatility in 
emerging markets could materialize as the Federal Reserve approaches normalization. 

Recall that implied volatility in emerging market currencies rose sharply with U.S. 

interest rate implied volatility in spring 2013, shown in the bottom-
right panel, and 
has recently moved back to similar levels.  Decelerating emerging market growth and 

rising corporate leverage, as well as volatility in commodity prices may make 

emerging markets vulnerable as normalization nears. However, these risks are 

somewhat offset by lower emerging market asset valuations and reportedly more 

cautious positioning fro
m emerging market investors, as discussed in the special QS 
memo. 
Volatility in emerging markets is only one part of broader financial market 
volatility that some worry could ensue from expected Federal Reserve normalization.  

Indeed, a senior IMF official 
recently warned of a ﬁsuper taper tantrum,ﬂ 
in which 
              
     
                                        
     negative term premiums 
would be rapidly decompress
ed as domestic policy rates are 
increased; Thomas will comment more on this risk in his briefing.
 Given the 
punctuated bouts of recent realized volatility in the very deep and liquid markets I 

discussed earlier, financial market volatility during normalization could be even more 

challenging for relatively illiquid markets. 
I will now take questions before turning to 
Lorie. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  No questions? 
Lorie. 
MS. LOGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll start 
with
 exhibit 3 and provide an 
update on MBS reinvestments, discuss testing of normalization tools, and conclude 

with the staff recommendation to extend the existing central bank liquidity and swap 

arra
ngements. 
The Desk™s MBS reinvestment operations continue to go smoothly, 
and MBS 
market liquidity remains stable.  
The continued trend 
toward higher prepayment 
speeds in March was largely an ongoing result of the low mortgage rates witnessed 

earlier in th
e year and has pushed the current monthly reinvestment amount up to 
approximately $40 billion, as shown in the top-left panel of your third exhibit.  

Despite the increased size of reinvestments, we do not anticipate having any issues 

with the execution of MBS operations, but we have increased the frequency of our 

operations to accommodate their larger size. 
Testing of the Federal Reserve™s overnight and term RRP operations continued 
over the intermeeting period.  Patterns of total RRP demand remained broadly 

consistent with recent experience, as shown in the top
-right panel.  
The additional 
25 counterparties that began participating in operations on March 16 have only 

modestly 
affected
 overall RRP usage. 
For broader perspective on the Federal Reserve™s 
involvement in reverse repo 
activity, this panel also includes reverse repos conducted with foreign official 

institutions, known as the ﬁforeign RP pool,ﬂ shown in gray.  The size of the foreign 

RP pool is notably above its pre-
crisis levels, largely a ref
lection of central banks™ 
desire to hold greater dollar liquidity buffers, while at the same time they are 

tightening their counterparty 
risk
-management
 frameworks.  Increases in the foreign 
RP pool this period, and since the beginning of the year, have been primarily driven 

by a single customer who has sought to increase the liquidity profile of its FX 

reserves 
due to precautionary 
financial
-stability motivations, in part by raising its 
cash balance 
held 
at the Federal Reserve. 
The Desk conducted two term operations over March quarter-end, the first a 
$75 billion, 14
-day operation and the second a $125 billion, 7-day operation, 

summarized in your middle-left panel.  This $200 billion offering in term RRPs 

reduced the Federal Reserve™s overall RRP offered am
ount spanning quarter-
end to 
$500 billion, down from the $600 billion offered at year-end.  However, the reduction 

did not appear to have an adverse 
effect
 on markets or meaningfully change 
participation, likely because the amount offered was perceived to still provide ample 
           
      
   
    
                     
   
           
         headroom above expected demand.  The 14-day operation was modestly 

oversubscribed, with $81 billion in propositions and a stop-
out
 rate of 9 basis points, 
a slightly higher rate than was expected.  
The 7
-day operation conducted on March 30 
was undersubscribed
, with $101 billion in propositions submitted and a stop-
out rate 
at the max offering rate of 10 basis points, similar to the rates on the undersubscribed 

operations held closer to year
-end.  Substitution between overnight and term R
RPs 
and the breakdown of counterparty demand at the March term operations were 

broadly similar to behavior observed in December. 
As shown in your middle-right panel, the Desk™s RRP operations continued to 
provide a soft floor under short-
term interest rate
s, even around quarter-end.  
The 
federal funds effective rate averaged 12 basis points over the period and printed at 

6 basis points on quarter-end.  While rates and volumes in unsecured 
markets
 over 

quarter-end were broadly in line with expectations, temporary funding pressures in 

secured markets
 were much larger than expected, with the overnight GCF repo index 

for Treasury collateral, shown in the dark blue line, printing at 45 basis points. 
Further, the dispersion in repo rates increased notably.  For ex
ample, the spread 
between rates on overnight Treasury GCF repo and 
triparty 
repo widened 
considerably on quarter-end.  This spread, shown in your bottom-
left panel, reached 
30 basis points on quarter-end.  
While all the factors that drove the larger
-than
-expected widening between repo rates are not fully understood, institutions with 

stable access to triparty repo funding appeared to demand increased compensation to 

intermediate between triparty cash lenders, like money funds, and GCF borrowers, 

such as sma
ller or less creditworthy dealers. 
It should also be noted that the spread between GCF and triparty repo rates has 
been gradually widening over the past several months even outside quarter-end.  
This 
trend is likely partially driven by financial institutions modifying behavior in 
response to regulatory changes and associated higher costs to intermediate between 

triparty and GCF repo markets. 
Looking forward, pursuant to the resolution adopted at the March FOMC 
meeting, the staff proposes conductin
g term RRP tests over June quarter
-end. 
For the June quarter-end, we suggest a slightly different approach to 
the 
public 
communication about the term RRPs than was used in December and March.  As 

outlined in your bottom-right panel, the Desk proposes to re
lease a statement shortly 
after the April FOMC meeting minutes on May 20 that would note the tentative 

intention to offer at least $200 billion of term RRPs in addition to capacity 
of 
overnight 
RRPs for the June quarter-end.  Based on our experience with t
he March 
term operations, we believe that $200 billion in term RRP capacity over June quarter-

end, in combination with at least $300 billion capacity in overnight 
RRP, should 
provide sufficient headroom on total RRP availability, assuming no change in the 

target range.  Further, we would propose noting in the statement that the Desk would 

release the remaining details on Monday, June 22
Šthat is, after the June FOMC 
meeting. 
        
   
     
  
                   
   
  
       
       
     
       
            
        We would thus come back to the Committee with a recommendation of the exact 
size and
 maximum offering rate for each operation at or shortly after the June 
meeting.  This communication approach could be replicated in future quarter-ends 

and should provide the market 
with 
confidence in available supply around quarter-
ends, but, 
importantly
, retain some flexibility to adjust the specific parameters of the 
operations should the Committee decide to lift 
off. 
In order to maintain operational readiness with the TDF
Šboth within the Federal 
Reserve and 
among banksŠthe staff is developing plans to resume a routine, every-
other-month testing schedule that would be similar to that employed prior to the 

series of special larger test operations conducted over the 
past year. Offering rates, 
counterparty limits
, and other terms of these operations would b
e set so that the scale 
of such testing operations would be modest.  The tentative plan is to announce and 

resume the routine periodic testing beginning next month. 
Additionally, the work on implementing changes to the methodology for 
calculating interest 
payments is proceeding according to schedule.  Comments on the 
Federal Register 
notice 
are due by the middle of May.  
If there are no major issues 
raised by those comments, the staff should be in a position to implement the new 

methodology before the June 
FOMC meeting as planned. 
Your fourth exhibit begins with the focus of some market participants over the 
intermeeting period on the discussion of normalization tools 
that appeared 
in the 
March FOMC minutes.
 Contacts specifically highlighted the discussion concerning 
temporarily elevated capacity for the ON RRP facility. 
In the Desk™s April surveys, 
respondents were asked to provide their expectations for both the level of the daily 

aggregate cap and level of ON RRP demand around the time of liftoff. 
As sho
wn in the top-left panel of your final exhibit, 10 respondents expected there 
to be no cap on the ON RRP facility immediately following liftoff.  Among those 

respondents expecting a cap at liftoff, the median expectation was a cap of 

$500 billion, and all anticipated that ON RRP demand would be at or below the cap.  

Across all respondents, regardless of whether they expected a cap, the median 

expected level of ON RRP demand immediately after liftoff was $300 billion, 

unchanged from the March survey. 
However
, many respondents did update their expectations for ON RRP demand 
from the previous surveyŠ
both immediately after liftoff and 
one- and 
three
-years 
ahead.  Expectations shifted in both directions, with a number of participants moving 

their expectations by several hundred billion dollars, perhaps pointing to significant 

uncertainly about the likely level of 
take
-up. 
Respondents were also asked about 
their 
expectation
s for the variation in ON 
RRP demand over various time horizons.  They expected the variability of the ON 

RRP demand around the time of liftoff to be more elevated than recent experience, 

largely due to uncertainties over the mix of overnight and term RRPs 
as well as how 
      
    
   
    
    
    
                       
              
          
      
   
    regulatory reforms might 
affect money markets when rates rise from the zero lower 
bound. In terms of the expected levels of money market rates at liftoff, the median 
estimate across respondents for the level of the federal funds effective rate was 

35 basis pointsŠ
very close to the center of the expected target range. 
The April 
surveys also asked respondents for the probability 
they attach to the level of the 
effective rate averaging within certain ranges during the month following liftoff.  
As 
shown in the top-right panel, respondents assigned very high probabilities to the 

effective rate 
being within the target range and only a negligible probability to the 

effective 
rate 
being outside the range. 
Finally, as discussed in the memo sent to the
 Committee on April 15, we would 
like to ask the Committee to vote on the authorization to renew for another year the 

standing liquidity swap arrangements with foreign central banks and NAFA swap 

arrangements. 
While the liquidity arrangements were authori
zed for an indefinite 
period in October 2013, the FOMC has the ability to unilaterally terminate its 

participation with 
six months™ notice. 
This is similar to the NAFA swap 
arrangements with Mexico and Canada, which are renewable annually on or before 

Dec
ember 15 of each year and require 
six 
months™ notice to terminate. 
The use of liquidity swap lines recently has been sparse, as shown in the middle-
left panel, with demand limited to regularly scheduled 
seven
-day dollar auctions held 
by the 
Bank of Japan
 over year
-end and March quarter-end.  
While this is consistent 
with relatively calm conditions in 
dollar funding markets
, we believe the swap lines 
are an important liquidity backstop, helping to maintain stability and confidence in 

global funding markets.  Additionally, liquidity swap and NAFA swap arrangements 

are tangible and constructive signals of cooperation among central banks, and their 
attendant costs are minimal.
 Liquidity swap arrangements also support the approach 
that the Federal Reserve along 
with other major central banks have endorsed that 
there are ﬁno technical obstaclesﬂ to central banks™ capabilities to provide liquidity 
quickly to a systemically important financial market utility. 
Therefore, the staff 
recommends that the Committee vote to renew the liquidity swap lines and NAFA 

arrangements. 
I will now turn back to Simon to discuss the calculation methodology for the 
effective funds rate. 
MR. POTTER.  Thanks, Lorie.  As detailed in a memo circulated in advance of 
the meeting, the staff has assessed that there might be some merit in changing the 

calculation methodology underlying the federal funds effective rate concurrent with 

the change in data source to the 
FR 2420.  We are interested in the Committee™s 
initial feedback on this 
assessment. 
As you a
re aware, the federal funds effective rate is currently calculated as a 
volume-weighted mean.  That is, each observed transaction rate is weighted by the 

share of total volume transacted at this rate
, and the effective rate is the sum of these 
                         
    
             
                      
 weighted rates.
 The distribution of volume by rates for a particular day from the 
FR 2420 data is shown in the middle-
right panel. 
The 
staff
™s 
assessment is that it may be more appropriate to calculate the effective 
rate as the median (
that is
, the 50
th percentile) of the distribution rather than its mean. 
As shown in the bottom-left panel, the volume-
weighted median generates a statistic 
that is the same as
, or very close to, 
the mean at most times
 except for 
the crisis 
period.  However, on tho
se occasions 
when
 the mean and median do differ 
significantly, the 
staff
™s 
preliminary analysis shows that the median is typically a 
better measure of broad money market conditions across a wide range of situations.  

Moreover, the median is much more robus
t to invalid data.
 In general, for an invalid 
transaction to 
affect
 the median, it must have a large volume attached to it, while the 
mean can be moved by an invalid transaction that has a more typical volume and rate.  

The s
taff believes this characteris
tic of the median would enhance both the integrity 
of the effective federal funds rate as a reference rate as well its credibility as a 

monetary policy instrument. 
 We look forward to your views on this subject, and, 
based on your feedback, the 
staff may p
resent a plan to move forward at the June 
meeting.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  T
hat concludes our remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Are there questions or comments
, particularly in 
response to Simon™s request for comments on the federal funds rate?  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I found 
that 
the staff memo and also the 
memo to Reserve Bank r
esearch 
directors
 made a pretty good case, 
to my min
d, for using the 
volume-weighted median.  I
t™s a better measure of financial conditions for all the reasons that 
you went through, Simon.  
In addition, it™s more difficult to manipulate. 
What 
I mean 
is, in 
theory, 
any trade moves a mean, whereas to move the median
, it either needs to be 
fu
rther 
away 
or bigger.  Anyway, I think it is a good case, and I guess I have two questions 
relating to 
when 
we do ﬁ
socialize
ﬂ this to the public, 
which we may not have the answers 
to today.  One is, 
will a 
median versus a mean have a differential effect on existing contracts
, of which there are many 
trillions?
  Two is, I™d be interested to hear how market participants react to this mean
Œmedian 
thing. 
I think that the potential cost that™s laid out in 
the memo is that of successfully 
communicating 
it to the public.  I don™t really see that as an insurmountable concern.  I mean, 
                       
       
   
  
    
    
                 
  
      very few people even know what the 
effective 
federal funds rate is in the first place, and the kind 
of people who know that ar
e probably able to tell the difference between a 
volume-weighted 
mean and a median if they want to and need to.  I don™t see that as a big thing, but I would 
certainly be sensitive to the views of market participants on that. 
MR. POTTER. 
In terms of the c
ontracts that are written on the 
effective 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate, if we were to pursue this, there would be a long lead time 
during which 
the market 

participants would know that the change is coming.  We would have to weigh the effect that that 

would have, an
d it would have some effect because the median is not always equal to the mean, 

but many of these contracts average over a long period of time.  
So occasions on particular days 
when 
we do see differences 
are
 probably not going to have a large 
effect
 on tho
se contracts. 
What they will be perhaps more interested in is the level of rates that you™ll be setting in 
the future.  If you think about a contract in 2016, that™s going to be very heavily influenced by 

where they think you™ll be setting the target rate. 
The
 kinds of issues to do with the gap between 
the mean and the median are very second-order, compared 
with
 that.  They also have to think of 
things 
like
, ﬁWhere would the 
effective 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate
 be trading in the range?,ﬂ and so on.  
I don™t believe this change is anything 
of 
first
-order importance for 
a contract, and it™s pretty 
typical for the uncertainty that market participants face overall in terms of trading in the fed
eral 
funds market
, which 
we know some large participants have 
left
 and s
ome other participants 
could leave in the future, 
affecting where the federal
 funds 
rate 
trades 
in the range. 
On the market participants™ knowledge of this, I agree that many people probably don™t 
know that much about the detailed calculation of 
the effective 
federal funds rate.  Those who do 
would find it pretty understandable, I believe, that we switch from a volume-weighted mean to a 

volume-weighted median, partly because one of the things that we do know is 
that 
the mean is 
       
                                    
        quite heavily influ
enced by a small transaction at a rate 
that 
is far away from where most of the 
volume is. 
MR. POWELL.  That™s helpful. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments?  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I
n the 
LIBOR 
case, the issue about really 
small changes in LIBOR from what was perceived to be a correct LIBOR pricing was considered 

a big issue. 
Here you™ve got a picture of 
a 20 or 40 basis point difference.  I
t gives me a little bit 
of pause that the people 
who
 are contracting on this might be upset by this change. 
MR. POTTER. 
In the crisis period, particularly as the balance sheet got larger, we didn™t 
have that much control over the fed
eral
 funds 
rate
, and that was an event that really was 
exogenous to the calculation method.  Whichever calculation method we would have used, there 

would have been more variance at that time.  If
, arbitrarily
, the Federal Reserve
 had turned up on 
one day and sa
id, ﬁWe are going to change that calculation method,ﬂ without any kind 
of 
forewarning, that would make payments flow differentially to what people expected.  The plan 

here is
, if there is support f
or moving forward 
with
 this, 
it will be clearly communicated well in 
advance, and it will be the type of consideration that all market participants should have to take 

into account when pricing contracts. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments?  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL. 
Well,
 I have a question now.  This 
refers 
to the expectations about the 
size of the 
ON RRP facility 
post-
liftoff. 
This is anecdotal, but it sounds like there™s a systematic 
difference between 
buy-side 
participants
, who tend to be predicting a larger facility, and primary 
                      
        
      
    
     
   dealers
, who are predicting something more in line with what the Committee has been thinking 
of saying.  
Is that accurate? 
MS. LOGAN. We do see some distinction between the two.  The median for the dealers 
is 
$190 billion at liftoff for demand.  For the buy side, 
it is 
$350 billion.  T
here is some variation, 
but there is variation within the dealer estimates as well.
  But I think you are correct that the buy 
side is skewed a bit higher. 
MR. POTTER. 
There is variation within the same 
firm
. MR. POWELL.  Are we incl
ined to attribute more or less weight to the buy side? 
MS. LOGAN.  I don™t think there™s anything in the commentary that would suggest the 
buy side has some better analytics of understanding that from what we™re reading in the 

commentary.  As Simon said, even within firms, we™re hearing the numbers to be quite different.  

In the survey, we did find that some firms had produced written reports that had different 

expectations than 
those 
who
 filled out the survey, 
so I don™t think there™s any additional 
knowledge or analytics that the buy side is drawing upon. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions or comments?  [No response]  Okay.  Then let™s turn 
to swap arrangements.  We have a proposal to renew both the NAFA swap arrangement with 

Canada and Mexico and a proposal to renew the liquidity swap arrangements.  L
et me first ask 
whether there are any questions or comments on these proposals.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d like to respectfully dissent again 
on the 
foreign swap arrangements.  
The 
Richmond 
Reserve Bank has dissented on these swap lines 
going back 20 years on the grounds that they facilitate inappropriate actions by 
the Fed
eral 
Reserve
.  One is sterilized foreign exchange operations, which are inappropriate for reasons I 
       
   
                
                     
   
    
                                                              spoke about in January.  The other is channeling intergovernmental assistance to our 
NAFA 
partners, among others, who may be well deserving of such assistance, but that constitutes fiscal 
policy that™s best left to fiscal authorities
, in our view.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Any other comments or questions?  [No response]  Okay.  Hearing 
none, seeing none, we need two separate votes
.  I™d like to first ask
Šand this is an FOMC 
voteŠon the renewal of the NAFA swap arrangements with Canada and Mexico.  All in favor? 

[Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed? 
MR. LACKER.  Opposed. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker is opposed. 
Okay.  I think that passes, and, second, 
I™d like to ask for a vote on the liquidity swap arrangements.  All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes] 

Any opposed? 
MR. LACKER.  Opposed. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Okay.  We need one more vote to ratify 
domestic open 
market operations
. Is there a motion? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Any opposed?
  [No response] 
Okay. 
We will consider those 
approved 
as well
.  Next, I think we™re going to move to our second topic, which is normalization 
procedures, and I™m going to call on Ellen Meade to provide 
a briefing. 
MS. MEADE.
2  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  I will be referring to the handout 
labeled ﬁMaterials for Briefing on Governance Issues Associated with Liftoff.ﬂ  
When you commence the normalization process, the Committee will set the 
stance of policy by announcing the new target range for the federal funds rate.  In 
addition, as you™ve discussed previously, the Committee and Board will set the 

administered rates
Šthe IOER rate will be set to the top of the new target range and 
the ON RRP rate will be set to the bottom of the new target range.  The Federal 

Reserve will also announce the details associated with the capacity of the ON RRP 
2 The 
materials 
used by 
Ms. Meade 
are 
appended 
to this 
transcript 
(appendix 2). 
            
                                      
    
          facility and the discount rate, which will be set at a spread above the top of the federal 

funds rate target range. 
Earlier this month, you received a memo outlining possible arrangements fo
r enhanced reporting of market developments and the governance of decisions on 

operational adjustments to the administered rates around the time of liftoff.  In the 

early days after the liftoff announcement, it may be somewhat difficult to get a clear 

pict
ure of how normalization is proceeding because it may take several days for some 
participants in money markets to adapt to the new market environment.  For example, 

money market participants may need to revise investment guidelines, counterparty 

limits, or other restrictions on their allocation of 
funds 
so that they are able to engage 
in the arbitrage opportun
ities available after liftoff. 
Even if the federal funds rate initially lies below the Committee™s new target 
range, you may judge that the prudent course is to monitor developments while giving 

money markets some time to adjust.  During these early days, you may find it useful 

to 
prearrange
 briefings during which the staff could provide updates on market 
developments and assess the effectiveness of pol
icy implementation, and you could 
ask questions.  For example, you could schedule daily briefings for perhaps the first 

two weeks following the liftoff announcement; such briefings could be held via audio 

or videoconference.  These briefings would not be F
OMC meetings
, so no transcripts 
or minutes would be prepared.  Should you wish to express your views about market 

developments or discuss whether to adjust the target range or the administered rates, 

the briefings could be readily converted into joint meetings of the Committee and 

Board.  If the liftoff process does not proceed as planned and the funds rate is 

persistently outside its new target range, then you would presumably wish to discuss 

the timing and course of possible policy actions, and the scheduled briefings would be 

replaced by joint videoconference meetings. 
As discussed in the memo we sent you, the FOMC and Board may also 
wish
 to 
establish decisionmaking procedures that would govern small operational adjustments 

to the administered rates after the first tw
o weeks or so following the liftoff 
announcement.  Adjustments to these administered rates could be helpful if the 

effective federal funds rate were persistently outside its new target range. The memo 

did not discuss the advantages or disadvantages associ
ated with adjusting the IOER 
and ON RRP rates, either separately or together, relative to the new target range for 

the federal funds rate.  The memo focused on the governance of any such 

adjustments, and we provided two approaches for you to consider. 
Under the first approach, each adjustment would be approved by a vote of the 
Committee or Board.  The Chair could convene a joint FOMC and Board meeting via 

videoconference at which you could discuss potential changes to the administered 

rates; all policymaker
s would be involved in the discussion of changes to the IOER 

and ON RRP rates.  Following that discussion, the FOMC would vote on any change 

to the ON RRP rate, while the Board would approve any change to the IOER rate.  A 

variation on this approach would involve policymakers using SDS to submit 

comments on proposed adjustments to one or both of the administered rates, with 
       
           
      
  
        
   
                      
   
    
          
           
 approvals for changes to the ON RRP rate and/or IOER rate recorded via notation 

votes by the FOMC and Board, respectively.  While this would be operationally less 

burdensome than holding a meeting, and would not require the preparation of 

transcripts and minutes, it would not allow for an interactive discussion and, as a 

result, might be most appropriate for relatively straightforward adj
ustments that the 
Committee had previously discussed. 
Under the second approach, you would delegate to the Chair authority to adjust 
the ON RRP and IOER rates, subject to limitations established by the FOMC and 

Board.  If the first couple of weeks of the normalization process had proceeded 

smoothly and you felt comfortable with the delegation approach, one of the staff 

briefings could be converted to a meeting at which you would formally take the 

decision to delegate authority.  You might prefer this approach to ensure that the 

Federal Reserve is able to respond quickly should market conditions warrant.  This 

delegation would allow the Chair to make small adjustments to the administered rates 

if deemed necessary to keep the federal funds rate trading in its 
new target range.  As 

an example, the memo suggested that the Chair could be authorized to make 

adjustments of perhaps 5 or 10 basis points in the administered rates and 
also 

indicated that policymakers could determine in advance whether they preferred to 

address such a situation by adjusting the IOER rate, the ON RRP rate, or both rates in 

parallel in order to maintain a constant spread between them. There may be some 

communications advantages associated with the delegation scenario in that it would 

clearly separate your decisions on the stance of policy
Šthe target range for the 
federal funds rate established by the FOMC
Šfrom small technical adjustments to the 
administered rates necessary to achieve that policy stance. 
The final page of your handout lists the questions that were distributed with the 
memo for today™s go-round on governance issues.  Another memo that was 

distributed at the same time concerned the setting of the primary credit rate.  The 

lending rate for primary credit was originally set in 20
03 at 100 basis points above the 
Committee™s target for the federal funds rate.  The spread was reduced twice during 

the financial crisis, and has stood 50 basis points above the top of the federal funds 

rate target range since February 2010.  The memo discussed two options for the 

setting of the 
primary credit rate spread:  maintaining that spread at 50 basis points 
above the top of the Committee™s new funds rate target range at the time of liftoff and 

for some period thereafter, or raising the spread to 1
00 basis points at the time of 
liftoff.  During the go-round, you may also wish to share any views you might have 

on that issue.  Thank you; this concludes my prepared remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Before we turn to questions for Ellen and our go-round, I 
would like to just make a few remarks of my own.  
At the outset, I want to emphasize that 
although our policy tools, by law, have different governance structures, the overall conduct of 

monetary policy is obviously the purview of the FOMC.  The gov
ernance issues before us this 
                           
                   
       morning really don™t concern the determination of our intended stance of monetary policy.  
Rather, this discussion pertains to the narrow issue of how to make tactical adjustments to our 

policy tools to deliver the intended st
ance of policy. 
We have spent a great deal of time and effort in devising our framework for 
normalization, and I am highly confident that it will work. But it is clear that when the time 

comes to raise the federal funds rate, we will face unprecedented un
certainties, and we need to 
stand ready to make adjustments, if needed.  It is important that we agree on an approach for 

managing both the initial phase of liftoff and the process for subsequent adjustments that may 

conceivably be needed once that initial 
phase is complete. 
The staff memo proposed that, 
for the first two weeks or so after liftoff
, we set aside time 
on our calendars to receive frequent market updates and, if necessary, hold meetings to make 

adjustments to our tools through the Committee and Board votes.  During this time, the FOMC 

may need to reconsider the setting of our tools, including the administered rates, parameters of 
the overnight RRP facility, and the use of term tools.  I just want to make clear that
, in my own 
view, decisions during this initial period should not be delegated to me. 
The FOMC and Board should vote on adjustments that are deemed necessary after 
debating the relevant policy considerations and alternative approaches.  For example, if the funds 

rate is trading soft relative to the target range, the Committee should decide whether to raise both 

rates, keeping 
the 
IOER

 RRP 
spread
 constant, or to instead adjust only one of the rates.  
These decisions are not entirely tactical or routine.  My expectation, however, is tha
t after some 
initial period, which the memo is guessing might be two weeks, we will have a reasonably good 

sense 
regarding
 how our approach is working, and only minor adjustments, if any, might be 
subsequently needed to keep the federal funds rate in the t
arget range. 
              
   
         
  
    
         
   
Assuming that our approach works roughly as expected, such intensive monitoring on the 
part of the Committee shouldn™t be necessary beyond this initial phase.  We ought to be able to 
settle into an arrangement in which
, at most
, modest adjustm
ent to our tools, especially to the 
administered rates, will be called for to keep the federal funds rate in the target range.
  I hope 
that such adjustments, if they prove necessary at all, can be made in a simple and efficient 

manner.  From a practical pe
rspective, I tend to favor an approach in which authority is delegated 

to me as 
Chair to make modest adjustments, perhaps up to 5 or 10 basis points, to the IOER and 

overnight RRP rates to help maintain the federal funds rate 
in the Committee™s target range. 
These adjustments would be in accordance with a strategy pertaining, for example, to the spread 

that had been decided by the Committee.  In such circumstances, I would, of course, keep the 

Committee fully apprised of ongoing developments.  If any problems in implementing policy 

emerge
d, clearly we would need to convene a meeting. 
I would expect the Committee to decide on any such delegation only at a time when we 
feel we have a good sense for how our approach is working and n
ot at the time of liftoff. Of 

course, if many of you are not comfortable with such an arrangement, we will have to, as Ellen 

indicated, work out a method for holding Committee and Board votes, likely by notation voting, 

and possibly on short notice, to ma
ke these potential modest adjustments once the first couple of 
weeks after liftoff have passed.
  Regardless of the approach we agree on, it 
will be important that 
it serve
s to reinforce rather than undermine market confidence and our normalization approach.  
Let me stop there.  I very much look forward to hearing your views.  W
e have now scheduled a 
full go-round, soŠ
Vice Chairman
 Dudley. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
So I am going to make a forecast that we are all going to 
agree that
, at least for the first few 
weeks
, we are going to want to have some sort of 
a discussion 
            
        
             
  
        
       if the funds rate is trading outside the target range.
  If we are going to do that, I have a couple of 
questions of the staff.  
At w
hat time of day would it be most appropriate to have those meetings? 
How would it work in terms of having the meeting, making the decision, notifying the marketsŠ 

what would the timeline look like as you are carrying that forward?  Because the memo didn™t 

really get into the mechanics of how you would actually implem
ent this.  I was just curious if 
there is any thought given to that at this point. 
MS. MEADE.  I think that we were trying to be optimistic when writing the memo
.  So we were thinking about the first couple of weeks or so as being briefings and not being about 

decisionmaking. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Let™s say they were 
about decisionmaking.  When will 
you know enough in the day to have a meeting, to have decided?  When would you have to 

announce it to the market? 
MR. POTTER. We are still looking at when some of the volume is transacted and also 
scheduling, because not everyone is in the same time zone.  I think 
we believe that 
later in the 
afternoon 
will work
.  And that will give us enough time to then announce to the market that 
evening what the changes would be. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Okay. 

MR. POTTER.  The other choice is to announce very early in the morning. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I guess I would say that
, if we agree on this, we should 
nail that down pretty soon, because, in principle, this could happen as early as June, and it would 

be helpful if people actually had the time blocked out on their calendar.  I think we need to figure 

out the time slot. 
MR. POTTER.  We are working on it. 
                             
       
               
    
  
      CHAIR YELLEN.  Other questions before we begin the round?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Just to clarify your proposed approach, 
any adjustment in the first two weeks of the overnight reverse repo rate would be an FOMC 

meeting. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.  I know the memo used two weeks.  I am thinking there is an 
initial period. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Until things settle down, basically. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. When we are figuring things out, and if we have to make 
adjustments, we need to meet, we need to discuss it, and during that phase, until 
we decide 
further things are
Šlet me just call them ﬁroutineﬂ
Šthere would be FOMC votes.  We would 
probably be having videoconference briefings that would be converted to meetings, and both 

groups would be voting. O
nly after whatever that initial period is 
when
 things have settled down 
would we agree 
that 
now we have fallen into a rhythm, and any adjustments, if they are needed 
at all
ŠI mean, I think 
in 
the most likely case, we are not going to need any further 
adjustmentsŠbut if we do, those things 
will be 
routine, and then we are talking about delegating. 
Let™s see.  First, President Lacker, then President Rosengren. 
MR. LACKER. 
In this initial period, would you envision all meetings, or a mix of 
briefings and meetings? 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
My understanding is 
the idea 
is that 
we are going to preschedule 
these times. 
When we start the video meeting, we will have some sense of whether things are 
going smoothly, and we really don™t have decisions to make, in which case the staff could be 

relieved of the burden of doing transcripts and so forth.  I would call that a briefing.  
But clearly, 
if things are not going very smoothly and we need to deliberate, we would convene that as a 
         
           
      
  
                  meeting 
right from the outset
.  And, I suppose, even in the middle, if something bega
n as a 
briefing, and we decided in the middle of that briefing, ﬁLook, we need to discuss something.ﬂ 
Is that fair 
to say? 
MS. MEADE.  Yes. 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
We could then say, ﬁLook, let™s convert this now to a joint Board and 
FOMC meeting.ﬂ 
MR. LACKER. 
Okay.  I ask because it has been a while since this group gathered in a 
briefing format.  I think we did it back during the crisis.  There are some rules about not saying 

something that matters, or has substance, orŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN. Well, we can™t deliberat
e. 
MR. LACKER.  That™s not quiteŠ 

CHAIR YELLEN. We can™t deliberate. 

MS. MEADE.  It is really a distinction, I believe, between asking questions and 
discussing among yourselves. 
MR. LACKER. 
If we have something to say
, like ﬁI think this means we should do 
X,ﬂ then we have to convert it to a meeting to say that? 
MR. 
POTTER
.  Well, you could pose it as a question. 
MR. ROSENGREN
.  Like in 
Jeopardy!
  You have to ask a question.  [Laughter] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I see Scott 
Alvarez is 
fretting
 back there. 
MR. 
ALVAR
EZ.  A briefing is an interaction with the staff, and you can ask questions, 
and it is for the purpose of disseminating information.  If the Committee wanted to have a 

discussion in which they are deliberating about a decision, that would be a meeting itse
lf. 
MR. LACKER.  Okay. 
      
          
          
                MR. ALVAREZ
.  We could set it up so that it could start as a briefing and be converted 
into a meeting, if that seemed to be the direction the Committee wanted to go in.  We can, 
as the 
Chair says
ŠI think the thought process is 
that 
we will have a pretty good idea before we set it up 
whether there is going to be a discussion, and we will just start from scratch as a meeting if that
™s the case. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Just a 
follow-
up to 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley™s question.  For how 
many of the short-term credit markets is it important to know about the closing in Europe?  A
s we think about the timing of the meetings, are there a bunch of short-
term instruments 
that
 would 
make it 
relevant to 
act
 in the morning, 
because of when Europe closes? 
MS. LOGAN. 
For the repo markets, most of that is going to be U.S. activity, and that is 
going to be early in the morning.  For unsecured fed
eral
 funds and E
urodollars
, there is going to 
be some very active trading in the ea
rly morning hours from Europe.  We saw this during the 
crisis when there was a lot of volume done early, and then there is some late-
day volume as well 
in the 
United States
.  It is going to be a mix.  We are going to do more analysis on the full pattern 
of volume data in the unsecured markets before we recommend a time of 3:30 or 4:00 or 4:30 in 

the late afternoon.  But you can think of the unsecured markets as having two trading periods, 

and the repo as being mostly very early in the morning. 
MR. ROSENGREN
.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  I was looking for a clarification.  In the context, the memo offers that 
both the 
IOER or ON RRP 
rates might be subject to these technical adjustments if we delegate 
them.  When I go back and look 
at the normalization principles, as they are described, they talk 
        
     
                 
              
          about IOER as being the primary mechanism by which we will move the funds rate into the 
target range. 
Let™s say we delegate on a technical adjustment basis 
the 
ON RRP rate
.  That 
seems to 
take care of itself.  But by delegating some adjustment to 
the 
IOER 
rate
, does that 
signal a change in policy stance in any way?  Or will it be understood that you are trying to move 

the spread in lockstep? 
MR. POTTER.  I have gotten this question quite a few times in public.  I use an idea that 
Jamie came up with, which is 
that 
everything we are doing in terms of the mechanics of lifting 

rates comes from interest on excess reserves.  We are trying to keep the overnight RRP as small 

as possible, and that me
ans it is just trying to get better trading in the arbitrage relationship 
in 
which 
you are getting interest on excess reserves. 
I view it as the primary way we are lifting 
rates.  But it is not really a measure of the stance of policy.  The stance of policy is the federal 

funds target range. 
MS. GEORGE.  Okay.  In the context of these basis points we have talked about, it 
would be understood these are technical moves, and thatŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN.  The Committee has set the target range and decided to make small 
adjustments to keep the funds rate there. 
MS. GEORGE.  All right.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Yes.  This is just a logistical question, Madam Chair.  Do I understand 
correctly that what you anticipate doing is, if we agree with the concept of having these 

prearranged 
briefings, that all of our calendars will need to be kept open for two weeks following 
each of the next I-don™t-know-how-
many FOMC meetings? 
       
     
         
                    
 MS. MEADE.  I think we were thinking initially about the liftoff 
meeting.  Oh, well, yes, 
of course. 
MR. TARULLO.  Unless you know something I don™t know.  
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You™d have to prepare for the earliest meeting you might 
liftoff for, right? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I suppose
ŠI mean, people will have some conflicts,
 right? 
MR. TARULLO.  They have major ones. 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
We can™t for the next whatever meetings
ŠI mean, we can try to 
block out 
those times.  But
 some people will have trips presumably that they can™tŠI suppose if 
somebody can™t participateŠ 
MR. TARULL
O.  There are already a number of international meetings that several of us 
on the Board, 
I think
, are going to haveŠand 
Vice Chairman Dudley will have conflicts with as 
well. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  That™s my point.  I™d prefer to get this nailed down 
sooner rather than later, so we can block out the time as efficiently as possible.  That would be 

my preference. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Maybe we can call in
ŠI mean, we normally have videoconferences, 
but conceivably we can 
call. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  In the old days, 
we had telephone calls, right? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes. 
Maybe we could have some telephone calls that people could 
take fromŠ 
MR. POTTER.  As long as they were secure.  That would be the 
issue. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Well, we need to work this out for sure.  Governor Brainard. 
             
               
             
      
  
  MS. BRAINARD. 
This is just 
from a communications point of view.  Would we 
communicate at the outset that the FOMC is going into the mode of daily briefings with the 
possibility that they could take intermeeting action?  Or would we simpl
y be silent on that until 
such time as we found it necessary to take an action? 
MS. MEADE.  The minutes of this discussion will reflect that you have discussed some 
of these issues. 
MR. POTTER.  I take your question as, 
ﬁLet™s be very careful,
ﬂ and I agree
 we should be 
very, very careful.  Maybe we want to think hard about how this is described, because we don™t 

want everyone thinking every day the FOMC is meeting at 4:00 p.m., and we are waiting for this 

thing to come over the wires 
about what the rates ar
e going to be the next day.  That is probably 
notŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  This is contingen
cy planning. 
MR. POTTER.  Yes.  This is a contingency plan. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
This is contingency planning for something that doesn™t 
work as well as we think i
t is going to work.  I think we want to present it in that manner. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS. 
My question 
is in terms of contingenciesŠdo you anticipate that we could 
do this by notation vote?  Possibly, 
if there was a conflict
 and you 
were
 traveling, you missed the 
videoconference and 
maybe a staff member was sitting in
Šthey could give you a quick 
executive summary and then the notation vote could be done by a BlackBerry anywhere, right? 
MR. POTTER. 
Again, we would have to look at the timing exactly and tell you what that 
window is, because the meeting could go quite long.  Then we would still have to put out the 

announcement or switch to 7:00 a.m. in the morning or something. 
         
             
      
  
  
                  
     
  MR. EVANS. 
You anticipate making an adjustment in the middle of the dayŠI mean, 
for the market. 
MR. POTTER.  No, no.  After the meeting, it is probably pretty good practice to 
announce the decision.  I would feel more comfortable announcing quite soon after the 
conclusion of the meeting, rather than waiting, 
but
Š MR. EVANS.  That does put a premium on the turnaround. 

MR. POTTER. 
Šyou could have some time gap there and 
instead 
do it earl
y in the 
morning.  To 
Governor Brainard™s question, there 
are 
a lot of complications
Šif this is the way 
you want to goŠ
that w
e would need to describe to you, so you understood exactly which way 
you wanted to go. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Presumably, Simon, you would want to announce this 
the day before, because the money market trading starts very early they need to have this 

information, so they can digest it. 
MR. POTTER.  We are actively checking so you have the full information to 
make 
that 
choice. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let™s begin the go-
round.  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the first question, m
y answer 
is ﬁY
es.ﬂ It™s as simple as that. 
On the second question, regarding approaches, I actually think you laid 
out 
the approach we should take really well in your comments just a moment ago.  W
e hope we 
won™t need to do any of this, but having a 
serious meeting 
to 
discuss what is causing the 
funds 
rate to 
trad
e outside 
the target range, understanding what the effects of moving the two different 
administered rates would be, and having 
FOMC
/Board of Governors 
decisions seems like the 
right 
approach.  But once things haveŠ
I think ﬁsettled downﬂ is the phrase 
you usedŠ
I think it 
                
          
                  
      
       would be completely appropriate to delegate to you any further tweaks, plus or minus 10 basis 
points, say, to the two administered rates.  I fully support the approach that you laid out today.  
I do view this as representing prudent contingency planning more than something that I would 

expect to happen.  I am still pretty confident that we won™t have problems keeping the fed
eral 

funds rate within the range, but I think it is goo
d planning. 
I do think that one of the issues that came up 
in the questions 
asked 
in the 
past minute or 
two is really important, and that is about the communication
s in connection with 
this.  
One of the 
Committee™s long
-standing principles is that, to th
e extent possible, policy decisions regarding 
monetary policy really should be separated from technical issues associated with the 

implementation of policy.  
I™m thinking back to the good old days when the Desk had wide 
latitude to adjust the amount of 
reserves in the 
System
 in order to achieve the 
target fed
eral
 funds 
rate.  I think it would be very useful, if we canŠand this is going to be 
the 
challengeŠ
frame 
the 
communications regarding 
these adjustments t
o the administered rates so 
that 
we indicate t
hat 
these are just mostly technical decisions reflecting, of course, the decisions of the FOMC and the 

Board of Governors on the policy decisions, but really communicated as technical means to 

achieve the policy goals that we have agreed on.  
We really wan
t to avoid this perception that 
moving around these administered rates reflects some kind of shift in the stance of policy or 

creating some noise 
in connection with
 that.  I think we are doing prudent planning.  It is April 

now.  Thinking through these iss
ues now 
makes a lot of sense. 
Again, I support the approach 
that you laid out.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am in favor of delegating to the C
hair 
certain tactical decisions that en
sure that we attain the policy goals voted on by the FOMC.  This 
             
        
  
      
   
   
  
        
          is consistent with the FOMC setting strategy 
but delegating tactical implementation of monetary 
policy.  However, determining the scope and timing of that delegation should wait until we have 
a better understanding of how the constellation of short-
term interest rates will respond to our 
setting of IOER and overnight RRP 
rates 
at, and immediately following, liftoff.  I am still 
somewhat uncertain about how successfully we will be able to targe
t the federal funds rate and 
other short-
term rates at liftoff.  As a result, I could imagine a wide variety of adjustments that 
may be necessary following liftoff. 
While the federal funds rate and other short-term rates may be comfortably bounded by 
the IOER and overnight RRP 
rates
, I can easily imagine situations 
in which 
that is not the case. I 
can also imagine circumstances in which some market rates do not adjust as expected to changes 

in our policy rates. In addition, it is difficult to predict how variable policy or market rates will 

be at liftoff. 
My preferred approach, 
in light of
 my concerns, would be to have frequent briefings, 
initially following liftoff, 
along 
with the flexibility to turn those 
into 
joint FOMC
Board 
meetings, if necessary.  Once the relationship of the funds rate and other market rates to our 

tools, as well as the variability of those rates, 
is better understood, we could agree on the 
appropriate delegation of tactical decisions to the 
Chair.  
Predetermining 
our arrangements for 
delegation at this time serves little purpose
, if they are quite likely to change after liftoff. I 
recommend being humble about how much we know now about liftoff and plan appropriately to 

have significant consultation and adjustments as we develop a more practical understanding of 

the challenges of lifting interest rates from the zero lower bound. 
Similarly, it is probably premature to determine the normal relationship we expect for the 
primary credit rate.  The current spread of 50 b
asis points above the IOER rate seems an 
           
   
                  
             
  
    
    
     
appropriate spread at liftoff. We can decide to alter the spread once it is clear where the federal 

funds rate and other short-
term rates are likely to trade relative to our policy tools. 
In summary, I suggest a highly flexible policy that is highly consultative.  Once 
relationships are better understood after liftoff, we can discuss delegation of tactical decisions for 

achieving our goals.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank 
you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable with a governance 
approach that involves prescheduled staff briefings for a period 
of time after liftoff and then
, after the initial period when things appear to have settled down, delegating authority to the C
hair 
to ma
ke small technical adjustments to the ON RRP and IOER rates between FOMC meetings. 
These technical adjustments would be for the purpose of keeping the funds rate from moving 

persistently outside the FOMC™s target range.  If the Committee agrees on the del
egation 
governance structure, then this delegation of authority should be communicated at the time of 
liftoff. 
It is important that the Committee be aware of the developments in financial markets and 
the effectiveness of policy implementation after the li
ftoff announcement, and the briefings 
would be very useful in that regard.  Whether two weeks is the appropriate time for the initial 

period isn™t clear to me at this point.  If we opt to prearrange daily briefings for two weeks, we 

might also prearrange a weekly briefing for the remainder of the intermeeting period.  Of course, 

the briefings could be converted to meetings, if necessary. 
I do believe it is important that we demonstrate after liftoff that we have the tools to bring 
the fed
eral 
funds rate int
o our target range.  That may necessitate making modest changes in the 
ON RRP rate or IOER rate in a nimble way.  Delegating the decisions for these technical 

changes to the 
Chair seems appropriate. I believe we should treat the IOER rate and the ON 
      
        
   
    
   
     
         
   
   
                  
RRP r
ate symmetrically with respect to delegation.  That is, if we delegate to the 
Chair, we 
should delegate the authority to make technical changes in both rates. 
Changes that are strategic policy decisions should remain under the purview of the full 
Committee
.  These would include decisions to deploy the auxiliary policy tools, like term 
deposits and term RRPs, as well as making larger changes in the IOER and RRP rates and, of 
course, changes in the federal
 funds rate target.  
Particularly if liftoff doesn™t g
o as planned and 
the funds rate is trading persistently outside its target range, the full Committee needs to be 

responsible for making those hard choices and helping to communicate them to the public.  The 

Chair shouldn™t have to go it alone. 
The Committe
e hasn™t had a full discussion of what constitutes successful liftoff.  This 
will help inform whether a technical adjustment is needed.  Let me offer 
the view 
that liftoff will 
be successful if the federal 
funds rate is within the target range
 on most, but not necessarily all, 
days.  In my view, successful liftoff does not require that the funds rate be at the midpoint of the 
range.  
We plan to operate with a target range of 25 basis points because we don™t expect to have 
precise control over the funds rate.  Under those conditions, I don™t think we should require the 

funds rate to be close to the midpoint of the range. 
Communication of any technical adjustments is an issue.  We have indicated to the public 
that at liftoff we will continue to target a range 
for the funds rate that is 25 basis points wide and 
set the IOER and ON RRP rates at the upper and lower bounds of the funds rate target range, 

respectively. 
If we find that adjustments are necessary to keep the funds rate in the target range, 
we must 
depart from these plans in one way or another.  Presumably, this can better be handled 
if, at the time of liftoff
, we acknowledge to the public that technical adjustments to the two rates 
might be necessary and that
, as we proceed with liftoff and normaliz
ation
, the Board of 
             
       
    
                
     
 Governors and FOMC have delegated authority to the Chair to make those adjustments, and 
also 
that any technical adjustments would not constitute a change in policy.  Thank you, Madam 

Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE
 CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am comfortable 
prescheduling the staff briefings during the first few weeks following liftoff.  They can be 

canceled if they are not needed
Šall is working smoothly, for example, and the federal funds rate 
is tr
ading within 
its
 target rangeŠor they could be converted to 
joint 
FOMC
Board 
meetings 
if 
adjustments to the overnight RRP and IOER rates are needed to keep the federal funds rate in its 

target range.  Obviously, we have to retain some flexibility about how 
long this period lasts
, depending on what our experience is. 
Turning to the governance approach beyond this initial period, I very much favor 
distinguishing between changes that are tactical, such as small shifts in the overnight RRP rate 
and the IOER rat
e to achieve the federal funds rate target selected by the Committee 
and changes 
in policy, which 
are 
shifts in the target federal funds rate
Šthis 
goes to President George™s 
question. 
I think there is a long history that tactical changes needed to implement the monetary 
policy stance that has been selected by the Committee can and should be delegated either to the 
Chair or to the Desk.  If you consider how policy was implemented prior to the crisis, the Desk, 

in close consultation with Board staff, decided 
how much 
in reserves to add or drain each day in 
order to keep the federal funds rate close to its target.  For many years, presumably as a 

governance measure, there was also one FOMC member on the call
, essentially to keep an eye 
on the proceedings. 
             
               
  
        
         
          
     The d
ecision on the amount of intervention and the means of intervention was left during 
normal times to the staff, the New York Desk, and the Division of 
Monetary Affairs at the 
Board.  In unusual circumstancesŠfor example, August 2007Š
the staff consulted clos
ely with 
the Chair in making those reserve adjustment decisions.  The issue in my mind is whether 

changes in the overnight RRP and the IOER rates that are small and designed to keep the federal 

funds rate in its target range meet this tactical criteria, an
d I think they do. 
The changes contemplated would be to implement the monetary policy stance that had 
already been mandated by the Committee.  
So t
his argues for delegation.  One could even argue 
for delegation to the Desk and the Division of Monetary Affairs staff, but I don™t see any reason 

to go this far.  I would favor delegating it to the C
hair to make clear that it is receiving the 
attention it deserves by senior policymakers.
  Also, delegation to the Chair might be more 
appropriate in this particular 
case
, because such 
decisions are about the level of interest rates 
offered 
on our facilities rather than
 as in the past, on the amount of reserves we might add or 
drain. 
To implement this after the initial period, I would give the C
hair the discretion to 
move 
the overnight RRP rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points, so a range of 20 basis points, 

and the IOER rate up or down by as much as 10 basis points 
as needed to keep the funds rate 
within its target range.  The adjustments could either be in tandem to maintain a constant spread, 

or the spread could be widened or narrowed subject to those criteria. 
In contrast to the delegation of modest IOER and overnight RRP rate changes to the 
Chair, I think any other changesŠ
such as implementing 
the time depo
sit facilit
y and things like 
that or changing the size of the cap on 
the overnight RRP facility
Šshould be left to the full 
Committee. With respect to the overnight RRP 
cap, this is pretty consequential because it will 
                 
      
     
                 
         
affect
 the composition of money market flows, and also it is unlikely that changes in the 
overnight RRP cap are going to be needed on a day-by-
day basis. 
So having the Committee 
make
 these changes is not going to be particularly arduous
; they
 will probably be made on a 
much more irregular ba
sis, if at all.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Yes, I™m comfortable scheduling a bunch of 
briefings that can be converted at short notice to meetings.  I think that adjustment of the IOER 

or the overnight RRP rates 
in the first few weeks following liftoff should clearly require an 
FOMC meeting. 
I would point out that it took us almost a year to figure out how we wanted to set the 
IOER and the overnight RRP rates relative to the funds rate.  Committee members brought 

different considerations to the tradeoffs involved, and the initial settings involve a co
mpromise 
among different views about those tradeoffs.  New information about performance of thos
e settings after liftoff is likely to inform Committee members™ views about those tradeoffs and 

likely require recalibration of that compromise. 
For me
, it™s hard to imagine a routine adjustment. 
The analogy has been drawn to the 
Desk™s draining and adding reserves through open market operations
. I™d point out that it has 
taken decades for those to become as routine as they 
did.  A
nd at times 
when 
the FOMC has 
changed its operational regime, those things have been tricky at first, 
and the Committee has 

likely
, in many of those instances, been very involved.  I™m thinking about the early 1980s and 
times in the 
1970s, 
when
 the instructions to the D
esk were very different.  
It™s going to take a 
while for changes to the IOER or overnight RRP rates to be seen as routine or technical rather 

than something 
like: 
ﬁAll right, we™ve set up a new regime, w
e™re trying to calibrate the settings 
          
       
  
     
  
                        
   of these things,
ﬂ and
 the Committee needs to be involved.  W
hat I™d advocate is that we 
plan to 
make all the decisions at meetings until the first meeting at which a decision 
that is made 
appears
, in hindsight, 
to have been 
clearly 
routine; from then on we 
can delegate th
e routine of 
changing 
it. I don™t think routine changes are likely
, to my mind.  If you think about it, what™s at stake 
here is the spread
: the 
arbitra
ge margin between the funds market and 
the 
IOER 
rate
.  It seems 
like 20 basis points, 15 basis points, somewhere in there.  That doesn™t seem like something 
that™s likely to fluctuate the way the need for adding or draining reserves fluctuated on a daily 

basis.
  If it fluctuates, that™s big news if it goes to 30 or 40 basis points.  I™d be kind of surprised 
about that, and I think we™d want to get to the bottom of it.  I don™t think we have an 

understanding of those markets in which it looks like, 
yes
, they should routinely fluctuate by 10 
or 20 basis points.  I™d urge us just to plan on making these decisions at meetings.  I™m happy to 

delegate if it comes to pass that these turn out to be routine decisions that the Committee feels 
like 
delegating.  Let™s go and make one of those decisions at a time like that and then delegate 
thereafter. 
I also wanted to talk about the discount rate spread.  The discount rate spread is 50 basis 
points, and it™s irrelevant to monetary policy right now in the sense that it doesn™t limit spikes in 
the federal funds rate when reserve supply is unexpectedly shortened.  It™s not going to be 

relevant to monetary policy implementation in that sense until
Š2020, I think
, is the latest staff 
projection.  I
ts relevance now is basically for small banks that come 
up short on reserves due to 
poor planning or some unforeseeable contingency t
hat they could claim is outside their control 
but probably isn™t.  Now, large banks have 
a ton 
of reserves 
that i
nsulate them against shocks, 
and they don™t come to the window.  Right now, in our current situation of 
large reserve 
             
             
      
     
         
  
     balances, this is basical
ly about giving the incentive to small banks to manage their accounts 
sensibly. 
I think our old normal spread of 100 basis points would provide a more appropriate 
incentive, given the amounts of money involved if you actually do the overnight calculation.  
I think we should move back to 100 when we lift off.  I would favor that.  It was there.  We set 

that in 2002. We did some analysis.  There was some thought given to the tradeoff involved.  I 

think it makes sense. 
It would also signal normalization in a 
way that would be useful.   
When you talk about discount window borrowing, the word ﬁstigmaﬂ inevitably comes 
up, and the idea is advanced that, well, keeping 
the primary credit rate 
low helps reduce stigma.  
That is certainly true in the only model we have of stigma and discount window lending, but the 

survey research we™ve done as part of the a group looking at discount window issuesŠthey did 

some survey work on stigma, and what they found is that it is not a relevant consideration for 

small banks. Small banks don™t feel stigmatized. Maybe they feel stigmatized already, but they 
don™t feel as if stigma inhibits their borrowing from the window.  It™s just a big bank or 
a too-
big-
to-fail 
bank 
kind of issue, and large banks don™t borrow now.  In the 
last 
crisis
, we lowered 
the primary credit rate
 when it looked as if there was a rationale for big banks borrowing at the 
window.  It turned out they were getting all of the money they needed from 
Federal Home Loan 
Banks anyway, s
o it didn™t seem to be particularly relevant to large banks either. I don™t think 
stigma is a reason to keep the discount rate spread at 50 basis point rather than 100.  That™s the 

import of that.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank
 you.  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My reaction to the questions posed is that 
they™re really matters of pragmatism.  I agree that planning for daily briefings with the option of 
                  
          
            
         
  
         
   invoking an FOMC meeting is sensible and 
worka
ble.  I™m certainly fine with that. 
I™m a
lso 
comfortable with the approach that you laid out
, with
 the Committee and Board making the 
decisions 
the first two weeks
, and then after that
, the delegation of small adjustments. 
So I™m comfortable in both 
cases
.  There are some details yet to be worked out, and under certain 
scenarios
, we may have time to work them out.  We could hear a second version of this possibly 
down the road. 
I haven™t given a lot of thought to the discount rate question, but I™m gla
d that President 
Lacker raised it and talked about it a little bit. 
With regard to
 trying to figure out what that 
spread should be, I want to throw out one thought, 
and that is a recollection that during the crisis, 

the Federal Home Loan Banks became a so
rt of surrogate discount window.  And the 
relationship of our setting of the rates to their operations and their settings may be relevant for us 

to consider. Those are my thoughts.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
First Vice President P
richard
. MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m entirely comfortable with the 
approach described by 
the
 staff and yourself to be used for informing the FOMC on the 
effectiveness of policy implementation during the initial period after liftoff.  
I™m al
so entirely 
comfortable with the approach 
described as that
 to be used for delegating authority to the C
hair 
on tactical matters once we have declared victory on a successful liftoff. 
As it concerns the spread between 
the 
IOER 
rate 
and the discount rate, I think it™s 
actually probably best to 
quiesce 
and minimize the variability at
, and immediately after
, liftoff. 
My preference would be to stay with the 50 basis point spread until we have some separation of 

these events.
  I think the number of moving parts 
at the 
time of liftoff could work against us, 
            
   
      
           
          
       
        especially as we try to understand all of the different things that could be happening, and one 
more change, I think, that isn™t 
necessary might best be saved for later. 
I will add to the earlier discussion on 
the median and midpointŠ
a behavioral issue that I 
would just like 
the staff to consider to the extent that we talk about changing the definition of the 
fed
eral
 funds rate.  I don™t know what the behavioral reaction to that would be
.  It seems like 
when we 
whisper
, people think we shout.  I just don™t know whether people would make more of 
that than is needed, again, at the time of liftoff.  I understand we™re not contemplating the 

definitional change then, but even announcing the plan of a change could have a behavioral 

effect.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  F
irst
, with respect to the meetings and 
briefings, I guess I™m having trouble seeing what the utility of daily briefings for a couple of 

weeks would be in the circumstance 
that 
we think is likely to obtain, which is that 
there™s a 
reasonably successful liftoff. 
It seems to me more likely that 
we would want a briefing or a 
meeting on the Friday following liftoff.  T
hereafter
, I™m just not sure how much there will be to 
say unless things are going wrong, in which case, as everybody says, we™re going to actually 

need meetings and not just briefings.  
But I just note that in passing.  I know this Committee can 

fill up virtually any
 meeting that is set with questions and conversation, but I™m just not sure how 
much there will be to say other than getting emails from Simon and Lorie telling us what has 

happened on day three. 
With respect to governance, like everybody, I think, who™s spoken on this point, I favor 
giving discretion to the Chair, but actually I think I would go further than the staff though.  

Indeed, I™m going to disagree with the Chair in the interest of giving her more discretion than she 
         
   
     
                     
      
     
          
  asked for.  I guess I don™t quite understand why we wouldn™t give her discretion for this kind of 
modest change in the IOER 
rate 
or the 
ON RRP 
rate
 or both, even in the immediate post-
liftoff 
period.  It is new, but we have spent most of the p
ast year talking about how important it is to 
have a smooth and credible liftoff.  And, notwithstanding my substantial uneasiness with the 

potential medium-
term effects of a large ON
 RRP facility, I™ve joined the consensus that our 
dominant goal should be that smooth and credible liftoff, and presumably that smoothness and 

credibility are going to be most importa
nt in the immediate post
-liftoff period, which is to say the 
first couple of days.  I
t seems to me that if we regard the adjustments as 
fine
-tuning 
in pursuit of 
a particular federal funds target rate range, it would be useful to give her the discretion in that 

first couple of days to make such adjustments in an effort to get, as Loretta says, to at least the 

bottom of that range. 
If there™s a major pro
blem with liftoff, we™re going to need another full FOMC meeting.  
But suppose, for example, there™s a little bit of softness in the floor on the first day or two after 
the announced liftoff, and that softness might be firmed by a modest adjustment in the 
IOER 
rate. 
A quick action of that sort might actually buttress the credibility of our tools and intentions 
right from the outset and thereby make the whole process smoother.  
I don™t think
, in any case, 
it represents a policy change, 
because we can talk a
bout it beforehand.  Now, it™s possible that 
markets might read such a quick adjustment as indicating that we lack confidence in the efficacy 
of the decision we had just made a day or two before.  But that™s a judgment that the Chair could 

make in consultation with those best able to discern what market sentiment and intentions may 

be. 
Just by indicating that nimbleness is a 
desideratum
, I think I™ve already explained 
why an 
FOMC decisionmaking process 
won™t 
do the trick.  I just think the logic of what we™re talking 
            
    
    
                 
           
              
     
     about here argues for giving the C
hair this kind of very limited discretion to adjust those two 
rates that we™ve been talking about and 
we will set at the time of liftoff in the period 
in which 
they might be most efficacious in changing or shaping perceptions of how this whole process is 
going to go. 
As to communication, it does seem to me proper to indicate in advance that small, 
operational adjustments might be made in the IOER and ON 
RRP rates between meetings. 
Characterizing those as op
erational adjustments beforehand and contemplating them
, I think
, helps reinforce the sense 
that 
these are technical changes rather than policy changes. 
The 
suggestion that any actual changes be noted by the D
esk, as opposed to 
the Chair or 
the 
Committee 
as a whole, also seems to me a good idea since it would reinforce the fact that these 
rates are more or less operational changes rather than policy changes. 
On the primary credit rate spread, I thought 
President Lacker
™s comments were very 
interesting.  No
twithstanding the fact that they are interesting and we should think about them, 
particularly this difference between 
small
 and large bank stigma when we do discuss this, I 
personally would prefer to wait until the staff thinking about stigma effects and perhaps other 
elements of the discount window are done and maybe a more fulsome memo 
has been 
produced 
and circulated so 
that 
we can have a discussion of that.  It seems to me we™ve got plenty on our 

plate right now, and we might usefully put that conversation off just a bit. 
I want to end by saying I hadn™t thought about it this way, but I fully endorse what 
Loretta said about the criteria for success in how we regard the meeting of the target range post
-liftoff, and I think if we all subscribe to that, it 
would be useful for us, through appropriate 

mechanisms
, to get that expectation out as well so that we™re being evaluated by commentators 
and markets in a manner consistent with what our actual intentions and aims are.
  Like 
President 
      
                    
       
  
      
          
       
    Mester
, again, this is another reason why I think 
these little adjustments even right after liftoff 
are fine for the 
Chair to make
.  And, 
like 
President Mester
, I think using any of the other tools is 
something that should involve the entire Committee.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Did I see a two
-hander?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Like Governor Tarullo, I came to the 
meeting prepared to support delegation in the first two weeks.  I interpreted your earlier 
suggestion as, 
one, respect for governance in a critical period and, 
two
, maybe a desire to have 
more of a group decision than an individual decision.  Could you maybe speak more for another 

moment or two on what your thinking is regarding that? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  I feel 
that 
in the days after liftoff, if things are not going exactly as 
we intend, and the funds rate is drifting outside the range, I do really think it™s appropriate for the 

entire Committee to meet, discuss what is happening, try to get 
to the bottom of what the 
problem is, and decide on what the approach is. 
Now, we 
could make the decision 
that
 this is no big deal, the funds rate 
is just fluctuating 
around relative to the target range 
by 
more than we had anticipated and this is the ﬁnew normal.ﬂ 
If we 
want
ed 
to address it 
not by moving the band or changing the spread, but by moving one or 
more rates around to deal with this when we see persistent movements outside the range, and 

early on the Committee says, ﬁLet™s just do this. It™s not that big 
of 
a deal
.  That™s the way to 
address this
ﬂŠand at that point you regard those adjustments as essentially routine, and 
it™s early
, and then you want to delegate it along the lines of what Governor Tarullo said, 
I am 
perfectly comfortable with that, and
, of course, 
that makes life easier.  But I think the Committee 
needs to feel comfortable that we have established procedures that have been determined by the 

Committee that we think are workable and appropriate. First Vice President Holcomb. 
             
        
       
                
MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  On the staff briefings issue, I say by all 
means they should be useful and perhaps important.  If it should turn out that between the 
regularly scheduled FOMC meetings the funds rate begins to trade frequently below the 

overnight reverse repo r
ate for a reasonably sized ON RRP facility, I support the 
Chair having 
limited discretionary authority to restore 
funds rate control by raising both the IOER and the ON 
RRP rates while maintaining the spread between the two rates.  I agree with Governor Ta
rullo 
that this could be within the first days as well. 
That these rate changes are not to be subject to a 
vote would signal that they are technical adjustments designed simply to implement previously-

agreed
-upon policy.  The main focus would stay on the 
target band for the federal funds rate set 
by the FOMC. 
The simplicity of a system in which the IOER and the ON RRP rates are set equal to the 
top and bottom of the target funds rate band, respectively, is appealing and easily communicated.  

Deviations from that simple system should be temporary with 
reserve
-draining tools
, like term 
deposits and term RRPs, being brought to bear 
whe
n systematically greater interest rate control 
is required. 
I understand that we are entering uncharted territory and may need to act nimbly.  
Therefore, a good solution is for the FOMC and the Board to give the C
hair discretionary 
authority to adjust the IOER
ŒON RRP band relative to the funds rate target range between 
meetings while maintaining the width of the band at 25 basis points.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans. 

MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The staff has laid out a perfectly reasonable 
plan for prescheduled briefings during 
the first two weeks after liftoff.  I expect the process will 

go smoothly and these will end up like routine morning calls.  
If problems arise, I am 
                             
      
          
   
              comfortable with turning the briefings into formal teleconference meetings to handle any policy 
decisions we may have to make. 
After the initial burn
-in period
Šperhaps two weeksŠI also favor the Board and the 
Committee delegating a
uthority to the 
Chair to adjust the IOER and ON RRP rates by up to 5 to 
10 basis points, if necessary, to keep the funds rate within the target range.  I am comfortable 

delegating this authority as early as you™d like.  Even at the outset would be all righ
t with me. 
Basically, these are efficient ways to tweak the dials as necessary, and I see a communications 
advantage to this approach, 
as it reduces the odds of small technical adjustments to 
the 
IOER or 
the ON RRP 
rates being misread as changes in the st
ance of policy.  I completely trust that if any 
major issues arise
, the Chair will not hesitate to bring us in on the decisionmaking process. 
I did have a question.  I can™t remember if this was in the documents or other people have 
mentioned this, but at the time of the first liftoff, would we be comfortable preannouncing that 

we have no intention of adjusting the stance of monetary policy before the next policy meeting 
so that any intermeeting adjustments would be seen as nimble adjustments, just technica
lly to get 
the funds rate in the range? I mean, I can™t imagine that we would really think that we are going 
to have to have a policy tightening in between the first and the second meeting.  But it would be 

unusual, I understand that. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Certainly
, we should make clear that we have an intended target 
range that reflects policy and stand prepared to make adjustments in the administered rates
, and 

that we 
may need to do that. 
MR. EVANS. 
You can say that in your press conference rather than 
it finding its way 
into the statement. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
           
   
              
    
                   
     
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m not entirely comfortable 
with the 
pre
-commitment
 approach that President Evans outlined.  As the Vice Ch
air
man
 talked 
about in some of the remarks he made 
publicly in the intermeeting period, we don™t know 
exactly what is going to happen to financial market conditions necessarily at the time of liftoff.  

If we saw a 
very abrupt tightening in broader financial market conditions, there might be a 
reason for the Committee to think about retracing the steps they have taken, even 
within
 the 
intermeeting period.
  I thought it was an interesting idea, but I, myself, wouldn™t be comfortable 
with that.
  Thanks. 
CHAIR 
YELLEN.  President George. 
MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I would be happy to set my calendar for 
prescheduled staff briefings during the first two weeks to offer some insight, and I would be 

equally happy to remove them [laughter] 
if the staff judg
es that everything is going smoothly and 
there is nothing to report.  I am also comfortable delegating to the Chair a degree of authority to 
make technical adjustments, and I think we will know whether those are technical or more 
substantive as we go along
. On the issue of the 
discount rate spread, my comments here really are along the lines of 
President Lacker™s
ŠI think this issue doesn™t have much effect right now on overall financial 

market conditions.  But we did make changes to the discount rate during 
the crisis to narrow the 
spread and then widened it to its current 50 basis points.  
Smaller banks do regularly use this 

facility, and Boards of D
irectors 
of the 
Federal 
Reserve 
Banks 
are required to make 
recommendations about the rate. 
It seems worthwhi
le to me to clarify how this rate is going to 
work as we contemplate normalization so that we minimize confusion and perhaps even mixed 

signals at the time of liftoff. 
Thank you. 
              
           
       
       
    
       CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank 
you, Madam Chair.  I appreciate the thoughtful 
analysis and the memos that discuss the intermeeting governance of the IOER 
rate
, ON RRP 
rate, and other policy tools during the early weeks of liftoff.  I thought that the approach 

described of scheduling dai
ly staff 
briefings during those first few weeks is prudent and should 
meet our needs initially, given that we could convert them to official meetings as needed. 
One thing I would note is that it might not always be clear what it would mean to ﬁ
settle 
down,ﬂ so if liftoff takes place, say, in mid-
June or mid
-September, things might settle down 
after the passage of 
quarter-end and then you might have this issue of whether that is really 
settling down from the point of view of being able to deal with quarter-e
nd.
  You might want to 
have staff briefings, again, scheduled for the end of the following quarter, which I guess, 
if we 

raised in September, would be at the end of December.  
I think just the passage of time is not 

necessarily going to tell you 
that this 
is going to be working and working fine.  I think that is 
something to keep in mind as we go forward. 
The staff memo noted that there are quorum rules for the Committee.  Those might be 
useful in the context of these staff briefings.  Not everyone needs to be here for every meeting, 

and the Committee still can operate. 
That might come up in this situation.  I didn™t say this at the 
very beginning, but I should say that I am very confident that this is all about contingency 

planning.  
I am confident the too
ls are going to work.  I think these 
meetings 
are going to 
become
 boring very quickly.  It is going to be like the call.  Not to say that™s boring, butŠ 
[laughter]Š
I misspoke.  But it will become routine
, at least
.  T
hat™s our base
line 
scenario, but I 
do think it™s useful to engage in this contingency planning. 
      
                 
   
      
            
              
   
  I think I am going to be in the minority on my next point, which is, can we trans
ition 
to a 
situation 
in which 
we simply delegate so
-called technical decisions to the 
Chair? 
Here I am not 
supportive of that delegation, and my answer there is shaped by three considerations. First, when 
my staff and I thought about the context in which increases in the ON RRP rate would be 

considered, we weren™t sure that those situations would be that technical 
per se 
or tactical.  It 
seemed like those would be situations 
in which the effective fed
eral
 funds rate would be below 
the bottom of the target range, and that seemed likely to occur in conjunction with the cap on the 

ON RRP volume being binding.  Then there would be some interaction, 
at least
, in your 
discussion about raising the ON RRP rate, and also discussion about raising the cap.  Now, the 

cap is a big deal.  We have talked about that at length.  The Committee certainly has strong 

views about that.  I
t just 
immediately seemed to bring substantive issues into play. 
The second con
sideration is that, a
s I listen to people talk about analogies with the past, if 
we were talking about delegating to the staff, I would almost be more comfortable 
with that 
than 
delegating to the C
hair.  
[Laughter] 
I say that because 
I think 
if 
it is routine enough to be 
delegated to staff, we can delegate it to the staff.  This is clearly not routine enough to delegate to 

the 
staff.
  This is about the Committee deciding tha
t a decision
, which is not sufficiently routine 
to delegate to the staff
, is being delegated to the Chair instead.  T
hat is not something I feel as 
comfortable with. 
Third, basically, there is an issue here of precedent.  This is not about this C
hair.  I f
eel 
perfectly comfortable with you, Madam Chair, and your 
discretion in this matter.  But future 
Committees may not have that level of comfort with future 
Chair
s in related situations.
  Getting 
together for meetings is hard and challenging.  It is always easy to delegate, and I think we want 
             
    
    
                      to fight that tendency, especially in view of how easy modern technology makes it to pull 
together a quorum of the Committee for substantive discussion and deliberations. 
For these reasons, Madam Chair, I recommend that 
the Committee not delegate authority 
for intermeeting adjustments to the 
Chair.  Again, this is all about contingency planning, but I 
think the Committee could make contingency plans to vote, as needed, between scheduled 

meetings, be it by telephone, vide
oconference, telepresence, secure lines
Šall of the other 
suggestions that are out there. 
A quick comment on the primary credit spread.  I thought the idea of doing more research 
and work on this was a very interesting one.  At liftoff, especially if we are going to be doing 

liftoff in the near term, 
the JuneŒ
September 
time frame
, I would favor keeping the 50 basis point 
primary credit spread at that time, then continuing 
to do work on the issue before we decide.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President 
Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I just want to mention 
that 
there has been some loose talk about 
comparing the timing of th
ese briefings
 to the morning call, and I am not in favor of tying them 

to the morning call.  Let me be clear on that. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Notice 
when I was faced with that
, I devised a way to end the 
requirement thatŠ 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I call that leadership by
Š CHAIR YELLEN. 
Thank you.  [Laughter] 
MR. EVANS.  So it can be done?  That™s what you™re saying? 

CHAIR YELLEN.  It can be done.  It only took 50 years, butŠ 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  It can be done. 
       
    
                
          
  
  
        CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Generally speaking, I™m comfortable with 
the 
prescheduled
 staff meetings.  Based on the discussion here, I™m wondering whether we need 
one every day.  Maybe twice a week
ŠI™m picking up on some of the comments of Governor 
Tarullo.  I™m not sure how much information you™re going to get from Tuesday to Wednesday.  

You could probably review this a couple of times a week. 
Also, picking up a little bit on themes 
Vice Chairman 
Dudley was talking about, could 
you do this with a subcommittee of the FOMC? Do you really have to have the entire 

Committee reviewing what is s
upposed to be a technical issue?  You could bring the whole 
Committee in
, if necessary, but if everything™s going okay, 
it seems that it
 could be done by 
subcommittee.  That™s something to think about. 
On the governance approach, the 
first part 
was
, should 
we have a vote of the FOMC to 
adjust ranges
? I view this as pretty cumbersome for something that™s supposed to be a technical 
issue.  It sounds nontechnical
. It makes it sound like it™s a policy change regardless of what we 
say, and so I see that
 as a difficult way to go. 
Now, for the C
hair™s authority o
f 5 
or 10 basis points, first of all, I think that moving 
these ranges should be subject to a high bar.  That™s one of my main comments.  
You 
really don™t 
want to do this unless you really have to 
because of
 the communications issues that we™re going 
to encounter.  The payoff to doing this is ultimately pretty low.  
For instance
, maybe the 
fed
eral 
funds 
rate is trading a few basis points below the range
, and now you make this move.  Now the 
fed
eral
 funds 
rate 
moves into the bottom part of the range.  So you™ve 
gained a few basis points, 
but at the expense of markets asking, ﬁWhat are you guys doing?  Are you changing policy?ﬂ 
      
             
  
    
         
     
      
  
   
   
                
 Another question I have that has not come up yet is the authority to go 5 to 10 
basis 
points over what time horizon.  Would you be able to go 5 basis points and then the next week 
another 5 
basis points
, and the next week another 5 basis points? 
I don™t think that™s the intent, 
but that™s something you™ve got to think about here.  And if you went the full 10 basis points and 

it didn™t work
, then I guess the whole Committee would have to come in at that point. 
I see a core problem here
, which we™ve talked about before in our discussions.  The 
Committee insists o
n saying that the f
ederal funds rate is the policy rate, but relatively few trades 
are occurring at that particular rate. 
According to the Committee, 
the IOER rate 
is not the policy 
rate, but, on the other hand
, that is the rate that affects the largest banks in the country
, and it 
affects their funding costs.  And, in other contexts, we have said IOER is our workhorse rate. 
And then you™ve got overnight RRP, which we™re also saying is not a policy rate, but 
which 
is for a market that 
has many traders and 
that 
is potentially 
large at the time of liftoff.  So 
we might say that the 
policy rate is the federal funds rate, but what does 
that 
mean to markets? 
It™s really the markets that are saying what the policy rate is, and if they think moving these other 

rates is more importa
nt than where the fed
eral 
fund
s rate is trading, then we
™ve changed 
policy in 
a macroeconomic sense. 
So, I think this is a conflict, but that is part of the situation we™re in
, given the way we™ve 
decided to do this.  I think it does have potential to sound like a policy move to people inside 

financial markets even though we™re saying, well, the federal funds rate range has not changed 

and so we haven™t done anything different.  The bottom line is 
that I am worried about 
communications issues. Because of t
hat, I don™t think you want to do this unless it™s absolutely 
necessary.  You know, overall I would say 5 to 10 basis points 
per inter
meeting period is okay 
             
             
                           
  
 with me.
  I would agree with President Rosengren that 
it might be premature to decide on this 
today.  You could make the delegation decision later around the time of liftoff, 
if necessary. 
Let me finish with one story that 
old-
timers
 here around the Fed
eral Reserve 
will 
remember from the early 1990s.  I am going to mention ﬁHe-Who-Must-Not-Be-N
amed
,ﬂ who 
is 
former Chairman Alan Greenspan.  At the time, 
it was considered that the 
Chair
man
 had 25 basis 
points on the federal funds rate target and that the 
Chair
man
 could make that adjustment during 
an inter
meeting period without consulting the Committee.  And the Chair
man 
at that time made a 
bunch of those moves and then came into the meeting and said, ﬁNow that I™ve made the move, 
now we don™t have to move at the meeting.ﬂ  This was extremely hot and divisive on the 

Committee in the early 1990s.  We don™t want to get into any kind of situation like that, and I 

know that™s not your intention, but it is a bit of a slippery slope:  What™s going to be delegated? 

Who™s agreed to it?  How much have you agreed to?  Under what circumstances? 
It is a very 
tricky issue
, and it has been a situation in the past on this Committee that has been problematic 
from a collegiality perspective. 
I know we™re not really thinking about anything like that, but I think 
it is a bit of a 
slippery slope.  You™ve got this issu
e about what rates really matter versus what rates 
we are 
calling the policy rate, and you™ve got this precedent in the past 
whe
n it didn™t go so well.
  Thank 
you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 
MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Cha
ir.  I™m comfortable with the governance 
approach in the first two weeks of scheduling daily staff briefings, but I assume that we™ll 

quickly work out whether we need them every day and we can probably unschedule a few of 

them within a day or two.  S
o I th
ink there™s some flexibility the
re.                 
          
           
    
   
  With regard to the governance approach for technical adjustments in the IOER or ON 
RRP rate
s, I don™t know about previous Chair
men
.  I™ve only had one Chair in my life on the 
Board, and my experience with th
at Chair is t
hat if there is going to be any question about a need 
for discussion, she will call for it.  I haven™t detected her trying to get around the FOMC or the 
Board, and I think we can rely on that.  So I™d be perfectly willing to give the C
hair 
an 
adjustment up to 10 basis points.  I agree that 
we need to specify that 
the discretion would be 
granted 
between meetings. 
I™m not sure about the wisdom of constraining the gap between the 
ON RRP and IOER 
rates to 25 basis points. We may find reasons 
why
 we need to move one without moving the 
other, and my general approach is, don™t constrain yourself if there™s no need to constrain 

yourself, because the law of unintended consequences is very powerful. 
On the primary credit rate, I agree with those who think we should t
ry to minimize the 
number of adjustments we make at the time of liftoff, and that this issue is sufficiently important 
for banks to which we give a lot more 
attention than their size would imply.  I™m not sure why 
we would want to start by raising the cost of borrowing by 50 basis points for the smaller banks 
who do borrow at that rate, and we™d need to look at what would happen when we raise the rate.  

And so, for both reasons, 
I favor examining that after liftoff. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  T
hank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m very well aligned with the 
Chair™s 
original comments and additional comments and response to Governor Tarullo™s and 
President 
Lockhart™s points, and with many others around the table as 
well. 
As for the briefings, I think it is fine to schedule them, and if we have them I™ll attend 
them, but I think the only case in which we would actually want to have them is if things are 
         
    
      
              
                 
    
    really not going well.  A
nd I don™t expect that that is likely at
 all in a world in which 
we have 
taken the cap off the overnight RRP or, for that matter, put a very high cap on. 
As far as delegation is concerned, if 
the test is adjustments that are 
routine or 
technical 
in nature
, I completely trust the 
Chair™s instincts on that. I will say that 
if what we™re dealing with 
is a very difficult and failed liftoff situation, I don™t think
, in real time
, that™s going to feel either 
routine or technical.  I think it™s going to feel like something that all of us ought to be involved in 
and accountable for.  I also would not constrain ourselves by holding this space between the 

IOER and 
the 
ON RRP rates
 at 25 basis points.  It might make sense to do something different, 
again, in real time. 
So, for all of that
, I think it™s essentially impossible to anticipate all of these 
things, and I would just say 
that 
I will do what is reasonable at the time. 
In terms of the primary credit facility, it is 
an interesting subject on which 
we can have a 
lot of debate.  I would
n™t touch it until well after liftoff. 
In my view, it™s just not a complication 
that we
, in my view
, need to be taking on right now.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 

MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
the proposal. I think it™s very 
important for us as Committee members to take responsibility for actively being engaged in 

assessing the effectiveness of monetary control and the relative roles of the IOER and the ON 

RRP rates 
in maintaining the federal 
funds rate in the target range for some initial period.  The 
length of that period, I think, should be determined by events.  My guess is 
that 
if the decision to 
lift off is made coincident with a meeting with 
a press conference, as seems very likely, I wo
uld 
expect that period of active involvement to span that quarter-end, but beyond that, 
I think it 
would be unwise to be too prescriptive at this point. 
         
   
  
             
                 
  
    
   
  
  
       
                                                         
  
 When market functioning has settled down, it will be appropriate to delegate to the C
hair 
the authority 
to make the necessary changes to the levels of the IOER and the ON 
RRP 
rates
, or possibly to the spread between them, 
in order to maintain effective monetary control.  I think the 
Committee can make that decision once it judges that the frequent briefings
 and meetings no 

long serve 
the
ir purpose, along with the parameters of the delegation.  
It™s very important that we 
carefully manage communications 
regarding the heightened vigilance and possible activity of the 

Committee and the Board during those initial weeks so that 
our 
communications bolster 
confidence in the normalization process and contribute to smooth market functioning. 
With regard to the appropriate level of the primary credit spread, I would be open to a 
recommendation from the 
staff as to retu
rning it to 
pre-
crisis levels
.  But like many others around 
the table, I would want to put some distance between the timing of liftoff and the 
timing of 
possibly changing that spread so as not to further complicate our 
already challenging 
communications around the time of liftoff.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
I think this has been a very useful discussion.  Let me 
say the Board meeting is now adjourned.  We™re ready to go on to item 3, and I suggest 
we have 
the economic briefings and then 
we™ll 
take a coffee break before going into our round.  L
et me 
turn things over to Bill Wascher
. MR. WASCHER.
3  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll be referring to the top exhibit 
on your pile, which is labeled ﬁMaterial for the U.S. Outlook.ﬂ  The data on spending, 
production, and hiring that we received since the March Tealbook were all weaker 

than we expected.  On the spending side, the February PCE data and March retail 

sales report led us to make a sizable reduction in our estimate of first
-quarter real 
PCE growth.  This downward revision to consumer spending accounts for much of 

the downward revision to first-quarter real GDP growth shown in panel 1 of your 

forecast summary exhibit.  In addition, a number of other categories of spendingŠ 

particularly business investment and residential construction
Šhave also surprised us 
to the downside in recent months, as have the incoming data on factory output.  I 

would note that after the April Tealbook was closed, 
we received the advance report 
3 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 3). 
         
        
     
     
   
              
   
  
                
          on capital goods orders and shipments for March, which was also weak but broadly in 

line with our expectations. 
One of the crucial questions that we faced
Šand that you face as well
Šwas how 
to interpret this batch of disappointing news, and wheth
er, in particular, it is best seen 

as just another 
hicc
up in a recovery that fundamentally remains on track toward 
achievement of your policy objectives, or the leading edge of a more serious 

slackening in the pace of recovery.  For the most part, we have 
leaned toward the 
former interpretation.  Accordingly, our projection calls for near-
term real GDP 
growth to return to a pace that is not too different from our March forecast.  In 

particular, although it is difficult to quantify their influence precisely, 
we believe that 
several transitory special factors
Šincluding unusually severe winter weather and 

production disruptions related to labor disputes at West Coast portsŠ
were a small 

drag on first-quarter real activity.  In addition, we think that measured fi
rst
-quarter 
GDP growth will be held down a bit by seasonal adjustment issues that affected 

estimates of state and local construction spending and by a distortion in the BEA™s 

translation of retail sales to PCE associated with the steep decline in gasoline prices 

and the increased share of gasoline sales at large retail establishments such as Wal
-Mart.  We do not judge any of these factors to be exerting a large influence on their 

own, but as a group, our 
back
-of-the-envelope calculations 
put the effect at a
bout ¾ percentage point. 
That said, we have not completely discounted the weaker-
than
-expected incoming 
data.  Specifically, we trimmed our estimate of consumption growth in the second 

quarter a bit as a result of the weaker
-than-
expected March retail sale
s report, and we 
made a noticeable downward revision to our projection 
of 
near
-term residential 
construction activity in response to the lack of a significant pickup in starts and 
permits in March.  We also lowered our forecast for nonresidential structures 
spending, as the latest data on drilling activity suggest that the recent drop in oil 

prices is having a larger effect on drilling and mining investment than we had 

previously anticipated.  Because we believe that the fundamentals underpinning 

household spending remain solid, we continue to expect that real GDP will rise at a 

pace that exceeds our estimate of potential output growth over the remainder of the 

year.  Even so, the 
level 
of real output at the end of this year is almost ½ 
percent 
lower than in our March forecast. 
As a way of providing another perspective on the near-term outlook, panel 2 
presents the results from the Board staff™s dynamic factor model.  This model uses the 

information from a large number of activity and price indi
cators to generate forecasts 

of near-term real GDP growth, and it was among the specifications we showed you in 

the April Tealbook box on nowcasting models.  As you can see, using the data that 

we had available when the April Tealbook was closed, the model 
also predicts a very 
low GDP growth figure for the first quarter followed by a modest pickup in the 

current quarter.  Of course, the model does not know about any of the special factors 

that we think will unwind and provide an additional boost to growth this quarter.  And 

I would note that the range of predictions for first-quarter growth coming from the 
                  
      
              
              
           
         various nowcasting efforts across the System is quite wide, underscoring the 

uncertainty surrounding the interpretation of the pace of activity last quart
er. 
To wrap up the discussion of the near-term spending data, I would remind you 
that we will receive the BEA™s advance estimate of first
-quarter real GDP tomorrow 
morning.  Given how low our current point estimate isŠ
and in light of the relatively 

large degree of uncertainty that surrounds these estimates
, even on the eve of a 

release
Šit would not be especially surprising from a statistical point of view if we 

were to see either a small decline tomorrow or a noticeably stronger increase than we 

have pencil
ed in.  And, of course, the BEA™s initial estimate is itself subject to 
substantial revision over time. 
Moving to the middle panels, the labor market has continued to improve, but here, 
too, the data point to somewhat less momentum than we had anticipated in our 

previous forecast.  In the establishment survey, March total nonfarm payroll 

employment growth was considerably weaker than the very strong pace that we had 

expected
.  I
ncorporating revisions to previous months, the average monthly change in 
payroll employment over the first quarter now stands at about 200,000, which is 

70,000 less than we had written down in the March Tealbook.  The news from the 

household survey also came in a little weaker than we had anticipated:  The 

unemployment rate held steady at 5.5 
percent in March
Šwe had expected it to tick 
down one-
tenth
Šwhile the participation rate, which we had expected to hold steady, 
edged lower. 
To summarize the information from the various pieces of labor market data that 
we have received, panel 3 shows our labor market conditions index, or LMCI.  As 

you can see from the inset box, the LMCI was basically flat last month
.  For the first 
quarter as a wholeŠthe rightmost 
bar in the main chart
Šthe index did increase, but 
at a slower pace than what we have seen in recent quarters.  Just as we did with the 

spending data, we took a modest signal from the incoming labor market news and 

reduced our projected pace of monthly payroll job growth by about 40,000 over the 

current quarter.  We also nudged up our forecast for the unemployment rate in 

coming months. 
Over the remainder of the medium term, our projection 
of 
real GDP growth is 
little revised 
from
 March.  The main conditioning factors that we built into the 
baseline forecast this round
Šparticularly
, the low
er projected path for the exchange 
value of the dollarŠare, on net, expected to be slightly more supportive of real 

activity.  By the end of the medium term, the effects of these changes offset roughly 

half of the downward revisions we put through to the near term, leaving the level of 

real GDP just a little lower relative to our March projection. 
Although it had only a small effect on our projection regarding 
real activity, I 
would point out that we now assume that the federal funds rate will lift off from 
its effective lower bound in September, one quarter later than in our previous forecast.  

Our revised liftoff assumption is broadly consistent with both the ﬁflashﬂ primary 

dealer survey that was taken after the March FOMC meeting and the latest dealer 
        
   
    
  
     
                     
                                      
                                                           
 survey, and 
it is more consistent with the timing suggested by financial markets. In 
addition, as best we can tell, a September liftoff date does not appear to be sharply at 

odds with FOMC participants™ March SEP submissions, in which the median 

participant 
pointed to the third quarter as the most likely quarter for liftoff.  After 
liftoff
Šand consistent with our usual practiceŠthe projected path for the funds rate 
is set by mechanically applying an inertial version of the Taylor (1999) 
policy rule. 
Panel
 4 gives our projected path for the unemployment rate.  With the level of real 
GDP at the end of the medium term only a little lower relative to March
Šand with no 
change to our supply-side assumptions this roundŠthe unemployment rate is 

expected to be 5.1
 percent at the end of 2017.  T
his is 
one-
tenth 
higher than its level 
in the March Tealbook and one-
tenth 
below our estimate of its natural rate.  The slow 
pace of decline in the unemployment rate reflects both the modest pace of GDP 

growth projected over the medium term and our assumption that the strengthening 

labor market will draw more individuals back into the labor force. 
Panels
 5 and 6 summarize the inflation outlook.  The incoming data on price 
inflation have been a touch above our expectations and supp
ort our projection that 
both total and core inflation will step up in the second quarter.  Further out, the 

inflation projection is little revised
.  A
s in previous Tealbooks, we expect 
that 
inflation 
will 
gradually move higher as resource slack diminishes, 
energy prices rise, 
and prices for imported goods turn up again. 
Finally, I wanted to call 
your attention to a change we 
made this round to how we 
characterize forecast uncertainty 
in the Tealbook.
 Specifically, we have revamped 
the methodology that we use to compute confidence intervals 
based on our historical 
projection errors and have also reworked our presentation of these intervals to include 

a comparison with the historical 
range of key forecast variables.  The new intervals 
are typically a little w
ider than the ones we reported previously, and they tend to 
show 
more asymmetry, which is most notice
able in the prediction 
interval 
surrounding the unemployment forecast.  When we 
miss big on unemployment, it 
tends to be because unemployment turns out to have been much higher 
than expected, 
not much lower.  Additional details 
on this new 
methodology were presented in a box 
and associated technical 
appendix in 
the Risks and Uncertainty section of the 
Tealbook and in Jeremy Nalewaik™s pre
-FOMC briefing.  The
se new intervals 
complement our other methodology of using stochastic simulations from the FRB/US 

model to produce confidence intervals around our projection, and we intend to show 

both sets of 
uncertainty measures in future Tealbooks.  I would note 
that 
the 
confidence 
bands shown in my exhibit today continue 
to use the FRB/US 
measures, 
but our intention is 
to eventually extend the new 
methodology to compute confidence 
intervals 
around our quarterly forecasts as well.  Steve will continue our presentation. 
MR. KAMIN.
4  Thank you, Bill.  The harsh weather we endured last winter left 
many potholes in U.S. roads and, as Bill 
Wascher has described, helped create one 
large pothole in U.S. GDP growth.  Interestingly, as shown in panel 1 
of my 
4 The materials used by Mr. Kamin are appended to this transcript (append
ix 4). 
                
    
        
         
          
  
    
                      
    presentation on the international outlook, a pothole also appears in the path of foreign 

growth in the first quarter.  Incoming data have been surprisingly weak in countries as 

diverse as Canada, which shared our harsh winter
; China, which was 
actually 
warmer 
than usual
; and Malaysia, which arguably has no winter at all.  As shown in panel 2, 
the downturn was also evident in global trade, suggesting some underlying malaise 

that was sweeping the globe. 
As indicated by the yellow bars in panels 1 and 2, we faced a very similar p
icture 
exactly a year ago, with U.S. growth, foreign growth, and global trade all turning 

down in the first quarter of 2014.  Accordingly, I went back and looked at my 

remarks for the April 2014 FOMC meeting for lessons that we might apply here.  

First, I 
found that I used the same tired pothole metaphor a year ago.  [Laughter] 
Second, at that time, I also predicted that foreign economic activity would clamber 

out of its pothole and resume moving along the path to recovery, just as Bill 
Wascher 
did for the United States.  Unusually enough, we both turned out to be right, and we 

are making the same call today. 
Certainly, the fundamentals favor a return to solid growth abroad:  Monetary 
policy is generally very accommodative, oil prices remain low, and most c
urrencies 
have weakened considerably against the dollar since last summer.  Moreover, many 

of the factors that pushed down global growth in the first quarter appear to be 

transitory.  Canada™s economy is estimated to have flatlined on account of unusually 

harsh winter weather and a step
-down in oil investment, but with oil prices bottoming 
out, growth should bounce back in the coming quarters.  Mexican output is estimated 

to have decelerated sharply in the first quarter along with U.S. manufacturing, and we 

anticipate that the projected rebound in U.S. activity will boost growth in Mexico as 

well. 
China also accounts for some of the pothole in foreign growth, but its situation is 
more complicated.  As shown in panel 3, GDP growth fell from 7 percent in the 

fourth quarter to only 5.3 percent in the first, well below expectations, as exports and 

industrial production dropped sharply.  It is difficult to parse out how much of the 

first
-quarter shortfall reflects reduced external demand, how much reflects the 
ongoing correction in the property sector, and how much reflects longer-
term 
developments such as the rebalancing of the economy and decline in potential output 

growth.  In any event, the authorities had been easing monetary policy even before 

the weak GDP 
reading
, and they
 have now stepped up this stimulus, including 
reducing the required reserve ratio 100 basis points.  In our projection, the 

combination of heightened policy stimulus and rising external demand pushes growth 

back up to over 7 percent later th
is year before it edges down thereafter. Like the 

booming Chinese stock market, however, this forecast is somewhat speculative, and 

we have revised down our projection a bit in response to the recent weakness. 
Ironically, nearly the only bright spot in the global economy has been the euro 
area, 
for which strengthening industrial production, retail sales, and PMIs point to a 
rise in first
-quarter GDP growth to 1¾ percent (panel 4).  Notably, financial 

conditions are becoming more of a positive for the econo
my, in part reflecting the 
                        
                          
  
  
     
                     ECB™s asset purchase program.  Bank lending standards are loosening, credit to 

nonfinancial corporations is finally picking up 
a bit
, interest rates are extremely low, 
and the real trade
-weighted euro is at its weakest level sinc
e 2001.  Accordingly, we 
see euro
-area growth firming to 2¼ percent in the next few years, provided that 
spillovers from Greece™s crisis remain contained, as we assume in our baseline. 
That, however, is a big ﬁ
if.
ﬂ  The Greek government is struggling in it
s efforts to 
negotiate additional financial assistance from European authorities and the IMF, even 

as it is running arrears to suppliers and raiding the accounts of local governments in 

order to stay afloat.  More than •10 billion in payments on its medium- and long-
term 
debt are coming due in the next four months.  Although the Greeks have reshuffled 

their negotiating team in an apparent effort to ease tensions with their creditors and 

strike a deal, there is still a good chance that the government could miss one or more 

of these payments.  Such an event could trigger a run on Greek banks, and unless the 

ECB stepped up its liquidity support by a substantial margin, the government would 

have to declare a bank holiday and impose capital controls, with a much-heightened 

chance of Greece eventually exiting the euro area altogether. Had such developments 

occurred at the height of the euro crisis in 2012, spillovers to the rest of the euro area 

would have been very destructive.  However, as Simon noted, the regio
n™s financial, 

institutional, and policy framework has strengthened in recent years.  Accordingly, 

we are building into our euro-
area forecast only a small drag 
due to 
spillovers from 
Greece™s intensifying crisis.  Nevertheless, we recognize that, as descr
ibed in the 
Tealbook, far more dire scenarios are possible, not just for the euro area but for the 

global economy more generally. 
While the pace of economic activity abroad remains quite unsettled, two key 
external drivers of U.S. economic prospects have been a bit more quiescent of late. 
First, oil markets have not yielded any big surprises.  To be sure, spot prices, shown 
in panel 5, are up more than $8 per barrel since the time of the March Tealbook, as 

falling rig counts and other signs of declining in
vestment have led markets to expect 
lower U.S. oil production.  However, prices for futures contracts further out on the 

curve are up by less, so that our projected path for Brent prices has been raised just a 

bit and remains well below 
levels prevailing l
ast summer. 
Second, for the first time since last July, the dollar has come down over the 
intermeeting period, as shown in panel 6.  This depreciation likely reflected weak 

data and the fall in expected policy rates here in the United States.  However, I would 

like to remind you that, starting with the March Tealbook, we decided to deviate from 

our standard random-
walk
-oriented model and project
ed a further rise in the dollar
.  That also must have contributed to the dollar™s subsequent decline.  [Laughter] 
In the 
event, from its lower starting point, we assume the broad real dollar will still move up 

some 2
¼ percent between now and the end of the year as the U.S. economy bounces 
back and markets refocus on the policy divergen
ces among major central banks. 
Your next exhibit puts movements in the dollar and their implications for 
economic growth into broader perspective.  As shown by the black solid line in 

panel 1, even at its projected peak early next year, the broad real dollar would be well 
                           
     
                                                                                                
 below its previous two peaks.  The black solid line in panel 2 shows the contribution 

of net exports to real U.S. 
GDP growth
.  We project it at negative ¾ percentage point 
this year and next.  This is the largest drag on growth since the early 2000s, and it 

almost entirely reflects the appreciation of the dollar.  It may seem strange that the 

dollar should depress the net export contribution to such an extent when it remains so 

far below its previous peaks.  However, what matters for the contribution of net 

exports to GDP
 growth is not the level of the dollar but how much it moves, and the 
dollar has appreciated sharply since last summer.  Additionally, the share of trade in 

the U.S. economy has grown over time, amplifying the effects of dollar movements 

on net exports and growth. 
Were the dollar to rise further than we are currently projecting, it would exert 
even stronger effects on the economy.  Returning to panel 1, the dashed line shows 

the 10 percent rise in the dollar described in the ﬁStronger D
ollar
ﬂ scenario in the 
Tealbook.  As shown below, the contribution of net exports to GDP would fall to its 

lowest level since the early 1980s.  Additionally, as indicated in panel 3, core 

inflation would fall below 1 percent on a four-quarter basis before rebounding.  Josh 

wil
l now continue our presentation. 
MR. GALLIN.
5  Thank you.  My material 
is titled ﬁFinancial Stability 
Developments.ﬂ 
My remarks draw on the recent QS financial stability report.  In sum, valuation 
pressures in asset markets have increased since the January assessment and remain 

notable.  In addition, vulnerabilities related to maturity and liquidity transformation 

remain moderate, but leverage in both the financial and the nonfinancial sectors, 

overall, remains relatively low.  Taken together, we think that 
conditions in the 
financial sector are moder
ately prone to amplify shocks. 
I begin with valuations in fixed-income markets.  The yield on the 10-
year 
Treasury noteŠ
the blue line 
in the upper-
left panel
Šand 
term premium measures
Š the red and black lines
Šhav
e remained quite low since the January 
financial 
stability 
briefing.  The possibility that term premiums will move up sharply remains a focus of 

staff analysis
.  I will return to this issue
 near the end of the briefing. 
In corporate bond markets, yield spr
eads to comparable Treasury securities have 
moved down a bit in recent months.  As shown by the red line in the panel to the 

right, the far
-term forward spread for high-yield corporate bondsŠone measure of 
risk premiumsŠ
remains near the middle of its histo
rical range, which suggests that 
valuations are reasonableŠ
relative, that is, to seemingly richly valued Treasury 

securities.  In addition, as shown by the light blue bars in the middle-left panel, 

issuance of high
-yield bonds, a nonprice measure of hot ma
rkets and thus valuation 
pressures, remained robust through the first quarter of the year.  Somewhat in 

contrast, issuance of leveraged loans
Šthe dark blue portion of the barsŠ
has 
declined
, on net, in recent quarters.  Although supervisory analysis of completed 
5 The materials used by Mr. Gallin are appended to this transcript (appendix 5). 
              
    
       
               
          
      
   
      
   
 deals suggests a modest improvement in underwriting quality, fairly lax nonprice 

terms were reportedly still prevalent in recent deals. 
Moving to the stock market, the expected real return on 
corporate equities
Šthe 
black line in the middle-right panelŠ
has fallen significantly since the 
previous 
stability briefing, as stock prices have advanced and expectations of corporate 

earnings have been revised down
.  The low expected return suggests that valuations 
are quite high.  The equity risk premium, which is the difference between the 

expected return on stocks and the expected real yield on the 10
-year Treasury note, 
shown in teal, has also moved down sharply, though it remains closer to the middle 
of 
its 30
-year range.  Our overall assessment is that equity valuations are somewhat 
more stretched now than they were just a few months ago. 
A variety of changes in the structure of fixed-income markets may add to the 
volatility of interest rates, and, perhaps, to the volatility of volatility.  FirstŠand I™m 

not referring to any panel quite yetŠ
increased electronification of the Treasury 
market could contribute to occasional and surprising spikes in volatility, such as that 

which occurred on October 15 of last year.  In addition, the continued decline in 

intermediation by dealersŠas illustrated by gross and net dealer borrowing, shown in 

the lower-left panelŠis consistent with anecdotes that new regulations have made 

dealers less willing to provide market
making liquidity, even in normal times.  A bond 

market selloff could also be temporarily amplified if investors in bond mutual funds 

rush for the exits, forcing funds to sell into an illiquid market.  The rapid growth in 

assets under management at such fun
dsŠshown in the lower-right panelŠincluding 
funds that hold less-
liquid assets, suggests that the scope for such an amplification has 
increased in recent years. 
The first panel of the next exhibit shows an estimate of the level of ﬁrunnableﬂ 
private money-
like instruments.  This measure of maturity and liquidity 
transformation includes cross
-holdings of money 
market instruments, such as when a 
money fund holds repo.  It is therefore an indicator of the vulnerability of the 

financial system through intermedi
ation chains that rely
Šat one link or more
Šon short-term funding.  The level of these runnables has been fairly stable at a relatively 

high level during the past two years, as growth in uninsured depositsŠ
the light blue 
regionŠ
has offset a decline in repo
Šin red
Šwhich suggests that the financial 
system remains moderately vulnerable to runs. 
A fairly bright
Šor should I say, 
green
Šspot on the financial-
stability map is 
leverage in the banking system.  As can be seen in the upper-
right panel, capital 
cushions at bank holding companies, as measured by both the Tier 1 common equity 

ratio
Šin blackŠ
and the leverage ratio
Šin red
Šhave increased notably.  This 
reflects both Basel III requirements and the resilience required in annual stress tests. 

As you know, no CCA
R bank fell below the stress test™s quantitative benchmarks in 
the most recent round, although three firms had to adjust their 
planned capital 
distributions. 
                  
    
    
      
        
    
                        
    As far as we can tell
Šwhich
, admittedly
, is not very farŠ
leverage in the 
nonbank financial sector continues to be a vulnerability.  As summarized in the 

middle-left panel, overall margin credit has moved down in recent months but 

remains quite elevated, and hedge funds appear to be using a fairly large amount of 

portfolio margining from prime brokerages to lever up in equity markets.  In addition, 

responses to the March SCOOS provided some evidence that counterparties have 

been demanding more leverage to fund non-agency RMBS, high-yield corporate 

bonds, and securitized CRE loans.  Unfortunately, leverage embedded in derivatives 

is hard to measure, so it remains difficult to assess the overall leverage of hedge 

funds, mutual funds, and other investment vehicles. 
Moving to the private nonfinancial sector, the middle
-right panel provides the big 
picture for
 households: Modest increases in household debt continue to be driven 

mostly by prime borrowersŠ
the orange line
Šthough debt of subprime borrowersŠ 
the black line
Šticked up in the fourth quarter.  Student loans and subprime auto 
lending have remained rapid 
even as 
delinquencies on these kinds of debt have 

moved up.  Although we do not currently consider student and subprime auto debt to 

be direct vulnerabilities for the financial system, we are alert for potential spillovers 

to other debt markets. 
As can be seen in the lower
-left panel, the debt
-to-assets ratio for all nonfinancial 
corporate businesses
Šthe black line
Šand for high-yield and unrated firmsŠthe red 
line
Šmoved up further in the fourth quarter, which suggests a continued buildup of 
the vu
lnerability of this sector. 
The lower-right panel provides a very brief roundup of the potential shocks to the 
financial system
 that appear most proximate.  A sharp rise in term premiums could 
precipitate a sudden drop in a variety of asset prices, especia
lly for those with 
stretched valuations.  Moreover, for reasons mentioned 
previously
, these shocks 
could be temporarily amplified if liquidity were to deteriorate just when it is needed 

most or if bond mutual funds were to experience large and disruptive outflows.  That 

said, the risk of a sustained amplification is mitigated by the apparently modest 

amount of leverage in the financial system.  We are also attuned to the possibility of 

damaging spillovers from a rate spike here to emerging market economies. 
As we 
concluded in a special memo, although blowback to the U
nited States 
through 
financial connections would likely be limited, a significant EME recession and a 

presumed increase in risk aversion would damage the U.S. 
economy as well. It is 

worth noting also that term premiums could, instead, stay low for longer than 

anticipated.  Such an outcome would be a shock to investors who have positioned 

themselves for rising yields and could also lead to a further buildup of vulnerabilities 

if investors are dr
iven to 
ﬁreach for yield
.ﬂ  Other potential shocks of note that have 
been around for 
a while
 include a disorderly Greek exit from the euro zone, 
significant geopolitical disruptions, or distress 
at a large global financial firm brought 
about by, say, 
legal penalties. 
I will conclude my prepared remarks by noting a few policy initiatives that the 
staff are pursuing related to specific financial vulnerabilities
, which appear at the top 
         
           
                       
      
       
     
    
    
       of the final exhibit.  
With regard to interest 
rate risk, 
the 
staff 
are in
dependently 
measuring the risks at banks and working with those banks to manage their 

exposures.  On market liquidity, the 
staff are undertaking a variety of projects to 
better understand changes in the structure of bond markets, including increased 

electr
onification, and are working with other agencies to prepare a public report on 
the Treasury market.
  Regarding 
asset managers, 
the staff have begun evaluating the 
potential for 
the growth of 
managers™ activities, perhaps through the use of leverage 
and 
liquidity transformation, to contribute meaningfully to systemic risk and 
whether 
reforms are needed. 
Finally, on leveraged loans, supervisors continue their 
monitoring efforts and will begin a more comprehensive Shared National Credit 

review in May.  
Tha
nks.  That concludes my remarks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.
  Questions for any of our presenters? 
President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™m look
ing 
at 
exhibit 2, 
ﬁAlternative 
Scenario
:  Stronger D
ollar.
ﬂ  What are the confidence bounds around these dotted lines? 
MR. KAMIN. Well, the simulations come from a DSGE model, but it™s not an estimated 
model.  So we don™t compute those, although I assure you that an estimated version of 
SIGMA 
that would allow us to compute those is on our long-
ter
m work agenda. 
The most tenuous thing is whether or not you will actually get a 10 percent additional rise 
in the dollar
.  As you can tell from the chart, that™s not a common occurrence.  That™s something 
that, broadly speaking, we think 
there 
might be a 1 in 10 chance of for a couple of years.  So that, 
in some sense
, is the most tenuous. 
In terms of thinking about the 
effects
 on net exports and then on U.S. 
real 
GDP, that™s 
actually a little bit more straightforward in the 
sense that the results from SIGM
AŠ
particularly 
for what I™m showing here, which is the 
net export 
contribution
Šare broadly consistent with our 
estimated trade models, and those don™t give you very different results.  So the 
effect 
of a higher 
dollar on exports and on imports is relatively straightforward, and obviously there are errors, but 
they™re probably not subject to huge errors. 
A larger area of uncertainty comes in 
when 
translating the effect of the change in net 
exports into GDP
, because there is some uncertainty there about the m
ultipliers
.  And there™s 
           
                       
   
          also some uncertainty about to what extent you want to build in a monetary policy response and 
what 
impact
 that has.  
So, for
 the net export contribution itself, I would guess that, 
relatively 
speaking, 
is 
not a huge confidence error.  The confidence errors would rise as you then translate 
that through 
to 
real 
GDP growth. 
MR. BULLARD.   Let me follow up with a 
slightly
 different question.  Over the p
ast 
25 years
, firms have become more globalized and 
have learned how to handle 
global currency 
fluctuations.  They adopt hedging strategies, and they put production in various countries and 

switch production in response to currency movements.  In light of those changes, should we be 

estimating effects of real exchange rate movements 
using 
data 
for the 1980s and 1990s? 
MR. KAMIN. Well, that™s an excellent question.  Let™s just say we periodically do revise 
our import equations, and we do look for signs of parameter instability.  So we™re alert to that 

issue, and we haven™t found any s
trong evidence of these changes in coefficients. There are 
other 
factor
s that, of course, are naturally parsed in.  They kind of correlate with what you 
mentioned, which is that, over time, 
the share of trad
e in the U.S. economy has grown, and that is 
ful
ly taken into account in our estimations because our models do incorporate the fact that, 
as the 
dollar changes exports and imports, those have a larger 
effect 
on GDP. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Thanks.
  Any other questions?  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you.  I have a question for Bill 
Wascher 
related to the Tealbook 
inflation outlook.  I think in your presentation you mentioned that the inflation outlook is 

trending up 
because
ŠI think you saidŠenergy prices are going to be going up, res
ource slack 
will be diminishing, and maybe imported goods pricesŠ
I can™t recall the entire list. 
Could you 
                
   
   
                       
      refresh my memory on the contribution of changes in longer-
term inflation expectations for 
delivering that increase in inflation? 
MR. WASCHER.  So
, over the medium-
term forecast
, our view is that the underlying 
rate of inflation is 1.8 percent, and that 
serves as an attractor for the inflation rate. 
MR. EVANS.  Inflation expectations, is thatŠ 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  We call it underlying inflation, but in some sense you may think 
of it as inflation expectations over the medium term. 
Over the longer run, 
that drifts up to 
2 percent because the FOMC says the target is 
2 percent, and 
because 
tightness in the labor 
market 
is pushing inflation up.  
So it doe
s serve as an attractor
, as one reason inflation moves 
back up toward 1.8 percent in the medium term and toward 2 percent in the longer run.  
But
, in 
addition, these other factors are important in getting there over the medium term. 
MR. EVANS.  All right. That™s helpful.  That is different 
from 
the way I was 
remembering it.  I thought that underlying inflation was pegged to your assessment of longer-
term inflation expectations
, and that they were still about 
1¾ percent
, but you™ve got aŠ 
MR. WASCHER.  That
™s right. I think that™s right.
  But maybe I™m not quite getting 
your question.  Over the longer run, we have those inflation expectations 
drifting
 up from 1¾ 
percent 
to 2 
percent. 
MR. EVANS.
    Right.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Yes, I want to compliment the staff on the new charts on uncertainty.  I 
think they are very helpful in thinking about the uncertainty 
associated with the forecast. 
Now, 
going on from what President Evans 
was asking
, maybe, the PCE inflation in Tealbook A, page 
69Šif I look at that, it looks, 
from
 the way the errors look on that forecast, 
like 
the staff has been 
                        
             
      
      underestimating PCE inflation.  Should I interpret this as being that we have upside risk to the 
staff™s inflation forecast? 
MR. WASC
HER. 
Which chart are you looking at?  The top one? 
MS. MESTER.  I™m looking at PCE inflation. 

MR. WASCHER.  That™s largely because of the energy price run-up in the mid-2000s.  I 
think we didn™t 
projec
t that, and I think that™s why the solid line, 
the median
, is above the data 
there. 
MS. MESTER.  But even the distribution looks likeŠ 

MR. WASCHER.  Yes.  Again, I think that™s because of the energy price shock.  
This is a 
relatively short sample with which 
we calculate standard errors around for PCE inflatio
n, for two 
reasons.  One is
, we don™t have data going back a long way, and two is, 
we think that this is 
a period over which inflation had different propertiesŠ
it was more stable recently 
than in previous 
periods.  
So, because of that, I think the influence of energy prices is more prominent here than 
it might be in the longer run. 
MR. ENGEN.  If I could add just one thing that amplifies that point, if you look in the 
middle right at core PCE, the median and the 
projected
 paths are virtually on top of each other, 
which is another way of showing that the total is being influenced by the run-up in energy prices 

and how it feeds into total inflation. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERL
AKOTA.  Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to follow up on 
President Evans™
s line of questioning.  During the 
intermeeting
 period, President Rosengren 
suggested the possibility 
of rais
ing 
the inflation target. 
If the FOMC were to introduce a new 
                 
           
       
              
     
  
        infla
tion target that was higher, would that have a higher gravitational pull 
in the staff™s model 
that we™d 
be pull
ed back to that higher target? 
MR. WASCHER.  In terms of modeling and the way we do it in 
the 
FRB
/US model, 
I think the answer 
is 
ﬁyes,ﬂ 
because we do have a small term that reflects the FOMC
™s stated target 
relative to current underlying inflation.  I think it would be gradual, but I think in 
the FRB
/US model, it would be a stronger attractor than a 
2 percent target. 
Also, i
f I used the Taylor ru
le, 
I think it would imply a much easier 
policy as well. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  That™s true, 
a different
 reaction function.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Okay.  I suggest we take a break 
for 
15 minutes 
to get some 
coffee. 
When we return, we have a few 
people who would like to comment on financial 
stability
, and 
then we™ll go to the economic round. 
[Coffee break
] CHAIR YELLEN.  We now have an opportunity for people to comment on financial 
stability, and 
three
 people have indicated they would like to.  
President Rosengren, do you want 
to start 
us off? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank yo
u, Madam Chair. When I talk to asset managers in 
Boston, the biggest concern raised is the problem of liquidity in the secondary market 
for 
corporate bonds.  They worry that when we b
egin to raise rates
, a rush to sell positions in 
corporate bonds will occur, and a crowded exit with few buyers could lead to a rapid increase in 

the yield on corporate bonds.  At least some elements of this concern probably deserve greater 

attention. 
Firs
t, the average size of trades in corporate bonds has fallen significantly relative to the 
average size of trades prior to the financial crisis.  This may reflect an actual or perceived 
          
                            
   difficulty in transacting large trades 
due to
 weakened liquidity in the 
market.  This raises the 
concern that if a significant portfolio rebalancing were to occur, it may be difficult to sell large 
positions in a timely manner. 
Second, there has been a significant decline in the corporate bond holdings of broker-
dealers.  Acc
ording to the 
SEC™s FOCUS reports
, while J.P. Morgan held $29.5 billion in 
corporate securities in 2007, those holdings had plummeted to only $11.3 billion by the end of 

2014. Similarly, Credit Suisse held 
$30 billion in corporate securities in 2007, and their holdings 
collapsed to only 
$4.4 billion by the end of 2014.  
Such sizable declines in corporate securities 
holdings among these key liquidity providers lends some credence to the concern about potential 

liquidity problems in this market. 
Third, 
bond mutual funds
Šwhich were shown in the earlier charts on financial 
stability
Šand bond exchange-traded funds have grown significantly since the financial crisis.  
The exchange-traded funds pose a particular problem if investors view them as highly liquid.  
At the end of 2008, assets under management at exchange-traded bond funds totaled $57 billion.  
By the end of February this year, 
assets under management at 
exchange-traded bond funds had 
soared to $320 billion.  I
f investors assume that the corporate b
ond market is liquid and, more 
specifically, that their exchange
-traded fund shares will always be liquid
, and if they choose to 
sell as we tighten
, they may be surprised at the price at which they transact. 
In summary, the concerns with corporate bond market liquidity as we approach liftoff 
bear
 watching.  The degree of movement out of bonds is likely to be highly sensitive to the 
projected pace of tightening as well as 
to the timing of tightening.  An oversized reaction in this 
market could result in a bumpy exit from the zero lower bound.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you
.                   
  
        
     
           
   
          MR. TARULLO.  May I ask Eric a question? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sure. 

MR. TARULLO.  Eric, can you take it a step further and 
say what the implications of 
your concerns 
are 
for policy? Is it for monetary policy?  Are you advocating a relaxation of 
capital requirements? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  No, I am not advocating a relaxation of capital requirements.   

MR. TARULLO.  I didn™t think so. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  I think it highlights that how we communicate around the time of 
liftoff actually is critically important for whether people decide that this is something they need 

to doŠ
to rebalance their 
portfolios quite quickly.  
I think the way that fi
nancial stability interacts 
with monetary policy is, 
it highlights 
that the communication issues become pretty important. 
MR. TARULLO.  That™s helpful.  Thanks. 

MR. LACKER.  Also, 
if it happens, we can say we talked about it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  All right.  Pre
sident Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to thank the staff for the 
excellent assessment of financial stability.  It™s my reading 
that 
the assessment again indicates 
that current policy has not produced any material signs 
of 
financial instability.
  Indeed, it appears 
that the main 
financial
-instability consideration for monetary policy at the moment is 
that a 
near
-term increase in the target range for the fed
eral
 funds rate could lead to financial instability.  
As the report says, 
ﬁTerm premiums
 in benchmark U.S. and other advanced economy bond yields 
are again near historical lows reached 
before the taper tantrum, raising the risk of similarly 
outsized market reactions at liftoff.
ﬂ             
                  
                        The s
taff also identified 
a vulnerability that could propagate this shock from the increase 
in rates.  Specifically
, page 4 of the assessment notes that changes in the structure of the 
Treasury market could amplify the effects of an initial rate move and lead to sudden swings in 
prices 
and liquidity. 
Now, how can we best mitigate this risk?  President Rosengren, I think, highlight
ed one way to think about this
, which
 is through communication, but I have a slightly different 
perspective on the answer to this question.  To answer this question, I think we have to 

understand why long
-term rates might rise dramatically in response to a small increase in short
-term rates. And here I believe that a key consideration is the policy signal associated with such a 

move in the near term.  Raising t
he fed
eral 
funds rate in the near term would mean 
they™re 
initiating liftoff when inflation is far below target and the growth outlook has been weakening.  

Liftoff in such an environment would indicate 
that the FOMC is considerably less willing to 
provide accommodation to respond to adverse shocks than financial market participants currently 
anticipate. 
As a result, they would expect less accommodation in general but especially so in bad 
times, and this expectation of higher interest rates and lower bond p
rices in bad times translates 
directly into higher term 
premiums
. Now, 
it™s tempting 
to conclude that we can somehow mitigate this potential financial 
instability only through 
reassuring verbal communication at the time of liftoff, but I think it™s 
difficu
lt for words to trump the communication content of our actions.  
So, in my view, 
we can 
best mitigate this financial stability risk by ensuring that our actions are always clearly connected 

to our pursued, 
declared objectives. 
In the current context, that
 would mean deferring liftoff 
until the economic data clearly indicate that raising interest rates is necessary for the FOMC to 

achieve its declared objectives of 
2 percent inflation and maximum employment over the 
       
  
                
    
       
               
  medium 
term. I™ll sa
y more about what this conclusion means for our policy deliberations 
tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  I™m going to pick up on the same topic that President Rosengren 
introduced and President Kocherlakota discussed.  However, I will not be expressing my views 

on monetary policy at this time.  [Laughter] 
I think Governor Tarullo asked a great question:  
What do you do with this information? I™m going to go a slightly different direction based on 

something Josh said, which I found very interesting. 
I was struck by two sentences on page 17 of the QS report.  
The
y are 
right 
after each 
other.  O
ne is
 that large banks™ liquidity ratios continue to improve.  The next sentence is 
basically that there is less liqui
dity in markets.
  These two sentences are 
right next to each other, 
and immediately
, when I read this
, I said, ﬁWhat™s the connection here?  To what extent is the 
liquidity requirements or the capital requirements, for that matter, affecting the willingnes
s of 
broker-
dealers to basically make markets and provide market liquidity, especially in 
a stressed 
environment?ﬂ  But it also led me to what Josh pointed out, which 
is that this 
is apparently a 
longer-
term research project 
about market liquidity and understanding what™s happening there, 
and how much amplification we may see
, whether it™s in corporate bond or Treasury bond 

markets
, in response to shocks. 
My comment is that I think this is a really important subject not just for thinking about 
our policy decisions or policy communication, but more generally, to understand what™s 

happening in those markets and understand to what extent it is changes in regulation, changes in 

technology, 
or other things.
  Really
, my comment is wanting to see more on that sooner, 
because 
I think this is a key issue, 
as others have mentioned.
  Thank you. 
                   
         
                    CHAIR YELLEN.  Great.  Does anyone else want to comment?
  [No response]  Seeing 
no hands, let us begin the economic go-round 
with 
President Mester. 
MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The Fourth District economy continues to 
expand.  In April, the diffusion index of business contacts reporting better versus worse 
conditions was 23 percent, up from 18 percent in March.  Retail freight and both residential and 

commercial construct
ion firms reported improved conditions.  All manufacturers and energy 
firms reported worse conditions. 
Anecdotal reports suggest some slowing in the pace of growth in the first quarter.  
Factors cited by contacts reporting slower growth earlier this year i
nclude the harsh winter 
weather, spillovers from the 
West Coast port strikes, declining energy prices, and the 
appreciation of the dollar. 
The effects of weather and the strike are transitory.  Almost all of our contacts reported 
that the 
effects
 of the wi
nter weather 
have now passed, although I should note that it snowed in 
Cleveland last week
.  The effects of the port strike are expected to dissipate by the fourth quarter. 
The fall in oil prices continues to challenge firms engaged in energy development or 
extraction as well as their suppliers, like steel producers.  Suppliers of raw materials that use 

petroleum
-based products report a 
falloff
 in orders as customers run down 
their inventories in 
anticipation of further price reductions.  
My business contacts believe that oil prices have likely 

bottomed out, and that the effects of lower oil prices are likely to be temporary for most exposed 

sectors.  Of course
, that remains t
o be seen. 
Conditions in 
District 
labor markets continue 
to follow national trends.  The D
istrict™s 
unemployment rate, at 5.2 percent, 
is below the national rate 
of 5
½ percent and below the 
5.7 percent 
District average over 
the 2001Œ07 expansion.  Contacts 
in all 
sectors except energy 
                    
          
     
   
  
       reported increasing staffing in the previous six to eight weeks, although, except for construction, 
the additions were somewhat smaller than previously reported.  So far, 
wage pressures remain 

limited to occupations such as tr
ucking, skilled construction trades, and quantitative white collar 
jobs.  Prices of finished goods continue to be stable despite more businesses reporting declining 

costs for 
nonlabor inputs. 
Turning to the national economy, we have received a number of disappointing data 
reports since our previous 
meeting across several sectors, including manufacturing, business 
fixed investment, and consumer spending, and including the employment report for March.  
As 
was the case last year, there was very harsh winter we
ather, but this year we also had the port 

strike, the sharp drop in oil prices, and the sharp appreciation of the dollar.  Similar to last year, 

we have seen a growth slowdown in the first quarter, and we are trying to extract the signal about 

future growt
h from the incoming data.  This is difficult to do in real time. 
A good case can be made that this is a temporary setback
, just as it was last year
, and 
that 
is forecast in the Tealbook.  The effects of bad weather and the 
West Coast port strike are 
transi
tory.  Using a Bayesian VAR model augmented to include weather indicators, my staff 

estimates that the unusually cold weather reduced GDP growth by 0.9 percentage point, and 

there will be some rebound in the next couple of quarters. 
We have seen the negative effects of lower oil prices on energy
-related firms but not 
much positive effect on consumer spending, although that is likely to come, and oil prices appear 

to be stabilizing.  Dollar appreciation has been a drag on exports and the profitability of fir
ms with multinational operations.  But as the rate of appreciation slows, the drag can be expected to 

diminish as well.
  The slower growth seen in our trading partners might be a reflection of the 
slower growth in the United States
.  If our growth picks up
, it could be that theirs will as well. 
                     
             
            
      
    In addition, not all of the incoming data were negative.  The rate of job openings reached 
another cyclical high, and initial claims are very low, just below the trough reached in the last 
economic expansion.  
These 
indicators suggest that the weakness in payroll jobs in March could 

be temporary.  Although the Conference Board™s 
consumer confidence measure was down in 
April, consumer sentiment came in high, and underlying fundamentals for consumer spending, 

including improved balance sheets, remain quite good. 
The news on inflation was also a bit better over the intermeeting period. Core inflation is 
modestly firming.  Both headline CPI and core CPI increased 0.2 percent in March for the 

second month in a row, and core CPI inflation edged up to 1.8 percent on a year-
over
-year basis. 
The Cleveland Fed™s median CPI measure, which helps predict headline inflation over the 

medium term, has remained near 2
¼ percent since April of last year.  The Federal Reserve Bank 
ofCleveland™s measure of the 
10-year expected inflation rate was essentially unchanged in April. 
So t
his is the positive view of things.  Of course, there is also the possibility that the 
slower growth will be more persistent and inflation developments will 
worsen.  I don™t believe 

we have enough information right now to reach a firm conclusion today, and we don™t have to.  

We can remain agnostic until we see more data over the next couple of months.  Incoming data 

will help us determine whether the slowdown 
in the first quarter is proving to be temporary, like 

it was last year, or whether it is pointing to something more fundamental. In particular, we are 

going to get two employment reports before our June meeting.  These are going to be quite 

important in m
y own thinking about the economic outlook.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Recent economic data have had a 
distinctly weaker tone since our 
previous 
meeting.  The March emplo
yment report indicated little 
              
       
                      overall improvement in labor markets, the unemployment rate was unchanged, and payroll 
employment growth was surprisingly weak.  Similarly, wage and price data have yet to show a 

clear trend toward our 2 percent inflation goal
. While some of the weakness can be attributed to 
the severe weather in some parts of the country, many of the higher-frequency data before and 

after the harsh winter weather have also been on the soft side. 
As a result, in my view, neither of the conditi
ons for liftoff articulated in the March 
FOMC statement 
has 
been sufficiently met at this time.  The March 
Summary of 
Economic 
Projections reflected some significant changes in longer-
run variables.  The central tendency of 
the longer-run unemployment rate has slipped from a range of 5.2 to 6 percent in June 2012 

down to 5 to 5.2 percent in March.  
Similarly, participant estimates of the long
-run equilibrium 
federal funds rate have declined.  The central tendency in June 2012 ranged from 4 to 

4½ percent, bu
t now it is down to only 3½ to 3¾ 
percent.  Our assessment of these key variables 

has changed significantly, which, 
in retrospect
, is not surprising, 
considering changes in 
demographics and productivity since the financial crisis. 
While I and many other participants have lowered our estimates of one of our dual 
mandate goalsŠthe natural rate of unemploymentŠwe have not engaged in any comprehensive 
discussion of our other goal, the inflation target.  That target has remained unchanged at 

2 percent since it w
as adopted in 2012. 
We have learned a great deal about conducting monetary policy in a low-
inflation 
environment since 2012.  I am fully aware that we should have a high threshold for changing our 

inflation target, 
as frequent changes would undermine its usefulness.  But the accumulated 
weight of economic experience suggests, in my view, that a reexamination of our inflation target 

is warranted for several reasons. 
                          
     
                
         First, the choice of an inflation target was largely b
ased on research both here and abroad, 
indicating that the likelihood of reaching the zero lower bound and the cost of being at the zero 
lower bound was small.  This research suggested a relatively low probability of reaching the zero 

lower bound, typically below 5 percent, and relatively brief spells at the lower bound once 

reached, usually a couple of quarters. 
In part, this optimistic read could have been based on faith 
in the efficiency of alternative monetary policy tools.  However, the experience of 
the past 
decade has been less favorable.  Today most major developed countries are at the zero lower 

bound, and, despite employing alternative policy tools, none has yet exited, even though we are 

now more than six years past the financial crisis. 
In shor
t, the research on the expected cost of 
hitting the zero lower bound has not been consistent with the economic outcomes we have 

observed. 
Second, we have revised our assessment of variables that should affect 
the probability of 
hitting the zero lower bound.  The most obvious example is the lowering of the equilibrium 
federal funds rate.  With the same inflation target, a decline in the equilibrium federal funds rate 
should 
increase
 the probability of hitting the zero lower bound.  
The most recent SEP 
submissions, for example, report a decline in the equilibrium real rate of more than 50 basis 

points, a
nd this assessment is echoed among private forecasters and market participants.  If one 
of the rationales for setting a positive inflation target is to reduce 
the frequency of hitting the 
zero lower bound, a lower equilibrium real rate implies the need for a higher inflation target to 

reduce this probability. 
On a practical note, the fact that Japan, the 
United Kingdom, Europe, 
and the United States have each h
it the zero lower bound and have remained there for a very long 
time should make us wonder whether the global convergence to a value of 2 percent for the 

inflation target was misguided. 
       
  
              
                
      Third, we have learned more about the cost of being at the zero lower bound.  After more 
than six years, we have still not returned to the 5 to 5.2 percent unemployment rate range that the 
SEP central tendency currently indicates is consistent with longer
-run unemployment rates.  
While the new tools of quantitative easingŠpurchasing mortgage-
backed securities and 
lengthening the maturity of our holdingsŠhave resulted in growth faster than we otherwise 

would have experienced, we have missed both elements of our mandate for more than 
six years 

now. 
This is not an acceptable outcome.  The consequences of not being able to exit the zero 
lower bound more quickly have been a long period of underutilized resources and 
below
-target 
inflation that risks eroding the credibility of the central bank.  A higher inflation target would 

surel
y have given us more room to lower real interest rates 
using
 our conventional policy tools, 
likely saving hundreds of thousands of jobs. 
Despite our willingness to alter other variables, we have not recently had a 
comprehensive review of our choice for the 
inflation target.  In light of the accumulating 
evidence that inflation targets globally may have been set too low, this choice may have resulted 

in a great cost to the global economy in terms of lost economic output and employment.  Thus, 

we should have a fuller discussion of our choice for the inflation target before we set our longer-

run strategies at the beginning of next year. 
In addition to the longer-run implications of the inflation goal for monetary policy, a 
higher inflation goal would have more 
immediate policy implications.  Entertaining a higher 
inflation target would imply an even larger inflation shortfall, compelling us to wait even longer 

before lifting off. 
A weaker version of this proposition suggests both that we should delay liftoff 
until we see clear evidence that inflation is increasing, and that we should be willing to entertain 
      
          
      
       
             
      an inflation rate that exceeds our current target. This strategy would
, of course
, be akin to price-
level targeting, a notion that President Evans and other
s have previously discussed. 
In summary, we should recognize that the economy™s performance over the previous six 
years has a bearing not only on our estimates of full employment and the equilibrium federal 
funds rate, which many of us have adjusted in the SEP, but also on the inflation target.  I 

understand the concern with shifting an inflation target that we set after years of deliberation and 

following years of success in bringing inflation down.  
But our failure to hit either of our 

mandated goals for six years and running demonstrates the potential cost of an inflation target 

that is too low.  Recognizing the many complications that a change in the target would entail, I 

believe we should have a more fulsome discussion about what the 
previous 
decade of
 economic 
history has taught us about the optimal inflation rate.  Should we be willing to entertain an 

increase in the inflation goal, this would, of course, 
have implications for the timing of liftoff, 

which we will be discussing tomorrow.  Thank you, Ma
dam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I would 
like
 to ask President Rosengren a question.  You 
are implying that the only margin for adjustment is on the inflation target rate.  Presumably there 

is another margin for adjustment, t
aking a lot of steps to make a future financial crisis of the type 
that we experienced in 2007, 2008, and 2009 less likely, right?  Because you could argue that 

one reason why we are in this position is because we had a really, really bad financial crisis.
  So, 
in principle, one could take steps to make the probability of a financial crisis l
ower
, and that 
would presumably lessen the need to change the inflation target.  How do you think about that? 
MR. ROSENGREN.  If you think you can significantly change 
the probability or 
amplitude of those shocks, then you are right.  But the equilibrium federal funds rate has come 
              
            
    
   
      
         
         
   down quite a bit.  Our own internal estimates of what that implies for how frequently we will hit 
the zero lower bound are that it is substantially higher given that most of the time the equilibrium 

federal funds rate that many of those models were estimated on was 4
½ percent.  We are now at 
3½ percent
ŠI actually think you could make an argument that it is lower than 3½ percent.  
So if 
you have 
an equilibrium federal funds rate that is lower, the implication is that 
you hit the zero 
lower bound more frequently unless you think you can dramatically alter either the frequency or 

severity of having the kind of shocks that we experienced. 
CHAIR YELL
EN.  Isn™t it the case that some of the steps we would take to reduce the 
odds of a financial crisisŠ
strengthening capital and liquidity
Šmay actually
, by raising the cost 
of intermediation
, lower 
the 
equilibrium real rate? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes, I 
think that™s right.  But my point is just that the 
room you need depends on the size of the shocks that you are dealing with.  And if you do other 

things and reduce the size of shocks, that also should be a factor.  
I don™t really disagree with 
a lot of th
e points that you made, but it seems to me that that™s not the only potential marginŠ 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I™d just raise one other countervailing argument 
that
, certainly
, the experience around October 15 of the very sharp movement in financial markets a
t a 
time when no real economic news was 
occurring makes me wonder
ŠI am not convinced yet that 
all of the actions we have taken have necessarily
, dramatically changed the probability or likely 
severity of shocks 
in the future from 
what we experienced before
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
In that shock, though, implications for the real economy 
were 
trivial. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  In that case. 

MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair? 
              
    
                
       
      
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  I appreciate you
r bringing this up, President Rosengren.  Just one 
comment
 about your rhetoric on this.  Missing the inflation target over six yearsŠif you look at 
headline inflation year over year, it was above target in 2011 and 2012, and it came back down.  

I know you like to think in terms of core inflation, but I think this is an issue for that piece of the 

puzzle.  When you 
evaluat
e the Committee over that kind of a 
time 
frame
, I think you have got 
to look at headline. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Yes.  I would say 
that 
hitting an inflation target temporarily 
because 
of an oil price shock is a P
yrrhic victory.  You care more about the underlying rate of 
inflation. 
MR. BULLARD.  These are the prices people pay. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  No doubt we will return to this.  President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART. 
Moving right along.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Over the 
intermeeting
 cycle, my staff conducted 56 interviews separate from our board 
meetings. We 
focused the interviews on any indications in their businesses that would confirm the weakness 

indicated by first
-quarter data and, more to the point, suggest 
that 
first
-quarter weakness might 
persist. 
We found that overall business sentiment remains quite positive, somewhat at odds with 
our reading of the incoming data.  On balance, our contacts and directors portrayed demand a
s continuing to improve at a steady pace.  We noted, however, that compared 
with
 the previous 
cycle, their optimism is accompanied by a hint of caution.  We heard more reports of negative 

effects of the dollar.  Exporters, port operators, and firms with significant foreign operations all 

noted market or other challenges that they attributed to the 
dollar. 
         
  
            
           
           
        
   As expected, we heard reports 
of investment 
pullback and layoffs in oil and gas 
exploration and production firms as well as in 
oil services companies.  That drag is being 
partially offset by greater investment activity in business sectors benefiti
ng from low energy 

prices. 
We also continued to hear reports that firms are trying to hold on 
to margin improvement 
coming from fuel and other commodity cost declines. 
Declines in gasoline prices have yet to translate into a meaningful boost in consumer 
spending.  A director with knowledge of consumer markets commented that product categories 

that historically have been leading indicators of stronger consumer activity
Što wit, apparel, 
eating outside the home, and moviesŠhave not yet signaled an upturn. 
We received positive reports on real estate investment activity, both commercial and 
residential. Architects and contractors indicated improved pipelines.
  Our banking contacts 
report that new mortgage and investment activity is strong. 
Regarding employment, we heard continued concern about turnover and retention.  At the 
same time, we detected little change in reports this round regard
ing wage inflation.  On that 
subject, although most data indicate that the trend in nominal 
wage growth remains flat, a 
measu
re constructed by my staff from the C
urrent 
Population Survey 
does show an acceleration 
in 
year
-over-
year
 wage growth in the first quarter.  Wage growth increased to a 3 
percent pace in 
the first quarter, up from 2.8 percent in the fourth quarter and up fr
om 2.4 percent a year earlier. 
Continuing on employment, I™ll mention something we heard for the first time from three 
large employers in quite different businesses.  All said they have begun shifting their work forces 

away from part time toward full time.
  They all cited the high managerial and logistical cost and 
quality challenges of a large, part-
time workforce. 
              
               
                
             
  We™ve been struggling to reconcile these generally positive anecdotal reports with the 
hard data on the first quarter and early indications of 
second
-quarter performance.  Our tracking 
estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth is just marginally above zero, at the low end of the 
spectrum presented in the Tealbook. 
Our tracking model is a straight statistical model with no 
judgmental overrides.  We wo
uld not claim it™s the most accurate read of the first quarter, but it™s 
what the raw data are telling us, and we™ll have an official reading soon enoughŠtomorrow 

morning.  
At this point
, I™m holding to the view that weather and other factors played a 

sign
ificant role in first
-quarter weakness, and that significant payback can be anticipated in the 
current quarter. 
We also observed
Šand this is nothing more than an observationŠthat weak 
first
-quarter growth has been a pattern during the recovery, normally giving way to a stronger 

rest of the year. 
We™ve made a small adjustment to our full
-year GDP growth forecast to reflect a weaker 
first quarter, but otherwise 
we have kept our forecast for growth and inflation unchanged from 
the March meeting.  We made no m
aterial change to our outlook.  We have growth resuming a 
run rate between 
2½ and 3 
percent
, with second-quarter growth above 3 
percent. 
A strengthening of consumer activity from the first quarter is a key factor in our outlook.   
We currently judge the risk to our growth and inflation outlooks as tilted to the downside.  
With the greater uncertainty I perceive at this juncture, the Tealbook alternative scenario titled 

ﬁPersistent 
Slowdown in 
Economic A
ctivityﬂ captures my concern that my outlook may be 
overly optimistic.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As many have already noted, the recent 
data have been disappointing, but it is worth noting, 
as Preside
nt Lockhart just did, that over the 
                      
               
   
      
past four years, 
first
-quarter GDP growth has averaged more than 2 percentage points lower than 
growth during the rest of the year, and there is no single smoking gun that can explain this string 

of seasonal aberrations
. E
ach year
, the winter slowdowns have proved to be temporary. 
So, if past is prologue, I expect the same pattern will occur this year
, with an anemic Q1 
followed by above-trend growth for the rest of 2015.  
I™m confident that the underlying 

momentum in th
e economy once again will be more apparent as the first quarter fades in our 
rearview mirror. 
This is consistent with what I™ve been hearing from my business contacts.  In particular, 
the fundamentals of the economy remain quite positive.  Solid job growth should lift income and 

consumer confidence further, helping to pave the way for continued consumption growth.  In 

addition, highly accommodative monetary policy will continue to boost spending, and these 

factors are very evident in my 
District.  In fact, 
some sectors of the economy, 
the 12
th District 
economy, are red hot.  An executive in the tech sector recently mentioned that to retain talent, 
some tech firms are now offering 20 percent or more pay raises. 
And if that wasn™t enough, 
they™re also throwin
g in housing for good measure, and in the Bay Area, housing is something 
that is very hard to come by and obviously very dear.  The other thing that we heard was that you 

can be vested
 in stock options 
after 
one month.  So this is an amazing time in the Silicon Valley 
economy, and about half of my staff ran off to apply for jobs. 
In addition, I will mention that some of my contacts in different sectors, including 
commercial real estate
, have emphasized the abundance of financing that can be obtained at very 

generous terms.  It™s an issue that I noticed
 was highlighted in both the S
LOOS
 and the QS 
reports, and we™re hearing about that in our D
istrict, too.
  Of course, continued low inflation 
remains a key issue.  I view the recent low inflation readings as being consistent with an 
                                 
              economy still operating below potential and facing temporary disinflationary factors.  Important 
questions remain.
  In the remainder of my remarks, I™ll focus on two of these issues.  
The first 
is, what signal should we be taking from the market-
implied measures of inflation compensation
?  And, second, what™s the empirical relationship between wage growth and inflation? 
The softness 
in inflation of late would be a lot more troublesome to me if it was also 
accompanied by a clear decline in inflation expectations.  This kind of scenario is discussed in 

the Tealbook alternative scenario simulation.  But so far, the weight of evidence sug
gests that 
this isn™t happening.  Long-run survey expectations from households and professional forecasters 

remain well anchored. 
In addition, as I pointed out in the past, long-run inflation expectations 
implied by a Phillips curve model estimated over the past 15 years, a period during which our 

credibility was firmly established, were also 
well anchored 
at 2 percent. 
Now, of course, the one discordant note comes from the market
-implied measures of 
inflation compensation.  Inflation compensation has fall
en significantly since the middle of last 
year, and while much of the focus has been on longer-
horizon measures
, there™s also a question 
about what signal we should take about the nearer-term inflation outlook. 
My staff looked at this question, and they conducted a forecasting comparison between 
measures of inflation compensation and five other competing forecasts, among them a random 

walk forecast and also the survey from the Survey of Professional Forecasters.
  We wanted to 
avoid liquidity issues that are 
associated with shorter
-term TIPS
, so they looked at inflation 
compensation derived from inflation swap rates
.  T
hese typically move very closely together 
with inflation compensation derived from the 
Treasur
y market, but 
are 
based o
n trading in a 
deeper market.
  Here we™re looking at one- and 
two
-year
-ahead inflation forecasts 
for 
headline 
CPI inflation. 
             
       
  
  
               
    
  
      
         
The striking result, which is very robust in all of their experiments
, is that forecasts based 
on inflation compensation were the worst performers of all 
the measures.  Basically
, inflation 
compensation did not give useful information about where inflation was going relative to survey 
forecasts. 
So, 
really
, looking at inflation compensation for insights into the future path of 
inflation 
is not supported by 
the data. 
One problem with our analysis is 
that 
data limitations preclude doing a similar exercise 
for long-term inflation expectations.  I™m going to go out on a limb here 
and say 
that the results 
we have for one- and two-year inflation compensation not being a useful predictor for future 

inflation will apply 
also to
 longer-term inflation. We don™t have that much data right now, but in 
five years when the transcript come
s out, we™ll see whether I was right or wrong. We™ll wait for 
that. 
Again
, President Kocherlakota has highlighted the factŠin a memo that he co
-authoredŠ
that 
inflation compensation 
is not a 
reliable forecast for inflation because it reflects 
other aspects of risk associated with different inflation outcomes. 
But I want to mention another 
interesting 
finding in our work 
about inflation compensation, and that is that these one
- and two-
year
-ahead inflation compensation measures are 
very highly correlated with recent past inflation, 
especially with pa
st inflation associated with movements in oil prices.
  That 
puts into 
question 
how to interpret this. It is a very similar result that we™ve found in the past when we looked at 

household surveys.  Household surveys of inflation expectations tend to be ver
y sensitive to 
lagged inflation, especially with regard to oil price movements, and for this reason we have 

tended to discount movements in household inflation expectations when the movements are 

driven by energy prices.  M
y staff suggests using a similar 
caution when trying to interpret 
inflation compensation measures as an indicator of people™s views on future inflation. 
      
    
                     
          
       The second issue I™ll discuss briefly is that of 
nominal wage growth.  A
s has already been 
mentioned, wage growth has been stuck around 2 percent for most of the recovery.  And, 
as economic theory would tell us, employee compensation makes up a huge fraction of a firm™s 

cost
s.  Y
ou would expect 
there
 to be a pretty tight relationship between nominal 
wage 
growth 
and price inflation, b
ut thi
s connection has been remarkably hard to find.  Many papers and 

research projects have looked at this, and
, basically, if you look back at the history of the 
literature, in every business cycle there™s a whole bunch of papers written about the relationship 

of nominal 
wage 
growth and price inflation.  T
he consistent finding through this literature is that 
it™s really hard to find any relationship between nominal 
wage 
growth and future price inflation.  

Recent research by Jim Stock and Mark Watson, and also some really nice work done at the 

Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland and elsewhere
, has shown that the additional information on 
wages or labor compensation has 
done little to improve the accuracy of standard inflation 

forecast models.
  My understandin
g is that 
the 
staff™s inflation forecasting models tend to be 
these 

price Phillips curve 
model
s or models that don™t really emphasize 
nominal 
wage 
growth. 
The lack of a close empirical link between 
nominal wage growth and future inflation 
likely refl
ects several factors that have affected labor markets in recent decades
Šsome of which 

I™ve talked about in the past.  
One is that 
nominal 
wage 
growth is probably being held down by 
rigidities in wage setting
 that kept wages from falling during the downturn and have 
been 
restraining wage growth as the economy improvesŠ
that is, there is 
downward nominal wage 
rigidity. 
The second is 
that 
globalization
, changes 
in unionization, and 
changes in technology 
have affected the share of productivity gains that are go
ing to workers, and 
that distorts the 
            
      
   
      
      
      
     
  
      
       relationship between wage growth and price inflation.  Put another way, the labor share 
of 
income 
has fallen dramatically since the 1980s. 
To summarize, based on the evidence accumulated over the past several decades
 of extensive research on this topic, there™s little or no information 
to suggest that 
aggregate wage 
data should inform our medium-term inflation outlook.  Now I™m going to break my rule that I 
stated earlier
ŠI do not view a 
rise in 
nominal wage growth as a necessary condition to be 
confident in the return of inflation to 2 
percent. 
All told, our current low inflation rates, I think, 
are pretty easy to understand in the context of transitory factorsŠ
import prices, energy prices
Š and the fact that there is st
ill some considerabl
e slack in the labor market.  As the labor market 
moves back to maximum employment, and 
as these transitory factors dissipate, I expect inflation 

to move back to 2 
percent. 
President Bullard mentioned 2011.  I think we should learn a lesson from that.  We did 
see inflation rise quite a bit 
as a result of a rise in some special factors.  We were experiencing 
high inflationary pressures due to 
large increases 
in the price of oil and other import prices, and 
what we did then, 
I think
, is the right thing.  We looked past the transitory effects of those and 
looked more broadly 
at the long-term inflation outlook, and that is how I am viewing it, too.  
Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank
 you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Could I ask an information question? 
The 
research 
that 
you mention
ed is 
very interesting, but 
I am not sure I followed the details.
  The inflation compensation measures 
were one-
to two
-year horizon expectation
sŠa
nd you also 
had survey measures of inflation 
expectations. 
       
    
  
        
                          
             
          MR. WILLIAMS.  The horse race 
was 
basically 
this:  W
e aligned the inflation swap rate 
one year ahead with 
the swaps of month
s 13 to 24 aheadŠo
ne year ahead
 with one year ahead.  
And then we looked at the 
Survey of Professional Forecasters 
and Blue Chip 
for each year. 
MR. EVANS.  At the same horizons? 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Same horizons. 

MR. EVANS.  I see, and those were helpful? Because
, if I understand some of the Board 
work, they use 
these 
long
-term inflation
 expectations for their modeling because, 
as attractive as 
it is theoretically to use a short
-term expectation, nobody can find a good measure of short-
term 
inflation expectation
s.  
Isn™t that right, Bill? 
MR. WASCHER. 
We use the longer
-term inflation exp
ectations in our models.  That™s 
right. 
MR. WILLIAMS. 
Yes
, but the question I™m asking is:  What do you think inflation is 
going to be over the next four quarters? 
The 
SPF is actually a very good forecast.  This is 
roughly as good as the Tealbook.  I
t™s
 asking what 
inflation 
is going to be over the nextŠ 
MR. EVANS.  Well, but the Tealbook won™t use any short-
term inflation 
measures, 
that™s 
my understanding. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  No, no, no.  I™m just looking at the forecast itself. 

MR. EVANS.  Oh, yes, but thos
e forecasts are lousy.  They might be better than the other 
ones, but they™re all lousy.  
MR. WILLIAMS. Well, I think the research says that the Tealbook is maybe a little bit 
better than the SPF and Blue Chip over the next year or twoŠ 
MR. WASCHER. 
Just 
in terms of forecasting? 
There™s probably not much difference. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  So it™s basically the same. 
                           
   
   
       
           MR. EVANS.  The
 Tealbook does something which is not in line with theory, to use 
long-term inflation expectations for a one-
year
-ahead inflation because, well, it kind of works, 
right? 
MR. WASCHER.  Yes
, we view the anchoring of inflation expectations as best 
approximat
ed by long-
term survey measures of inflation
 expectations. 
MR. 
EVANS
.  Yes
, that™s why I was asking the 
question about 
whether I understood you 
right, you™ve currently got it anchored at 1¾ percent and are hoping to goes up to 2 percent. 
MR. WASCHER.  Right. 
MR. 
EVANS
.  But at any rate, I™m done.  
Well, I mean, it™s interesting. I appreciate that. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Please proceed. 

MR. EVA
NS.  Okay.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  For the most part, my directors and 
business contacts expect that the recent spate of soft economic readings will be short
-lived.  The 
one report that seems to sum it up the best came from the 
chairman of Manpower who, when 
talking about soft first
-quarter numbers, said none of his clients are getting depressed about it.  
The view seems to be that there is enough momentum from last year that growth should pick up 
soon. 
Separately, I didn™t hear of any meaningful reports 
of wage or price pressures from my 
contacts.  My own outlook for the real economy continues to be for 
real 
GDP growth to run 
between 2
½ and 3 percent over the remainder of this year and next.  Our assumptions for 
potential output growth are somewhat strong
er than 
in the Tealbook, so our GDP path translates 
into a very similar reduction in resource gaps as the Tealbook™s.  By the end of 2016, we have 

the unemployment rate down to around 5 percent, which is my current assessment of the natural 

rate. 
           
      
               
                  
 My inflation forecast has not changed.  Like the Tealbook, I do not see inflation reaching 
target until sometime in 2018 or 2019.  I should again point out that my assessment of 
appropriate monetary policy underlying this forecast has lower rates than most people around the 

table. 
Now, I want to spend some time today talking about why this outlook leads me to favor a 
whites
-of-
their
-eyes approach for our policy response to rising inflation.  I have talked about risk 
management many times before.  Today I want to art
iculate three additional reasons the data lead 
me to prefer a cautious approach to raising rates. 
First, forecasting inflation is inherently 
difficult, and that™s the discussion that we were just having.  This implies a high burden of proof 

to say we are 
sufficiently confident that our currently low core inflation will move back to 

2 percent in a reasonable period of time. 
Second, despite near-
zero nominal rates and a large 
balance sheet, I am not convinced our current policy stance is all that accommodat
ive to begin 
with.  And, third, I actually see benefits to risking a modest overshooting of our 2 percent 
inflation target. 
Let me start with why it should take strong evidence to have confidence in an outlook of 
low inflation rising back to 2 percent.  Anyone who has looked at the forecasting performance of 
statistical inflation models knows that everyone™s abilities in this area are limited.  Indeed, there 

is a body of research that shows it is not that easy to be a random walk forecast
.  Even the best-
performing models seldom forecast a rapid change in inflation, and they always imply substantial 

forecast uncertainty.  That said, we do have many analytical reasons to think our current low 

inflation will rise at some point. 
Most of the commentary I hear at this table centers 
on the 
economy regaining traction, resource gaps closing, and the upward gravitational pull of high and 

stable inflation expectations, like in the Tealbook forecast. I also suspect that simple mean 
            
      
                 
  
       
   
          
         reversion probably plays a role in 
these forecasts as well. I agree that these forces will 
eventually deliver.  The question is, when?  Taking until 2019 to reach our target is not 

acceptable to me. 
Given all of these difficulties in forecasting inflation, my own preferred dashboard of 
indicators is mostly a list of factors coincident with rising inflation
.  While measures of labor 
market slack are important, I would not rely on them alone, 
as it is possible something has 

changed in the structure of the economy that makes those historical benchmarks less trustworthy.  

In addition, I will continue to look for increasing core inflation, faster wage growth, and firmer 

market
-based measures of inflation compensation to provide corroborating evidence of stronger 
inflationary pressures. 
As I sai
d, the absence of statistically strong leading indicators 
suggests 
that 
these observations are likely to be more coincident than predictive. But at least once we see 
them, we can have more confidence that inflation is moving up persistently.  Until then, 
I remain 

wary. 
Now, my second pointŠthat current policy is not as accommodative as we might thinkŠ 
comes out of the model analysis.  
A fundamental benchmark for thinking about the level of 
monetary accommodation and inflation pressures is the difference bet
ween the actual real rate of 
interest and the equilibrium
, or Wicks
ellian
, real rate of interest.
  As Milton Friedman said, low 
interest rates alone do not mean monetary policy is accommodat
ive.  The relevant question is 
whether, after adjusting for inflation, our current real federal funds rate is far enough below the 

equilibrium real rate to achieve our policy objectives in a reasonable amount of timeŠ
that is, for 

inflation to actually get up to 2 percent, 
as the forecasts embody. 
I think the answer to th
at question is ﬁno.ﬂ  There are a number of simple observations 
that suggest that the current equilibrium rate is quite low.  Namely, even with our interest rate 
         
        
       
     
  
    
    
       
      
         
and balance sheet policies in place, we still see the continued existence of resource gaps, a lack 
of any meaningful upward movement in inflation, and relatively low levels of capital spending 

despite piles of cash on corporate balance sheets. These cash stockpiles are an indication that 

expected real returns on physical investment are not very hi
gh. 
To put a number out, the Tealbook-
consistent equilibrium real rate shown in 
Book 
B, as 
circulated over the weekend, 
is negative 0.1 percent.  Some might look at the current real funds 
rate of minus 1.18 percent, as reported in the Tealbook, Book B, and 
say we have adequate 

accommodation in place.  I don™t agree.  
Recall that the Tealbook™s equilibrium real rate is 

calibrated to close the output gap in 12 quarters.  It says nothing about inflation.  In the Tealbook 

baseline, the inflation gap is still wi
th us until 2019.  That would mean that inflation would have 

to run below target for more than a decade 
and, t
o me
, that is simply too long to be considered 
the result of appropriate policy. 
I want to mention that President Bullard 
referred to the fact 
tha
t PCE 
inflation rose to 
2 percent in 2011 and 2012 on the strength of commodity price increases.  I think the reason we 

focus on core 
inflation is
 that 
core is a better indicator of what inflation is likely to be next year, 
because th
e shocks in headline PCE often are transitory.  T
he real test
, I would say
, is, when did 
the Tealbook ever forecast inflation two years out as being at 2 percent or above?  I think that 

has 
not been the case for quite some time. 
While we can 
all 
lament the 
fact that there are large uncertainties regarding the value of 
the equilibrium real rate of interest, uncertainty over inflation forecasting and the stance of 

monetary policy accommodation go hand in hand.  Logically, because the equilibrium rate has a 

str
ong bearing on the inflation outlook, uncertainty over it ought to translate into comparable 
uncertainty over inflation itself.
  In other words, how can we declare we are confident that 
         
      
    
   
                   current low inflation is headed back up to 2 percent unless we are also confident that our policy 
setting relative to 
the 
equilibrium real rate is able to return inflation to target
? This brings me to the third reason my outlook is premised on a whites-of-
their
-eyes 
policy approach.  I recognize that the usual policy lags mi
ght mean that a delay in tightening 
could cause inflation to modestly overshoot 2 percent sometime down the road.  But so what?  Is 

that such a big cost?
  No.  On the contrary, it could be a benefit.  Considering how long inflation 

has been below target, adopting a policy that allows the possibility of such an overshoot actually 

seems necessary to support the credibility of our symmetric inflation objective.  If we find 

ourselves with the federal funds rate at 1 percent or a little bit above that while infl
ation is still 
too low, we could easily regret the conservative credibility that we
™ve built up. 
I would 
also 
say that if we are not willing to allow an overshoot of our inflation objective, 
then I think we should definitely 
be having the conversation that
 President Rosengren was 
suggesting we have in terms of the appropriateness of the level of the inflation objective, if it is 
something that we are not allowed to overshoot with any reasonability.  I think that™s important.  
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR Y
ELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Holcomb. 

MS. HOLCOMB.  And now for something completely different.  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  The Texas economy has decelerated since I last reported to the Committee.  Continued 

low oil prices, the strong dollar, and a weaker national economy pushed state employment down 

by almost 12,000 jobs in March, the first decline in 40 months.  Over the first three months of the 

year, combined job growth averaged a positive but still dismal 0.7 percent, down from 4.2 

percent d
uring the fall of 2014.  Our forecast for December-over-December job growth, which is 
      
           
                           derived from the Texas Leading Index, now stands at 0.5 percent.  That™
s down from a forecast 
of 1 to 2 percent growth six months ago. 
Besides oil and gas, the manufacturing sector has seen the greatest slowing.  Companies 
in the computer and electronics industry say that they are losing opportunities as the appreciating 
dollar pushes up the relative price of U.S.-made capital equipment.  Chemical producers report 

lower se
lling prices and margins and lower exports.  Producers of primary metals have noted 

increasing import competition, too.  Companies in the professional and business services 

industry have been indirectly affected by both low energy prices and the strong dol
lar, 
particularly those with a significant fraction of their clientele in the energy and manufacturing 

sectors.  There have been some reports of adverse spillovers from energy to financial services as 

well. 
Our most up-
to-date information comes from our Te
xas 
Manufacturing and S
ervice 
Sector 
Outlook Surveys.  The latest manufacturing survey results, 
released only yesterday
, show 
production declining in April for the second straight monthŠ
the first consecutive two
-month 
decline since the recession. 
The 
New 
Orders 
Index, too, has registered its worst two-month 
performance since the recession, posting readings of minus 16.1 and minus 14.0 in March and 

April, respectively.  In contrast, our latest service sector survey 
results
, released this morning
, show the headline revenue index rising to 14.6 in April from 10.7 in March.  April™s reading is 

the highest reported so far this year, but 
it is considerably lower than levels reported through 
most of 2014. 
Despite slower job growth, the Texas unemploymen
t rat
e continues to fall, and at 
4.2 percent in March
, it reached its lowest level since July 2007. We have anecdotal reports of 
laid
-off energy workers shifting into construction, especially along the Gulf Coast, 
where skilled 
         
             
  
   
    
          
      
  
    construction workers remain
 in short supply.  The wage and benefit ind
exes from our 
manufacturing and service sector surveys indicate that upward wage pressures are somewhat less 
intense than they were last year.  Looking ahead, health-
care contacts are concerned about losing 
experienced workers in a coming wave of retirements.  In finance, our bankers report flat 

demand and unchanged standards across all major loan categories. 
Oil prices have moved irregularly upward since last month™s FOMC meeting, with WTI 
closing some of the gap 
with 
Brent.  Y
ear-to-date volatility has been driven by conflicting supply 
developments, including unexpected increases in OPEC output
Šname
ly, Saudi Arabia™s 
production was up 4 percent in MarchŠinventory buildups in the U
nited 
States
, and reports of 
slowe
r growth in U.S. oil production.  If the Iran negotiations successfully conclude in June, that 
country could ramp up its output by more than 700,000 barrels per dayŠ0.7 percentage point 
of 
world supplyŠby the end of 2016, which would be enough to lower the 
price of crude between 
$5 and $15 per barrel in 2016, all else staying constant.  The conflict in Yemen is another source 
of uncertainty.  Yemen itself is a negligible producer of crude oil.  However, the threat of wider 
conflict between Saudi Arabia and 
Iran
, and Yemen™s proximity to the fourth-
busiest ch
okepoint 
for crude oil flows in the world, have created fears of supply disruptions. 
Our energy industry contacts tell us that the number of drilled but uncompleted wells, or 
DUCs, has increased between 33 and 50 percent since the end of last year. These are wells that 

have been drilled but are kept out of production.  They are underground inventory.  
New capital 

projects are difficult to initiate, but spending continues on existing contracts.  U.S. oil production 

is expected to peak within the next two to three months.  We are also likely to hit above-ground 

storage constraints within that time 
frame.  Drilling costs are down 20 percent, partly as a result 
of real efficiency gains and partly as a result o
f cheaper labor and equipment.  
There is cautious 
                                       optimism that the worst is over, coupled with recognition that we
™re unlikely to see a return to 
$100-per-
barrel oil any
 time soon.  Repercussions and adjustments in the broader Texas 
economy are ongoing. 
We are a bit more sanguine about the national economic outlook today than we were a 
couple of meetings ago.  It appears considerably less likely now that we will blow through full 
employment at full throttle.  That revised assessment is based on predictions from a small suite 

of models we use to forecast real activity two to four quarters out.  Although each model relies 

on its own set of financial and policy indicators, all are now telling a consistent story
:  solid if 
unspectacular GDP growth, on average, in the second and third quarters of 2015 and a gradual 

deceleration in employment growth over the course of the year, with the unemployment rate 

leveling off in the neighborhood of 5 percent heading into 2016.  
We expect 
trimmed 
mean PCE 
inflation, our measure of the underlying trend in headline inflation, to average about 1¾ 
percent 

over the next four quarters.  As compared with the Tealbook, we are more optimistic on both 
halves of the dual mandate, b
ut we
™re certainly not only
 in the same ballpark as the Tealbook, 
but in the same outfield.  Hopefully, it™
s not left field. 
Although we are looking forward to tomorrow™s GDP report, we don™t expect to take a 
strong signal from it, whatever the number turns out to be.  The first est
imate relies on a lot of 
guesswork, and in any case, 
GDP growth is volatile from quarter to quarter.  As a result, we
™ve 
not found real-
time estimates of lag
ged GDP growth to be especially helpful for forecasting at 
the horizons that are of interest to us.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Data on economic conditions in the Eighth 
District have improved notably during the 
intermeeting
 period.  The pace of job creation was 
           
           
   
   
     
        revised up for 2014, and preliminary data for 2015 has generally been positive.  
The 
District 
unemployment rate continues to decline and stands at 5.7 percent today, according to the most 
recent reading
Šonly slightly higher than the national rate. 
According to the revised BLS d
ata, 
District job creation occurred at about twice the pace 
in 2014 as compared 
with
 2013, which was itself revised higher.  One of the largest revisions 
was in the Louisville MSA which was revised from an
 original estimated value of 2.3 percent 
growth to an updated value of 3.8 percent.  By sector, notable upward revisions occurred in 

transportation, manufacturing
, and professional and business services.
  Correspondingly, 
Louisville™s average hourly earnings growth is significantly faster than the national 
average. 
On the downside, one of the most notable developments in the local labor market was the 
announcement by U.S. Steel that they would temporarily idle their Granite City, Illinois, 
plant
, laying off over 2,000 employees effective in May.  Media repo
rts suggest that the layoffs are 

due, in part, 
to a rise in imports of relatively inexpensive Chinese steel
Šsteel that
, evidently, the 
Chinese do not need in their home market. 
On this dimension, 
my recent intermeeting visit to China
, combined with discussions 
with CEOs and my interpretation of some hard data, has suggested to me that trend growth in 

China may be notably slower than commonly appreciated.  I think this goes beyond the relatively 

weak reported growth rate 
in the first quarter 
to a trend rate 
of growth as low as 4½ percent.  
Chinese GDP statistics are notably opaque
Ša topic of macroeconomic discussion for the 
past 15 

years or moreŠbut corroborating data and anecdotes now seem to be diverging more sharply 

from official reports, suggesting that a 
Chin
ese slowdown is to be taken far more seriously this 
time.
  The proximate cause of the slowdown is likely the ongoing anticorruption campaign, 
                 
                       
       
     which is reportedly casting a very wide net and is likely creating a chilling effect on new 
business formatio
n and business expansion. 
Turning to the national outlook, I have five main areas for comments on the current 
narrative for the U
nited S
tates, 
as reported in the Tealbook, 
FOMC speeches
, and popular 
commentary.  The comments are in the following areas:
  one, potential over
-interpretation of the 
Q1 slowdown; two, an unemployment forecast that I think is not credible; 
three, assumptions 
about 
r* that may be suspect; four, over-interpretation of the likely effects of the value of the 
dollar on U.S. growth pros
pects;
 and, five, underappreciation of the risks of asset price bubbles 
during the next two to three years as rates remain exceptionally low.
  I™m going to comment on 
the first three of these today.  I™m not commenting directly on inflation because I think
 the 
situation in that dimension has not changed greatly during the inter
meet
ing period.  I continue to 
expect inflation to return to target and eventually overshoot 2 percent in 2016. 
On the first issue, potential over-interpretation of the Q1 slowdown, d
ata 
are 
clearly 
weaker on a tracking basis since our 
previous meeting.  GDP will be reported tomorrow 
morning, and the s
taff has penciled in an estimate close to zero. But suppose we take the median 
of the nowcasting table reported in the Tealbook, which 
is 
an 
approximately 1½ percent annual 

growth rate of GDP in the first quarter.  On that basis
, the year
-over-year growth rate would be 
3.3 percent.  I think this number gives a better sense of the underlying pace of growth in the U.S. 

economy and provides 
a better point of reference 
for 
shaping GDP expectations for the 
remainder of this year. 
In addition
, I think that seasonal factors for Q1 are being called into 
question.  We considered Q1 GDP growth averages versus averages for Q2 through Q4 over 

differe
nt time periods
, excluding recessions
, since the mid
-1990s.  Average Q1 real GDP growth 
        
                           has been notably lower in these subperiods.  This broad-
brush analysis suggest
s that low Q1 
growth rates are not occurring by accident, and that Q1 seasonals may need revamping. 
The second issue is unemployment projections balancing out at about 5 percent over the 
forecast horizon despite easy monetary policy
, by conventional definition.  I do not think that 
such a forecast is credible, and I continue to disagree with th
e labor force participation 
assumption behind it.  A key 
paper in the 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
Šby Aaronson 
and others
, published 
in 
2014Šsuggests that labor force participation has been dropping 
according to demographic factors since 2000, 
and, furthermore, that this downward trend will 
continue through the forecast horizon.  This suggests that, on balance, there will be no sustained 

upward improvement in labor force participation and, therefore, that unemployment will 

continue to drop into 
the 
4½ to 4 percent range over the forecast horizon, barring any major 

disruption in the U.S. economy.  This dynamic would be very similar to what was observed 

during the 1990s expansion and again during the 2000 expansion.  On both of those occasions, 
unemployment moved into the low 4 
percent range. 
Previous staff predictions in this area have emphasized increases in labor force 
participation but have turned out to be wrong.  Indeed, the predictions given in the S
ummary of 
Economic P
rojections have also re
lied
, in part, on this story and have also been wrong.  
The 
median SEP forecast as of September 2012 for unemployment at the end of 2014 was too high 
by more than 1 percentage point.  The same was true of the median SEP September 2013 

forecast for unemploy
ment. 
So what™s the bottom line?  We™re charting a course for very low interest rate monetary 
policy based on an unrealistic assessment of future labor market performance, and this will harm 

FOMC policymaking in the quarters and years ahead.  
We can, of co
urse, cite other labor market 
                         
  
   
  
    
        
         
         indicators and thereby bring to bear more information on overall labor market performance.  The 
Board of Governors™ l
abor 
market 
conditions index does exactly this, conveniently summarizing 
information on many different dimensions of labor market performance.  
The 
Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis calculated that the value of this index is comfortably above its long-run 

average since 1986.  This indicat
es that
, based on the totality of available information, labor 
markets are n
ot weak but instead are relatively strong viewed in historical perspective. 
I like this 
index because it brings all information
 together in one place and avoids cherry-
picking particular 
indicators that may or may not be indicative of overall labor market 
performance. 
The third issue is 
r*.  Some commentary has suggested that 
an r* parameter in a 
Taylor 
rule is 
low based on estimates of 
Laubach 
and Williams, which
, combined with relatively small 
inflation and unemployment gaps, would suggest, through a Taylor-
rule
-type calculation
, that 
current policy is approximately the policy recommended by the rule.  This argument could 

rationalize current policy settings, although it would suggest that polic
y is 
perhaps not as 
accommodative as people woul
d intuitively think. 
One comment is that the value of 
r* is highly 
uncertain
, either from a theoretical perspective or a measurement perspective.  Time
-varying 
r* Taylor rules are relatively untested and do not represent the empirical tradition behind Taylor 

rule estimation and recommended policy outcomes. For this reason
, I am skeptical of using 
time
-varying 
r* as a rationale for current policy settings. 
The value of 
r* from a broader perspective should represent the 
Wicksellian 
natural rate 
of interest
, which one might view as governed by the real rate of interest that would prevail in 
an economy without frictions and without monetary policy influence.  
In a wide class of models, we 

know what the 
real rate of interest would be.  It would be the sum of the rate of productivity 
growth and the rate of labor force growth.  These factors alone would drive the real output 
      
   
            
       
    
             
  growth rate in this class of models.  
My staff calculated an 
r* value based on such a view.  It 
turned out to be 2 percent today, and this seems like a good benchmark for 
r* from which to 
calibrate Taylor rule policy recommendations.  Such recommendations would suggest that policy 
is indeed accommodative today, which would match most people™s intuition about current policy 

settings. Interestin
gly, this value of 
r* has historically been somewhat lower than the 
Laubach
-Williams measure
.  It
 has been near zero in recent years, but as of today has moved above 
zero to 
a value of about 2 
percent. 
The bottom line is that there are many ways to look at this value of 
r*, but a sensible 
guess is that 
r* is 
2 percent or higher, meaning policy today is accommodative, 
as intuition 
suggests.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you. 

MR. TARULLO.  M
adam Chair, if I couldŠ
President Bullard
, I was a little bit confused 
by what you were saying about labor force participation, 
and particularly the staff™s assessment 
of it.  My understanding of what the staff has been saying is that while they project a downward 
trend in labor force participation because of demographics, they also assess the decline in the 

immediate post
-crisis years to have been substantially steeper than that
.  And what they were 
predicting
Šand continue, I think, to predict, 
unless Bill 
corrects me
Šis a less steep decline or a 
flattening
-out of current labor force participation
, which eventually has their projected 
demographic trendŒbased participation rate converging with the actual participation rate.  And 

that, I think, is what™s been
 happening over the p
ast year and a half or so
, during which, 
with a 
little bit of fluctuation up and down, 
the labor force participation rate 
has been 
roughly stable, 
which I think is bearing out the staff™s expectation of the convergence of their projected trend 

with actual labor force participation. 
       
        
         
                 
      MR. WASCHER.  Yes, I think that™s how I interpret it as well.  I don™t think what we 
have in the forecast is at all at odds with the 
Aaronson and others paper of 2014.  The gap we 
have in there is roughly what we estimated in that paper, and as Governor Tarullo indicated, we 
expect the downtrend in the participation rate to continue 
and the actual participation rate to 
close the gap by falling less than the downtrend we have. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  First Vice Presiden
t Prichard. 
MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Economic activity in the Third District 
slowed during the first quarter.  While still expanding, the rate of expansion has been below 

expectations.  However, it appears that the recent slowdown may be tem
porary, and that 
sentiment is widely held among contacts in our region.  Unemployment in the region ticked up to 

5.7percent in March
, with Pennsylvania experiencing a significant decline in employment, 
enough that the first-
quarter job growth in the state 
was actually negative.
  However, both our 
April 
Manufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey 
and 
Nonmanufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey 
indicate that the manufacturing and service sectors expanded employment in April and point to 

further job growth and capital expenditures over the second half of the year.  One prominent 

manufacturer in the region indicated that his businesses are poised to grow rather more robustly 

in the second half of the year once they have worked through the necessary inventory correction.  

Although he doesn™t anticipate 2015 to be as strong as last year, the second half of the year 

should see solid growth. 
In response to a special survey question on the effect of the dollar™s appreciation on the
ir manufacturing activity, respondents who ha
ve exchange rate exposure indicated that the 
appreciation negatively affected their operations. 
However, our District does not overly engage 
in foreign trade, 
with exports
 accounting for only 10 
percent of revenues and imports 
         
   
              
            representing about 5 
percent
 of nonlabor costs.  
Thus, the overall effect of the dollar™s rise was 
fairly small 
for 
Third District manufacturers. 
Both nonresidential and residential construction weakened in March.  We are also seeing 
a softening in multifamily housing.  Reflecting th
e overall weaknesses in this sector, house price 
appreciation is also slower than in the 
nation as a whole, 
with prices
 growing in the 3 
to 3½ percent range.
  Retailers in the region have been report
ing healthy sales over the inter
me
eting 
period and modera
te year
-over-
year sales growth. 
Contacts report th
at sales are starting to be 
bolstered by lower gasoline prices, and consumers in the region remain highly confident.  They 

are also paying down post-holiday debt, and debit and credit card lines are declining.  Bankers in 

the region indicate that the growth in the commercial loan segment of their portfolios has picked 

up substantially, while other loan activity has remained fairly flat. 
Thus, our D
istrict reflects 
fairly well what might be transpiring in ot
her regions 
nationally
Ša bit of a step back in labor markets, 
a falloff in manufacturing activity
, and a lack of 
any significant improvement in residential investment.  This slowdown is well reflected in one of 

the series we produce in our real
-time resear
ch center, the 
Aruoba-Diebold-
Scotti Business 
Conditions Index.  The ADS uses six high-frequency data series to construct an index of current 

economic activity.  Those series include
, one, initial jobless claims through the week ending 

April 11 of this year; two, payroll employment through March; t
hree, industrial production 
through March; four, real personal income through February; five, real manufacturing and trade 

sales through January; 
and, six, real GDP through the 
fourth quarter of last year.
  The index is 
centered on zero, which indicates normal growth rates, and the index has recently turned 

negative.  However, we are receiving indications that the somewhat slower growth we have 
              
      
       
   
   
             
  wit
nessed is a temporary phenomenon, and that economic activity is expected to bounce back to 
trend growth rates. 
As mentioned by President Bullard, we also find that, 
historically
, first
-quarter GDP 
growth may not be adequately adjusted for seasonal variation.  Over the past 30 years, 
seasonally 
adjusted growth 
in first
-quarter GDP has averaged significantly less than growth over the 
remaining three quarters
Š1.8 percent as opposed to 2.7 percent.  Additionally, if one examines 
the timing of the 10 
weakest qua
rters over that span, six occurred in the first quarter and
, 50 percent of the time
, the weakest quarter 
was the first quarter of the year.
  Observations like 
these may point us to placing more weight on GDIŠ
gross domestic income
Šor on GDPplus, 
which incorporates the income side of GDP, in interpreting current economic activity.  GDPplus 

has the advantage that, unlike GDI, it is available with the same timing as expenditure
-side data. 
With that as background, we continue to project that overall economic act
ivity will 
accelerate modestly
, that utilization gaps will continue to progressively narrow
, and that inflation 
will continue to firm. With 
a substantial amount of data forthcoming before our June meeting, I 
expect that we™ll have a clearer view of the em
erging trends and confirmationŠor notŠ
that 
first
-quarter economic performance was, indeed, a poor harbinger of the year to come.  Thank 

you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  
President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming national data suggest that the 
economy hit a soft patch in the first quarter, which is consistent with the recent information on 

economic activity in the Fifth Federal Reserve District. 
At the same time, our reports indicate 
that the weakness is widel
y viewed as temporary.  Our diffusion index of manufacturing activity, 
released this morning
, was slightly negative in April, and that followed a reading of negative 8 
            
  
                       
       
   for March
.  B
ut our index of expected shipments six months ahead was a robust plus 38, a 
level 
that has not been exceeded since 2011.  
Similarly, our 
index 
for nonretail service
-sector activity 
was also slightly negative in April, but the index of expected demand six months ahead held 
steady at a pretty positive rate.  And the indexes for employment remain positive across all 

sectors. Retail revenue rose 
5 points to plus 17. 
More broadly, commentary from our directors and industry roundtable participants was 
more positive this month than last, and we™ve heard numerous reports about transitory factors 

having affected recent activity.  An executive at an engineering firm in West Vir
ginia said that 
ﬁweather has been the primary factor in our business slowdown.ﬂ 
Several other reports cited 
production slowdowns attributable to the West Coast port strike.  For example, a manufacturer of 

industrial safety products stated that production 
was interrupted by delays in receiving shipments 
of just one critical part manufactured in China.  These reports suggest that it™s quite reasonable to 

expect a rebound in growth in Q2. 
As usual, any discussion of labor markets these days turns quickly to the subject of 
shortages of skilled workers.  It does seem as if these shortages are having noticeable effects. 

For example, the CEO of a large building materials company told of a trucking company 

refusing outgoing shipments due to a lack of drivers.  
We also continue to hear about markets 
experiencing wage pressures
, and, while not universal at this point, the scope of these 

observations appears to have broadened of late.  This was most apparent in the reports from 

representatives of several staffing firm
s, both national and regional, who serve on our 
roundtables, including a regional representative from Manpower.  
One large staffing firm is 

telling clients to expect upward wage pressure ﬁin all skill levelsﬂ later this year.  Two grocers in 

Richmond recently announced double-
digit starting
-wage increases, perhaps 
in response to Wal
-         
     
       
     
  
                 
    Mart™s announcement.  A large auto manufacturer plans to raise starting wages for assembly line 
workers at a plant in our District from $13.17 an hour to $15.85 an hourŠabout 20 
percent. 
A lumber company in West Virginia has responded to a shortage by bringing in entry-
level workers 
from Puerto Rico, renting houses for them, and hiring an interpreter, all of which raise the cost of 
labor by 10 to 15 percent.  
These reports suggest that broader wage pressures may be about to 

emerge, although I recognize that wage acceleration is not yet apparent in the monthly figures for 

average hourly earnings. 
Turning to the national economy, as I said, we™
ve clearly hit a soft patch recently. 
Some 
of that softness was due to well
-known temporary factors.  Combined, these transitory factors 
could well explain a large part, if not all, of the first
-quarter slowdown.  
Moreover, this wouldn™t 

be, as many have noted, the first flat quarter we™
ve se
en during this expansion.  So the question 
is how rapidly economic activity picks up again from here as the effect of these transitory factors 

fade. I share th
is Tealbook™s optimism on consumer spending, and that™s based on robust 
income growth, solid consumer sentiment readings, and continued improvement in labor market 

conditions.  The rebound in car sales last month was an important piece of evidence that 

consumers have the confidence to boost spending in the months ahead. 
Turning to inflation, the late
st readings have been a bit firmer than expected.  Core CPI 
inflation averaged 2.3 percent at an annual rate from December to March.  The staff™s translation 

into core PCE inflation is 1.4 percent over the same three months, and that implies that Q4 will 

be the low point for core PCE inflation.  Oil prices appear to have bottomed out and the run-up in 

the dollar seems to have lost steam, so the transitory downward pressures on headline inflation 

are waning. Thus, it seems fairly clear to me that we are eme
rging from this inflation dip
, and 
inflation will be moving towards 2 percent in coming quarters. 
                      
         
             Looking ahead, as several of you have mentioned, we will receive more than the usual 
amount of data over the upcoming intermeeting period, including, importan
tly,
 two employment 
reports and two reports on personal income and consumption.  
If the data come in consistent with 
the Tealbook forecast, we would have solid evidence in hand at our June meeting that consumer 

spending growth had rebounded and that inflation was moving up.  If so, I believe the case for 

raising rates would be strong, s
o it seems premature to make any statements at this meeting or in 
the days immediately ahead, I believe, that could be interpreted as taking June off the table.  

Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Unemployment in the 
Tenth 
District remains 
very low at 4.2 percent, and recent employment growth has been modest but is mixed across 

states and industries.  Several 
District 
states are seeing sizable oil and gas layoffs, and negative 
spillovers are showing up in regional factory and transportation activity as well as in consumer 
spending 
areas 
and 
those that are 
energy dependent.  
Through the first quarter of this year, 
District energy jobs were down 4½ 
percent
, and firms in our latest energy survey expect 
their 
employment to fall by 12 percent this year.  District manufacturing is also feeling the 
effect, as 
the last time our manufacturing survey composite was lower than 
its April reading was in early 
2009. Firms responding to our energy survey, however, note 
that 
breakeven oil prices have 
fallen considerably as services costs have dropped, providing some encouragement for future 

activity as oil prices edge higher.  On the other hand, D
istrict states with virtually no oil and gas 
activity have seen a solid start to 2015.  Colorado, in particular, continues to grow rapidly, driven 

by strong tourism and construction activity.  
As a result, total employment in the region is up 
       
      
       
         
  
     
              slightly this year, and overall services activity in the District continues to grow despite the 
energy layoffs.  In agriculture, drought has worsened, although winter wheat production is 

shaping up to be similar to its recent five-
year average, and corn a
nd soybean planting intentions 
are generally strong.  Still, persistently low crop prices and elevated input costs continue to 

increase farmers™ short
-term financing needs. 
For the national economy, my outlook for growth over the medium term is little chan
ged
.  I assume that 
the softness in first
-quarter GDP proves transitory, as it has for the past several 
years.  Weather effects and the sharp decline in energy investment look to be important factors 

holding down first-quarter growth.  However, more persis
tent factors 
producing softer export 
growth and a broader slowing in new investment bear watching.  
Alternatively, personal 

consumption appears to have some upside potential, 
as there is yet to be a significant boost to 

spending from lower gasoline prices. 
March™s payroll numbers were clearly below expectations, though the labor market 
continues to improve in several aspects.  The services sector continues to perform well.  In the 

first quarter of this year, services added
, on average, 
179,000 additional jo
bs per month.  This is 
better than the 134,000 
average in the first quarter 
of 
last year.
  Overall, I expect average 
monthly payroll growth to drift down from the rapid pace of 260,000 per month last year to 

200,000 this year before settling down to a pace 
of around 150,000 next year as the labor market 
continues to tighten and growth moves to its trend level. 
Research by my staff also indicates improving labor market conditions, 
as reflected by 
the number of workers moving from lower-
to higher
-paying sect
ors
Šthat is, the extent of 
cyclical upgrading.  Their analysis shows that the rise in the quits rate over the past two years is 

primarily due to a higher quits rate in sectors with lower pay, like wholesale/retail trade and 
           
        
               
  
      
   
      
      leisure/hospitality.
  Tracking individual workers in these sectors using C
urrent 
Population 
Survey data shows 
that 
they have recently been moving into higher-
paying sectors, like 
education and health services, at rates similar to those before the recession. 
Turning to inflation, I expect
 inflation to remain somewhat below target due to lagged 
effects from low energy prices and a stronger dollar.  Inflation in some sectors, such as health 
care, have also notably slowed.  In addition, 
because of some of the current factors affecting 

inflation, year-over-year core could drift lower as stronger readings from a year agoŠ
core PCE 
readings from March to June of last year were 
running at a solid 2 
percent pace
Šdrop out of the 
12-month window.  
Such base effects have not affected 
my overall confidence regarding the 
medium
-term outlook for inflation, assuming 
there are 
continued improvement in the labor 

market and stable longer-
term expectations.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kocherlakota. 

MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam 
Chair.  I will start with a few observations 
about the Ninth District economy.  It™s generally robust, but the decline in oil prices is certainly 

creating challenges in some areas.  I will then turn to the national economy, 
where I see 

continued shortfall
s in aggregate demand relative to supply. 
Labor markets are tight in many parts of the Ninth District, 
with contacts reporting 
significant swaths of unfilled openings.  There are signs of growing wage pressures in some 

economic sectors and geographical are
as.  However, overall, wage pressures remain muted. 
Importantly, many businesses report having little or no ability to pass on wage increases to 

consumers in the form of price increases.  So this is actually a flip side of the argument that 

President Will
iams 
offered
Šhe indicated that he didn™t need to see wage increases to feel 
confident in the 
return 
of 
inflation to 2 percent. 
The flip side of this is that we might see wage 
      
       
             
   
    
           
   increases happening and still not see inflation
, because the question is whether those businesses 
experiencing the wage increases have 
the pricing power to pass that on.  The contacts 
that 
we talk
ed to in the intermeeting period suggested they do not. 
Contacts at businesses with an international footprint expressed concern during 
the 
intermeeting period about how the high value of the dollar would affect the demand for their 

products, especially in light of overall softness in global demand conditions.  And so
me of
 the 
comments that 
President Bullard
 offered about China echo things we heard from our contacts 
during the intermeeting period. 
Not surprisingly, economic activity has slowed greatly in the oil-producing areas of 
North Dakota.  However, overall confidence in the B
akken region remains high.  Many, if not 
most, of our contacts r
eport seeing the currently low level of economic activity as a welcome 
opportunity to shore up critical infrastructure needs in the western part of North Dakota. 
Let me turn to the national economy.  Both real and nominal variables are telling us a 
similar story, I believe:  
There is insufficient aggregate demand to use available resources in an 
effective fashion.  In terms of real activity, if we look back over the past five years since the end 

of 2009, real GDP growth has averaged 2.3 percent.  T
here is l
ittle sign of this pace 
quickeningŠl
ast year
, real GDP growth was only 2.4 percent.  H
ere I
™m using annual averages 
to get away from some of the seasonal adjustment factors that have been highlighted in previous 

interventions.  
This year
 now looks like it may be even worse than this weak average 
performance.  In the wake of the data that we
™ve 
received from the first quarter, Tealbook
, Book 
A, has downgraded its outlook for 2015 economic activity, and it now projects growth in this 

calend
ar year to be less than 2 percent.  We will get more information
, of course
, tomorrow 
morning along these lines. 
            
          
            
                      
  The persistence of these patterns has led some to conclude that they reflect a permanent 
downward shift in the productive capabilities of the United States.  I think we should be very 
cautious before accepting these claims. We saw significant improvement in all labor market 

metrics in 2014.  This improvement seems to have had 
little 
effect
 on the excess supply of 
human resources in the economy. 
We saw little upward pressure on compensation or on the 
inflation outlook.  This conjunction of low price pressures and strong employment growth 

suggests 
that the 
ﬁRoom to Growﬂ 
scenario i
n Tealbook, Book A, might be quite relevant.  And 
if you look at th
e implications of that scenario, the weakness of aggregate demand relative to 

supply creates concerns with respect to nominal variables. 
The outlook for inflation in 
Tealbook, Book A, 
is 
that it will be below target until 2019, well over four years from n
ow. 
Just to follow up on some of the discussion we heard earlier about inflation over the past 
few years, headline 
inflation 
did go above 2 percent in 2011, but I think if you go back over 
2008, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2013, and 2014, in all of those years, 
it was below 2 percent.  In 2011, it 
was above 2 percent.  On average, over that time frame since the end of 2007, 
it™s been
 about 
1.3 percent. Market
-based longer-
term inflation expectations remain low. 
I want to
 say something about the prediction issue.  It™
s absolutely true
, I think
, that if 
you do horse 
races of th
e kind 
that President Williams talked about
, market-
based measures 
don™t really fare that well. I think it
™s actually because they™re 
of value to policymakers, not just 
to statistical 
forecasters, because we
™re interested in a different loss function.  We
™re not 
interested in just minimizing mean square
d error
, we™
re actually interested in trying to mitigate 
low inflation, especially when it
™s going to be costly to households.  And I th
ink that 
monitoring 
these market
-based measures of inflation expectations 
is helpful along those lines. 
         
             
   
    
  
    
          
     
       
     Tealbook, Book A, notes that we™
ve seen some slippage in Michigan survey measures as 
well
ŠI don™t want to put too much weight on that at this stage, but 
it™s something to watch.
 I think there are signs in these data that we may be facing a prolonged period of inflation running 
substantially below our target.  Now, why should we care about a possible downward slippage in 

inflation and inflation expectatio
ns? 
This builds on some of the remarks that 
President 
Rosengren already made, that p
ersistently lower inflation expectations translate to lower nominal 

interest rates.  Lower nominal interest rates translate into little recession
-fighting capacity for the 
central bank.  And such a reduction 
in policy capacity would be especially troubling because it 
would build on the policy capacity associated with a significant decline in the neutral real 

interest rate noted by President Rosengren.  
So this decline in inflation expectations really 

creates a first
-order loss in terms of what we are trying to accomplish 
because it increases the 
probability of hitting up against the zero lower bound. 
As President Rosengren 
suggested, the decline in the neutral rate of intere
st should lead 
us to consider raising the inflation target.  I see a great deal of possible merit in this
 suggestion.  
More generally, I think that it would be useful to have discussions about the long-
run goals that 
we have established.  We learn 
more 
over time
, and it™
s useful to take 
that
 on board.  
We d
on™t 
want to do it every year, certainly, but I think at intervals we should be taking on information and 

reevaluating the long
er-run goal statement.  
The 
Bank of Canada does this on a five-
year basis
.  Every five years they go back and relook 
at their framework and what they™
ve learned
, and 
I think there
™s something to be gained from that kind of systematic reevaluation of our framework.  
So I would be very supportive of further discussion of President Rosengren™s suggestion. 
With that said, first things first.  We actually need to forestall a possible decline in 
inflation expectations 
today 
generated by a failure to hit the current low target. 
During the 
               
          
           
         
  
  intermeeting period, Governor Haruhiko Ku
roda of 
the Bank of Japan visited Minnesota 
and 
gave an excellent speech.  He described the aggressive efforts of the Bank of Japan to stimulate 
an increase 
in inflation expectations.  As I listened to him, I was reminded yet again of how we 
need to do all that we can to avoid leaving our successors with the kind of tough situation that 

Governor 
Kuroda now faces. 
I don™t see that determination reflected in 
alternative B, but I won™t 
talk about that until tomorrow.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
  In terms of the economic 
outlook, I™m of two minds.  On the one hand, I™m more uncertain about the growth outlook and 

more concerned about the potential downside risks to growth.  On the other hand, I think the 

downside risks on the inflation side have lessened considerably.  A
t the last meeting
, I would 
have said that I expected further labor market improvement but was not yet reasonably confident 

that inflation would return to our 
2 percent objective ov
er the medium term.  Now, I would at 
least partly reverse things.  Conditional on further improvement in the labor market, I™m getting 

closer to being reasonably confident that inflation will return to our 2 
percent objective
, but I am 
less confident about when I will see further labor market improvement and how quickly it will 

occur. 
Turning first to the growth side
, it strikes me 
that 
there 
are 
a lot of crosscurrents right 
now, and it™s really difficult to assess the net 
effect
.  To me, this sharp slowing 
in payroll growth 
in March should not be a big surprise, however.  As I noted in my comments at the March 

FOMC meeting
, a big gap had opened up between payroll growth and GDP growth, so unless 
one thought that the productivity growth trend would remain ex
traordinarily poor, it seemed 

reasonable to expect 
either 
GDP growth to pick up or payroll growth to slow down.  A
s it turns 
      
        
           
   
              
            out, GDP growth slowed rather than picked up, s
o that left payroll growth to bear the brunt of the 
adjustment. 
As I assess the firs
t quarter, I do think there are both transitory and more persistent 
factors responsible for the slowdown.  On the transitory side, the 
Federal Reserve Bank of 
New 
York™s staff analysis
 does suggest 
that 
severe winter weather did have a sizable effect
. We 
put the 
impact
 at about 1½ 
percent on 
the
 annualized growth rate, slightly less than last year.  Having 
said that, I wouldn™t take that point estimate too literally. 
Also
, I do think the West Coast port 
slowdown did disrupt economic activity.  We had a small business advisory group meeting, and I 
was surprised that two out of the eight or nine businesses that attended referenced the port 

slowdown as hurting their businesses 
in the first quarter
Šthis is 
around upstate New York and 
New Jersey, and that™s not really where I would expect 
the 
port slowdown to actually manifest 
itself
, so I thought that was meaningful. 
There 
are
 also some more long-
lasting components as well. As Steve Kamin made clear, 
the dollar™s sharp appreciation has led to a deterioration in U.S. net exports, and the 
Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York staff estimates that a 15 percent appreciation of the broad rea
l trade
-weighted 
dollar, which is a little bit m
ore than we have right now in hand, would cut about 0.6 
percentage point from the level of real GDP after one year, and I think that™s pretty consistent 

with the Tealbook estimates.
  And I think it™
s important because that™s just the partial 
equilibrium effect.  If you have a trade drag, it also drains real income from the economy, so 

there™s also the risk of second-
order effects. 
Now, the second thing 
is that 
oil and gas investment is plunging.  I™m not sure how 
severe the knock
-on 
effects will be, but I d
on™t think we™re done yet.  Firms have been protected, 
in part, this year by hedging their future forward production by selling oil forward, and they™
ll           
        
       
                      
       
     
   
become more exposed to the current oil prices as time passes
, so I expect a downward trend in 
investmen
t to continue.  As Helen Holcomb pointed out in her comments about the Texas 
economy, the effect does seem to be quite a bit larger, I think, than expected.  
Richard Fisher 

said
Šin January, I 
believe it was
Šat th
at time he thought that employment growth in 
Texas, 
which was well above average compared 
with 
the country, would slow down to the national 
average.
  But if you look at the payroll data in March for states on a seasonally adjusted basis, 
payrolls in Texas fell by 25,400 people, which is pretty sizab
le for Texas. 
And it™s interesting 
that Oklahoma was the state with the second
-largest decline in payroll. So
, clearly
, the fall 
in oil 
and gas investment is having a significant 
effect
.  It™s rippling through to incomes
, and i
t™s rippling through into c
ommercial real estate construction
, so I think it actually has a more sizable 
effect than just looking at oil and gas investment itself. 
Third, I think the inventory accumulation, which I don™t think anyone has mentioned, 
looks to me like it™s poised to be a drag on growth.  If you look at the inventory-
to-sales ratios, 
they have been drifting up, and if you look at the rate of inventory accumulation in the first 

quarterŠ
well, we™ll see what we get tomorrow
, but it looks to be on the high side in terms of 
what™s sustainable over the medium term.
  So if you had to ask yourself, 
ﬁAre inventories going 
to contribute positively to growth or negatively to growth over the next year
?ﬂ 
They are 
almost 
certain to be a drag on growth.  In the face of 
all 
of these cro
sscurrents, I think the next few 
months of data are really important.  I™m really looking at what April and May look like.  And 

even if we get strong April and May data, I™m not really sure what to make of itŠi
s this just a 
bounce after first
-quarter weakn
ess, or is this the new trend? 
In contrast to the growth side, I am getting more comfortable that inflation is starting to 
stabilize and is likely to start dri
fting back up toward our 2 percent objective.  When I look at the 
         
                  
  
      
    
     inflation data and all the other factors that feed into the inflation outlook, I think most suggest 
that inflation
Šdespite a stronger dollar, lower energy prices, and still-
sizable slack in the labor 
market
Šactually seems to be stabiliz
ing.  So let me run through the evidence very q
uickly.  If 
you look at the three-month change in the core CPI, it™s now above 2 percent compared 
with 
a 12-month change of 1.8 percent.  Inflation compensation, 
as measured by the five
-by-
five 
forward TIPS versus nominal Treasury has moved up a bit.  
Surv
ey measures of inflation 
expectations are generally stable, and I would argue that wage compensation growth trends are 

stable to slightly higher. 
So the fears I had of inflation getting unanchored to the downside seem to have 
diminished.  I could imagine that things could have worked out quite differently.  We™d have 

lower headline inflation feeding through into core inflation
.  T
hat, 
in turn
, would 
depress 
nominal 
wage 
growth and cause 
inflation expectations to be anchored 
to the downside.  And the 
fact th
at we haven™t seen that at this point, I think, makes that dynamic much less likely.  So I™m 
much more confident now that inflation will return to our 2 percent objective, subject to having 

sufficient growth to continue to close the output gap.  Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  This discussion has appropriately focused on 
the significantly weaker
-than-expected incoming data on first-
quarter economic activity.  The 
staff forecasts a r
eturn to higher growth of around 2 percent or more in the second quarter and 
the second half of the year, and we™ve heard similar forecasts during this round of discussion 

from several of the 
Reserve 
Bank presidents.  The Tealbook forecast is, not surprisingly, 
consistent with what we see in the charts given 
to 
us by Bill Wascher
Šin particular, the two real 
GDP forecasts and their fan charts
.  S
o there™s a fair probability that will happen, but it™s not a 
      
    
               
         
       
    guarantee that we™re going to bounce right back in the coming quarter and there 
have been some 
weak data in April. 
In terms of elementary textbooksŠlooking at C + 
I + G + NXŠthe Tealbook forecast
s expect the bulk of the rebound in the second quarter to come from consumption, which is a 
reasonable forecast i
n light of expectations for employment and real disposable income.  
The 
Tealbook also expects government purchases to rebound significantly, net investment to decline 

more slowly than it did in the first quarter, and net exports to decline at the same rate 
as in the 
first quarter.
  This is all very interesting, but of course, we™re waiting for tomorrow™s first 
estimate of first
-quarter growth to clarify
, perhaps, 
what happened in the first quarter. 
When you focus on recent growth rates, you get a fairly pes
simistic picture of what™s 
happening, and we need to remind ourselves that the overall position of the economy is good.  

Let me start with the labor market.  The unemployment rate remains at 5.5 percent, a level that is 

not that much above many estimates of the natural rate today and is not above estimates of the 
natural rate that we had going into the March meeting.  A year ago we didn™t think we™d reach a 
rate that low until 2016
.  A
nd, importantly, some, though not all, 
of the other labor market 
indicato
rs whose behavior suggested that the U-3 unemployment rate understated the extent of 
labor market problems appear to be returning to pre-
recession levels. 
So, from the policy 
viewpoint, the basic question on output and employment is whether employment wil
l continue to 
grow at a rate sufficient to bring further improvement in the labor market in coming quarters. 
The inflation rate remains below target, and that is a problem.  However, one gets the 
impression that while we are committed to looking through tr
ansitory factors
Šparticularly dollar 
appreciation and the decline in oil prices, 
and gasoline prices in particular
Špopular discussion 
both here and in Europe has not focused on what that means.  It does not mean focusing solely 
      
     
           
          
            on core inflation, because both energy and import prices affect core inflation.  Core PCE 
inflation was 1.3 percent over the 12 months through March.  According to Board staff estimates 

in the Tealbook, increases in the dollar, which are very unlikely to persist indefinitel
y, 
are 
holding down that figure by 0.3 percentage point this year, bringing what could be called 

nontransitory core inflation to something like 1.6 percent.  And current energy price changes are 

reducing core inflation by another 0.1 percentage point, which brings you to a nontransitory core 

inflation rate of 1.7 percent. 
Now, you might be concerned about this if the low core numbers were being reflected in 
declining inflation expectations, but the survey measures seem to be relatively well anchored.  

And a
ll this, again, seems consistent with the data presented in the 
bottom two charts in Bill 
Wascher™s handout
, which show inflation coming back rather quickly to just below 2 
percent. 
I expect that the transitory factors
Šwhich are, fundamentally, 
oil and th
e exchange rate, which 
may or may not turn around reasonably soonŠwill gradually abate and possibly begin to reverse 
themselves.  We only need them to abate.  And labor market slack will continue to diminish, 
putting inflation on a path that, over the medi
um term
, will take us very close to our inflation 
target.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 

MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  A lot of people have talked about Q1 and 
have posed the question, 
ﬁWas Q1 an aberration?
ﬂ I certainly
 hope that it was an aberration, and 
I expect that it has been an aberration. 
And I don™t think, personally, that 
we™re going to learn 
that much from the GDP number tomorrow morning.  I
f it
™s kind of low or really low, it may not 
tell us very much because
 we had a really low number in the first quarter of 2014, and that didn™t 

seem to mean very much a quarter or two later. 
       
      
  
           
   
         
    
              
         I actually think the question is not so much 
ﬁWas Q1 an aberration?ﬂ 
but more the 
question that was implicit in some of 
Vice Chairman D
udley
™s analysis a minute ago
: ﬁAre 
there 
things at work in the economy that will give us a growth path for the rest of the year that
™s somewhat lower than what many of us expected toward the end of last year
?ﬂ Not that it will in 
any way resemble Q1, bu
t that somehow there are forces that are restraining growth a little bit 
more than we would have anticipated.  
Vice Chairman Dudley
 suggested one in his presentation.  
Another possible explanation of that phenomenon, should it occur, is the one that 
I think lies 
behind the Tealbook™s alternative scenario of a persistent slowdownŠ
that is, 
that there is a kind 
of confidence problem that™s inhibiting consumer spending despite the extended improvement in 

income fundamentals because of job growth and mayb
e a little bit of wage growth
, as well. 
I think for that reason one has to be a little agnostic right now in awaiting data over the 
next couple of months
Šas President Mester
, Vice Chairman Dudley, and several other people 
have said
.  A
lthough, as someoneŠI 
think it was 
Vice Chairman Dudley
Šalso said
, even then, 
it™s not clear how much some of the questions we™
ve been asking will be clarified because 
there
™s going to be a certain degree of snapback.  So instead of trying to speculate about all of 
that, I wan
ted to put on the table in a little bit more detail something 
Simon had an exhibit on in 
his presentation at the beginning of this meeting and that is the phenomenon of negative interest 

rates on European sovereign debt.  This phenomenon may be relevant to 
an assessment of the 
most likely medium
-term U.S. growth trend because of 
its potential 
effects
 on financial markets 
and the dollar, potential downside risks, andŠ
and I
™m not going to talk about this, but it may be 
relevant to the 
great debate about s
ecul
ar stagnation. 
There have been negative interest rates on some shorter
-term European sovereign debt for 
several years now, but the last six months or so have 
seen a qualitative change in the 
       
     
             
   
       
                    phenomenon in a number of respects.  First, negative rates have m
oved down along the yield 
curve in European countries with the strongest credit reputations to the point that, as in the chart 
that Simon distributed, we now see negative interest rates in a nontrivial portion of 5-
to 7
-year 
debt in the stronger European sovereigns.  Second, yield curves, as he mentioned, are quite flat in 

these countries.  I just checked this morning, and the spread between German 
2-year and 10-
year 
government bonds is about 40 basis points.  That compares to a spread of about 140 basis points 

for U.S. T
reasury securities.
  The 30-
year 
bund is still trading positively but 
at 63 basis points, 
which is a pretty low number for a 30-year.  As everybody knows, the Swiss 10-year sovereign 

issue earlier this month went out at negative rates, and 
I believe that™
s the first time 
in history 
that any sovereign debt of that duration has been priced negatively.  
And 
so, as 
far as Thomas 
Jordan knew, he was setting a precedent, or at least his country™s government was setting a 

precedent. 
Currently, 
as S
imon™s chart shows, more than 35 percent of all euro-zone government 
debt carries a negative interest rate. As recently as two weeks ago
, I think
, it was up over 
40 percent. There
™s been a little bit of an interest rate change since then, which has affec
ted the 
yields in some of those medium
-term tenors.
  Substantial portions of some non-euro-zone 
sovereigns, notably Denmark and Switzerland, also are priced at negative rates, and some 

shorter-duration corporate bonds of the highly rated European firms are 
also priced at negative 
rates now. 
Clearly, this is all related to long
-standing European economic problemsŠand, 
more 
immediately, first the prospect and now the reality of the ECB™s QE program.  It
™s also related
, I guess, 
to the relative scarcity of sov
ereign debt instruments 
issued by countries like Germany 
that continue to run tight fiscal policies and large current account surpluses, notwithstanding 
                                 
  
   
  
           
 economic conditions in the euro zone more generally.  
The unprecedented nature of this 
phenomenon has caused most thoughtful analysts to offer only tentative v
iews of the relative 

importance of various 
stories that explain
 why investors would hold longer-
term sovereigns with 
negative yields.  
Logically, I think the explanations fall into three 
categories. 
First is gloom 
about the long
-term prospects for the countries in question.  Now, it™s true, there™s not a whole 

lot of high optimism to be found about European growth prospects, but almost everybody 

discounts this as a dominant explanationŠ
that is, the idea that there
™s going to be negative 
growth 
or deflation
 for 10 years in Europe. 
The s
econd group of explanations are based on investor inertia, basicallyŠwhether 
forced, as in the case of pension funds and some other institutions, which may be required by 
law 
or regulation to hold certain percentages of extremely low-risk bonds, or unforced, as in the case 

of other investors who are themselves unsure of what all 
of 
this negative rate stuff means and are 
waiting right now to see what happens, and maybe 
chan
ge their investment decision if things 
don™t turn around relatively soon. 
The third set of explanations is that, in an environment that doesn™t offer 
a lot of 
appealing investment options, 
there may be some plays available here.  For example, you may 

get capital gains if yields go even further into negative territory, or you may get exchange rate 

gains whether from short-
term developments that cause quick swings in currencies or from 
longer-term appreciations of currencies with very low inflation or even deflation.  That is, if you 

think that there
™s going to be very low inflation in Switzerland for a long time to come and you 
are a U.S. investor, and you think that there™s going to be inflation in the United States, you 

might actually end up profiting by that play.  
As an example of th
is search for an investment 
play, I took note of one analyst™s advice to his clients that the best play may be in bonds with a 
        
           
  
       
           good bit of convexity so as to m
aximize the chances of catching the wave of large market 
movements when these trends reverse. 
To date, as a very good 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Market
Source 
report 
indicated, there have been relatively few discontinuities observed in European debt markets.  But 
I think this is the point at which Herb Stein™s memorable aphorism comes to mind, because 

unless the medium
-term prospects for Europe are a lot worse than most people think, there™
s going to be a reversal of negative rates at some point.  Even 
if there
™s no near
-term reversal 
resulting from sufficiently enhanced growth prospects or from sufficiently significant policy 

moves, a nontrivial number of investors might, over time, 
overcome their inertia and start 

seeking positive nominal yields elsew
here. 
There are 
a lot of potential outcomes here, some of which are relatively benign.  Others, 
though, are of potentially greater concern.  For example, if enough investors were caught flat
-footed by an unexpected change in ECB policyŠand, paradoxically, an unexpected 
improvement in European economic prospectsŠ
there could be some pretty significant turmoil in 
relevant markets, although there we would have to ask ourselves how much the financial turmoil 

would be offset by the prospect of improvement in the real economy.  I think of 
even greater 
concern to us would be a decision by those investors who did not initially move out of European 

sovereign debt that they couldn™t take the uncertainty or the negative rates any longer.  The 

natural destination for the
se investors is
, of course, U.S. T
reasury securities
, and I think that 
some of the dollar strengthening we™
ve seen this year has been attributable to 
the existence of 
investors
 who have already made such a move.  And it is possible, though very hard to judge 
how likely, that many more could follow.  If they were to do so, the recent modest retracing by 

the dollar could itself be halted and reversed pretty significantly. 
                  
       
      
                  On this last possibility, it™s worth mentioning that, notwithstanding the notable spread
s between 
bunds and T
reasury securit
ies, some European investors have apparently concluded that 
the roughly 80 basis point difference between German and U.S. two-
year 
bond rate
s is 
insufficient to compensate for currency
-hedging costs and other risks.  And 
this calculus is
, I think, what may be contributing to some of the otherwise-
hard
-to-explain changes in the yield 
curves of some of the stronger European sovereigns, since fundamentals are not really changing 
there but you™re seeing some movement in those yield curves, which I take to be everybody 

repositioning
, trying to figure out the best defensive place to be right now.  So investors may be 
moving around within bonds that are either euro-denominated or effectively tied to the euro. 
But if that spread b
etween 
U.S. T
reasury interest rates 
and rates on European sovereigns 
were to widen, either because we raise rates or because QE and other developments in the EU 

drove yields down even further there, then more European investors might be tempted to take the 

Atlantic plunge.  And this, in turn, could cause some market dislocation in Europe, a renewed 
unwelcome strengthening of the dollar, or both.  This is pretty speculative right now, but 
certainly in a context in which the trajectory of U.S. economic perfor
mance is at least in some 
question after the 
past few months, I think this situation is another reason for us not to be in a 
hurry to raise rates, at least not until we
™ve had a chance to see how investors are adapting, and, 
most importantly, what their adaptation means for the dollar. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The incoming data for the first quarter have 
been weaker
, overall, than expected, including data for household and business spending, 
industrial production, and housing starts and permitsŠ
a little bit different but quite similar to the 

first quarter of 2014.  In addition, the initial BLS report on the employment situation for March 
              
   
   
        
      
     
       was also much weaker than expected, and 
that™
s different from last year
, when payroll gains 
continued 
to be 
very strong right through the first quarter.  And the question, of course, is how 
much signal to take.  
One reason to discount these data somewhat are the transitory factors that 
are likel
y to reverse, including bad winter weather and the West Coast port disruption 
as well as 
the technical factors that have been discussed.  Another is that GDP data may eventually be 

significantly revised and is a noisy signal
Šand I thought that the new exhibit in Tealbook, 
Book A, on prediction intervals was interesting and useful on that point.  
In any case, it makes 
sense to me to take some signal from this year™s weak first quarter, both for labor markets and 

for GDP
.  I think the baseline staff forecast 
strikes a reasonable balance for the rest of this year 
by assuming higher GDP growth, but not a significant catch-up quarter like we had in the second 

quarter 
of 
2014. On inflation, I would tentatively say I feel a little better about inflation, which is n
ow 
forecast to run at about 1½ 
percent
 for Q2, well above the Q1 readings.  Survey expectations 
remain stable.  Breakevens have moved up modestly across the curve since the March meeting, 

seemingly driven more by oil prices and liquidity rather than changing expectations.  
In light of 
all of the recent market readings that suggest concerns about low inflation, it™
s an improvement
, for a change, 
to read stories that fixed
-income traders are seeing a greater likelihood of inflation 
getting back to mandate-consistent levels and less risk of very low inflation.  
Of course, we may 

overread these market movements, and it may simply be that TIPS got a little cheap relative to 

nominals, and traders acted on that.  The underlying story of a return to 2 percent inflation over 

the medium term, given GDP and labor market outcomes as forecast, continues to make sense to 

me.  And I look forward to gaining more confidence from the incoming data on that.  I would 
      
  
   
    
                        
   worry more about lower inflation in the case that the economy does slip into a lower gear in 
growth and labor markets. 
Looking forward, the positive narrative is that consumer spending will increase to healthy 
levels supported by low energy prices, high confidence, and much better labor market conditions. 

In fact
, going back to 
Stan
™s basic equation, you could say that the U.S. economy has grown at 
about 2.7 percent over the last two years, with net exports at around zero.  With net exports now 

contributing negative 0.7 to negative 0.8 percentage point, you have to ask, where is growth 

going to come from?  It™s not going to come from government spending
, it™s not going to come 
from housing investment, and it™s not going to come from business investment in a world in 

which
 drilling is being significantly reduced.  So it really has to come from consumption.  And, 
in fact, in the medium
-term forecast
, PCE growth accounts for well more than 100 percent of the 
growth.  That narrative, I have to say, makes sense to me, but it does amount to an airplane 

flying on one engine.  S
o far
, the combination of the weak spending data and high consumer 
confidence says that the consumer, 
in effect
, is now 
ebullien
tly saving. 
In terms of the risks, one, of course, is that PCE growth does disappoint.  Another one, 
frankly, is that
, in a 
world of still
-slow growth, a return to stronger growth here could well lead 
to a tightening in financial conditions not so much through the rate channel as through the dollar 

channelŠi
t may not be a rate tantrum that is really the threat this time.
  We will see
, by the time 
of the June meeting, 
whether there is progress in addressing Greece™s fiscal crisis or whether 

Greece, instead, is headed for control
s on capital flows
, sovereign default, and the like, with 
potential disruption for the U.S. economy.  
We™ll see two more
 employment reports and 
a lot 
more data.  And we™ll know, I think, at that point, something about whether the first quarter™s 
      
               
      
  
  
  
   
         
        
    disappointment is transitory
 and anomalous or, instead, marks some kind of real loss of 
momentum. 
Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I wanted to reflect briefly on the quarterly 
assessment of financial stability and then turn to the outlook. 
Although overall risks to financial stability in 
the United States remain moderate, one 
area that 
bears 
heightened scrutiny is the potential for spikes 
in volatility due to changes in 
market liquidity.  In particular, we should be asking whether episodes of severe volatility, 
like 
the wild swings we saw
 in T
reasury 
bond yields on the morning of October 15, 
are likely to 
become the new normal.  Bond inventories held by broker-
dealers have declined
, in some part 
due to regulatory changes.  Separately, and predating the onset of Dodd-Frank, changes in 

marke
t structure may be at least as important in some markets
, for which automated and high-
frequency traders may now account for a majority of the activity.  Coupled with the big run-up 
we™ve seen of investments in bond mutual funds, this raises the specter of amplification of 
volatility and fire
-sale dynamics at times when investors looking to cash out could be surprised 
by lower-
than
-expected liquidity.  Together, 
these changes to the structure of financial markets 
could increase the volatility of asset price 
responses. A modest increase in the average 
level of 
volatility shouldn™t be a concern, particularly if market participants respond with more rigorous 
risk management
.  But a lack of liquidity that leads to large and self
-reinforcing swings in prices 
and market freezes during periods of stress could pose threats to financial stability and would be 

especially concerning in the case of the U.S. T
reasury market, with its traditional benchmark 
status. 
                 
          
               
  
   
     I think it
™s premature to draw conclusions for financial 
stability.  Some of the 
preoccupation with the decline in dealer inventories may, 
in fact
, be misplaced, and I think 
focusing too much attention on the critical role of dealers as reliable providers of liquidity during 
severe stress episodes suggests a ver
y high degree of amnesia.  Moreover, bid-
ask spreads are in 
line with historical norms. 
As we
™re learning from the investigation of October 15, we also do 
not yet fully understand the implications of the growing role of high-
frequency traders in these 
mar
kets. 
With heterogeneity across their size, business models, and trading strategies, some of 
their activities may
, in fact
, contribute to market liquidity, 
while 
some 
may be destabilizing. 
And, finally, it™s unclear how much leverage or high-
quality liqu
idity is embedded in bond 
mutual funds and how vulnerable they might be to liquidity mismatch and fire-
sale dynamics. 
The Dodd-
Frank requirement for mutual funds to undertake stress tests holds some promise, but 
only if deployed rigorously.  In short, I a
m very pleased that we are putting intense focus on this 
issue, and I think it will only rise in importance as the date of liftoff approaches. 
Now let me turn briefly to the outlook in the United States.  The recent data on the labor 
market, aggregate spen
ding, and industrial output have been disappointing.  The key question 
that we are wrestling with around this table is how much of this unanticipated weakness 

represents a slowing in the underlying momentum of activity and how much is due to transitory 

dis
turbances
?  The preliminary conclusion I would draw from the surprises in the recent data is 
that the negative impulse to U.S. aggregate demand from the combined effects of the plunge in 

oil prices and the surge in the dollar seem to be at least as strong as we had expected, while the 

expected positive effects have not materialized so far. 
Turning first to the positive effects, recent shocks were expected to be reflected primarily 
in stronger consumption growth, but the recent data have been disappointing.  Some of the 
               
   
  
  
   
            
      
  preliminary indicators of consumer spending are often substantially revised, so we perhaps 
should not take too much signal from them.  Indeed, auto salesŠamong the most reliable of 

indicators
Šrebounded strongly in March.  Nonetheless, subpar data on retail sales have now 
persisted for four months, suggesting that temporary infl
uences or statistical noise 
are 
not fully to 
blame.  On balance, it™s possible that the forces boosting consumer spending may not be as 

strong as we might have hoped.  
Weaker
-than
-expected consumption would be very unfortunate, 
because strength in other ca
tegories of aggregate demand remains elusive.  The recent data on 
housing starts and permits, for example, suggest that this sector continues to struggle. 
On the negative side of the ledger, the drop in oil prices was expected to curtail business 
investment related to drilling, while the dollar™s rise was anticipated to reduce net exports. A 

broad variety of indicators suggests that these effects are materializing with greater force than 

had been anticipated.  Drilling investment looks to have dropped at an annualized rate of 

50 percent in the first quarter
.  And orders and shipments of capital goods, as well as business 
sentiment, have also been weak and suggest that overall business investment will edge lower 

over the first half of this year.  
A variety o
f indicators also suggest 
that the 
stronger dollar is 
weighing significantly on activity.  Net exports subtracted 1 percentage point from growth in the 

fourth quarter, and the staff estimates 
a contribution of minus 
 percentage point in the first 
quarter.
  The national manufacturing purchasing 
managers™
 diffusion index of new export orders 
has been in contractionary territory for the past three months.  Manufacturing production 

declined at an annual rate of 1 percent, and the outlook for internationally or
iented firms has 
worsened significantly in recent days. 
       
               
  
                
       
      
In parallel, the recent labor market data suggest a slowing in the 
take-up 
of slack. 
Average monthly payroll employment gains were 200,000, down about 60,000 from last year™s 
pace
, and all of the indicators of slack have moved sideways in the last month. 
Of course, there™s a danger in reading too much into this data.  It™s entirely possible we™
ll see the stronger trend in underlying activity that was apparent in the second half of the year 

reassert it
self.  But it
™s important to keep in mind the international context.  On the one hand, we 
have seen some encouraging data from the euro area
Šdata on retail sales and industrial 

production, in particularŠwhich holds out some promise that aggregate demand wi
ll strengthen. 
And the dollar™s sharp ascent seems to have stalled, at least for now.  On the other hand, 

negotiations between Greece and its creditors remain challenging.  And although the macro data 

are
 notoriously unreliable, Chinese GDP growth looks to have slowed noticeably in the first 

quarter.
  On balance, the foreign economic outlook suggests continued weak demand in some 
important advanced foreign economies and signs of faltering growth in some important emerging 
market economies.  In this context
, the threat to price stability from stronger demand growth in 
the United States seems quite limited. 
Let me close by touching briefly on inflation.  Recent data have provided some 
reassurance that underlying inflation is not moving lower.  Oil prices have moved up somewhat 
further since March, and the 
3-month moving average of core PCE inflation has increased from 

the very low level reached in January.
  Even so, current estimates of both the 3- and 12-month 
changes in core PCE prices point to an underlying trend rate of only 1.4 percent.  And while it™
s reassuring that survey
-based measures of inflation expectations are remaining stable
, and there 
has been some improvement in market-
based measures, th
e latter 
are still materially below the 
levels 
that preva
iled
 until the middle of last year. 
The overall picture should suggest at least 
              
     
         
        
                
        
some caution about attributing all of the recent softening to transitory factors and puts a high 
premium on incoming data as we assess the timing of liftoff, which is 
the topi
c for tomorrow™s 
discussion.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Well, thank you.  Thanks to everyone for another interesting and 
thoughtful round of observations.  As usual, I™
ll try to summarize a couple of main themes and 
add a few remarks of my 
own. 
Starting with real activity 
and 
the labor market, everyone agreed that the news has been 
generally disappointing since our last meeting, although views 
differed 
about its implications. 
With respect to employment, the March employment report show
ed unexpected weakness in 
payroll gains, but many of you emphasized 
that 
one shouldn™t make too much out of one month™s 
report.  And, still, average gains in the first three months of the year are running 
at about 
200,000, which is a respectable pace, especiall
y given how weak output growth looks to have 
been in the first quarter. Other labor market indicators during the intermeeting period were 
mixed but generally, 
I think
, imply little change in resource utilization.  The unemployment rate 
stayed at 5.5 percent.  Broader measures of labor underutilization ticked down one-tenth, but 
the 
labor force participation rate fell 
one-tenth, and the employment-
to-population ratio was 
unchanged.  You noted that 
the JOLTS
 job openings rate ticked up slightly, but there wa
s also a 
slight decline in quits and hires, and 
at least 
the Board™s labor market condition
s index was 
unchanged.  I noted some reports from business contacts about increases in turnover and the fact, 
as President George mentioned, that people who are 
ﬁtur
ning over
ﬂŠwho are quittingŠ
appear 
to be moving to jobs 
in which
 they™
re receiving wage gains. 
On wages, I think everyone agreed that aggregate measures suggest very little pickup in 
wage growth, although some of you suggested that the reports you™
re recei
ving from your 
       
      
    
                  
        
    
  business contacts are beginning to hint at a broader acceleration in wage gains and labor market 
pressures.
  That said, many of you noted that wage pressures are confined to particular regions 
and sectors
, such as high-
tech 
in Silicon Valley
 and San Francisco.  But, 
as President Williams 
noted, the implications of movements in wages for inflation and 
for 
our criterion of wanting to 
have reasonable confidence that inflation will move back 
are 
debatable, and at least in recent 
years it doesn™t 
look like there
™s that much of a close link between 
nominal wages and inflation. 
With respect to spending, everyone remarked on the unexpected weakness we™
ve seen in 
a broad range of spending and production indicators, including retail sales, housing start
s, orders 
and shipments of capital goods, nonresidential construction, drilling, exports, and industrial 

output.  And, of course, tomorrow morning we receive the first-
quarter GDP preliminary 
estimate.
  The underlying cause of the Q1 slowdown and its implications for future growth is 
obviously very important and unclear at this point.  Many of you mentioned, and cited evidence 

from your business contacts, 
of the importance of bad winter weather and the West Coast port 
dispute.  A number of you mentione
d the fact that we have a pattern here
Šover many yearsŠ
of 
Q1 being unusually weak, suggesting some residual seasonality in the GDP figures.  
Views on 
the size of these transitory effects differ, but if they are substantial
, then the prospects for a quick 
return to moderate growth should be good. 
On the other hand, a number of you mentioned that other explanations for weaker growth 
that may be relevant in the first quarter could have implications 
for the remainder of the year.  In 
particular, the dollar rece
ived a good deal of mention.  It looks like the dollar may be having a 
significant negative effect
 and that many of your business contacts mentioned the negative 
effect 
they™re seeing from the stronger dollar.  In addition, the decline in oil prices does seem to be 

having a significant effect
Šmaybe larger than we anticipated on business investment and 
       
      
                       
                
    drilling activity, and we haven™t yet seenŠ
surprisingly
, perhapsŠmuch evidence of a positive 
effect
 on consumer spending.  The anecdotes that you reported fro
m your business contacts were 
somewhat mixed, but I interpreted those as being reasonably positive in terms of not seeing any 
really significant changes in business prospects. 
On the international side, a number of risks 
were mentioned: 
Greece
; China, 
whose growth looks like it slowed more than expected
; geopolitical risks that bear on oil prices
; and 
a very interesting discussion, I thought, of what™s happening in global financial markets, 
with 

negative rates in Europe and the potential for a 
global reshu
ffling of portfolios that could raise 
volatility or could have very significant effects either on the dollar or interest rates and could be 

triggered by a shift in U.S. monetary policy. 
On the inflation front, incoming data came in pretty much as the 
staff
 had expected.  Core 
inflation was a touch higher than expected.  Oil prices were up somewhat since our last meeting, 

and the broad dollar exchange rate actually fell a little bit during the intermeeting period.  S
ome 
of you noted that these are welcome developments from an inflation perspective, as they indicate 

that the downward impetus 
provided by 
oil and the dollar to 
inflation is ebbing and shouldn™t 
continue. We had a nice discussion of measures of inflation expectations, with survey measures 

generally remaining stable and market-based measures of inflation compensation moving up 

slightly, although 
they are 
still bel
ow where they were last summer. 
President Williams™
s discussion about the relevance of these inflation expectations to inflation forecasts was 

interesting.  They don™t seem to be very good forecasts of inflation, and it is interesting 
that 
we have, 
I thin
k, 
repeatedly noticed that these measures are more heavily influenced by oil prices 
and movements in oil prices than, 
it would seem
, is reasonable. 
             
  
            
                   On the other hand, with respect to inflation and the outlook for inflation, a number of you 
suggested
, I thi
nk, that we could be in for a period in which inflation undershoots our objective 
for many, many years to come
 and, crossing over into the policy domain, suggested quite a bit of 
concern that we may be in for a very long period of an inflation undershoot.  That took us to 
some interesting observations on the question of 
what the equilibrium real rate is
; the possibility 
that it may be persistently depressed or not, as some think
; a debate about what
™s happening with 
the equilibrium real rate
; and the possib
ility 
that 
if the equilibrium real rate really is depressed
, what 
that implies for our monetary policy, and particularly for our inflation target, which is 
something that maybe we want to get back to and consider. 
Okay.  Let me just stop there as 
a summary
 of what I heard.  Are there any comments or 
corrections anyone wants to offer?  [No response] 
Then
 I™d like to offer some comments of my 
own, then we can quit and go to dinner.  I, of course, was also disappointed in incoming data on 

employment, spending, and production.  I recognize this may be just another soft spot, akin to 
what we saw last year and in a number of years past
, and I definitely think we should be careful 
not to overreact to what is a few weeks™ worth of news.  I find it reassuring that indicators of 
consumer confidence remain pretty upbeat, and I really haven™t altered my modal outlook for 

employment and output over the medium term.  I guess if I were updating my SEP forecast now, 

I would mark down projected growth this year, but modestly.  That said, I do find the widespread 

nature of the recent negative surprises disconcerting
, and, at a minimum, I am more worried 
about downside risk and 
am 
more uncertain about the outlook. 
In March my concerns focused on the external sector, and now I see question marks 
pertaining to the underlying strength of domestic aggregate demand as well.  I find it particularly 

disturbing that the slowdown in business investment appears to have become more widespread. 
                  
     
    
                In March the weakness appeared concentrated i
n drilling activity, and I think now we are seeing 
outright declines in real equipment outlays and nondrilling, nonresidential construction as well.  
The Tealbook assumes 
that investment in intangibles is still growing at a solid pace, but we 
actually have no idea what
™s happening there because reliable source data won™t be available for 
some time.  The broad weakness in business fixed investment may be partly explained by the 

slowdown in aggregate sale
s and output via an accelerat
or effect, but conceivably other factors 
that may prove to be more persistent may also be at work, and I worry about that. 
I™
m also concerned that we may not see a pickup in residential investment nearly as large 
as the Tealbook forecast
s this year.  Housing starts and permits have been incredibly weak even 
though mortgage rates are low, employment and income are rising, and demographic trends seem 

to call for a faster pace of building.  
According to staff calculations, 
if housi
ng remains weak 
it could shave 
¼ percentage 
point or so off the Tealbook projection of real GDP in the second half 
of this year and in 2016. 
I worry most about retail sales having been soft for several months now.  Savings rates 
moved up 1 
full percentage 
point since the fourth quarter despite large gains in employment, a 

sharp decline in oil prices, record equity prices, 
a solid increase in house prices, and low 
borrowing costs.  I suppose one could explain this by saying that bad winter weather and other 

transitory factors are at work here
.  I suppose supporting such an explanation is 
the fact that 
we did see strong auto sales in March, and consumer sentiment, even though the C
onference 
Board 
number fell today, is still pretty high.
  And I suppose, for tho
se reasons
, the Tealbook forecast 
seems reasonable to me, but I must say my confidence in the Tealbook forecast that projects that 

PCE growth is going to pick up to 4 percent really, 
to me
, is a leap of faith, and I worry that we 
may not see a pickup that™
s that 
large.
  And as several of you have mentioned, at this point the 
                          
         
             
    
  only real source of strength in the economy is consumer spending.  I
f there are question marks 
associated with
 consumer spending, that puts a lot of question marks on the outlook overal
l. I don™t think the risks from the external sector have diminished.  Maybe they have even 
increased to some degree. 
The s
taff has marked down estimates of export growth in the first 
quarter 
appreciably
.  It may well be that the drag 
generated by
 past dol
lar appreciation and slow 
foreign economic growth could be greater than previously assumed.  I also worry about the 
Greek debt situation
.  If Greece were to put in place controls on capital movements 
or, worse, 
exit the euro, 
I think it
™s hard to know what 
effect
 that would have on the dollar.  I™m not sure 
whether it would cause the dollar to appreciate or depreciate
, and 
I think there are reasonable 
stories either way. 
I certainly am hopeful that information between now and June will help us resolve some 
of these uncertainties. We will see
, certainly
, two more employment reports and a range of 
indicators on spending and production that could tell us whether we™ve been through a soft patch 
or if there
™s a more significant loss in momentum.
  But by June, 
the spending data for the second 
quarter will still be incomplete, and we shouldn™t underestimate the possibility that new data will 
confuse rather than clarify our assessments of the state of the economy. 
As for inflation, I don™t really have anything to add to what
™s been said.  Even though 
core CPI inflation came in a touch higher than expected, overall, the incoming data on wages and 

prices has been roughly in line with expectations.  My own outlook is little changed.  Both core 

and headline PCE 
inflation 
rates 
are running well below 2 percent and are likely to do so for the 
rest of the year, barring some major surprise in oil prices or a fall in the dollar.
  And the April 
Tealbook projects that headline inflation will be under 1 percent this year on a Q4-over-Q4 basis, 
                              and th
at core inflation this year is only going to run at 1¼ 
percent.  Those forecasts seem quite 
reasonable. 
Given this inflation outlook, the likelihood that employment and output will expand at 
only a moderate pace in coming quarters, and uncertainties about the global economy, I 
personally think it™s unlikely that the 
conditions we
™ve set out for a firming of policy will be met 
by June, but I have an open mind.  We™ve agreed to be data dependent, and that assessment could 

certainly change 
as we receive additional data on real activity and inflation in coming weeks. 
So let me stop there
.  We should probably break for dinner.  Tomorrow, 
Thomas will 
give his briefing. We may have to make some changes in the statement when we see what
™s in 
the GDP report, but I think we have enough time tomorrow morning to do that.  We™ll begin 
tomorrow 
at 9:00 a.m. 
[Meeting recessed] 
         
   
                       
            
          
   
    
              
  
   
                                                             
  
 April 29 Session 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  I guess 
we should get started
, and 
I™d like 
to first turn to Bill
 Wascher to give us an update on this morning™s GDP announcements. 
MR. WASCHER.
6  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™ll be referring to the handout 
titled ﬁMaterial for Gross Domestic Product Update.ﬂ  You 
have a table that 
summarizes some of the key aspects of this morning™s GDP data, and the first thing I 

would say is that it™s nice to be lucky once in a while.  [Laughter] 
As you can see 
from the first line of the table, the BEA™s advance estimate of real GDP 
growth in the 
first quarter was 0.2 percent at an annual rate.  That™s 
one-
tenth of 
1 percentage point 
higher than 
our estimate
 in the Ap
ril Tealbook. 
Among the major spending categories, 
real PCE growth slowed from 4.4 percent 
in the fourth quarter to 1.9 
percent in the first quarter, about as we had expected. 

Business fixed investment, which is labeled here by its official title, 
nonresidential 
private 
fixed 
investment, fell 3.4 percent, and residential investment edged up 
1.3 percent.  Again, both of th
ose were close to our expectations. 
The next three lines show some offsetting misses that turned out not to have much 
effect on the top-line GDP number.  In particular, government spending fell by less 

than we were expecting
, net exports fell by more, and 
there was a greater 
accumulation of inventories than we™d written down.  
In terms of their contributions 

to growth, net exports were estimated to have subtracted 1¼ 
percentage points 
from 
GDP growth in the first quarter, while inventories added 
¾ percentag
e point to 
growth.  I should note that, 
for these two categories in particular
, the BEA does not 
have complete data for the 
first 
quarter
.  In the advance GDP estimate
, inventories 
and net exports are based on two months of data and BEA™s 
assumed values fo
r the 
third monthŠin this case, for 
March. 
Our staff had a chance to look at the monthly assumptions and other details of 
both of these components, and Steve mentioned to me that his colleagues in the 

Division of I
nternational 
Finance 
are inclined to disc
ount some of the negative miss 
in net exports between their forecast and the BEA™s estimate.
  Going the other way, it 
looks as though the BEA wrote down a very high assumption for inventories in 

March, and we might be inclined to discount a little bit of that.  So I don™t know that 

it would have much effect on the top line.  B
ut I 
believe
 our thinking at this point 
would be that net exports aren™t quite as weak as the BEA has estimated, and 
that 
inventories may not be quite as large. 
The bottom of the table shows 
the BEA™s estimate of consumer price inflation. 
Total PCE prices fell 
2 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter, the same as our 
6 The materials used by Mr. Wascher are appended to this transcript (appendix 6). 
           
        
     
                
                                                                               
  
 Tealbook estimate, while core PCE prices rose 
nine
-tenths 
of 
1 percent, 
one
-tenth 
more than we were expecting. 
Finally, I
™ll
 just mention that real disposable personal income rose at an annual 
rate of 6.2 percent in the first quarter, while the saving rate came in at 
5.5 percent.  

Both of those figures were also close to our expectations.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Are there questions for Bill?  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD. Bill, is the staff embarrassed that you missed this by 50 percent? 
[Laughter]  No, congratulations on this.  This is a good call, and I think it was useful information 
to bring to the Committ
ee.  It™s a tough job, and when you get something right, you should 
definitely take some credit for it. 
MR. WASCHER.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great.  Then let™s turn to Thomas, who is going to brief us on 
our monetary policy decisions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.7  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™ll be referring to the handout 
labelled ﬁMaterial for Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.ﬂ 
At previous meetings and, indeed, yesterday, several of you discussed the 
possibility of market turbulence in the run-up to, or following, the onset of policy 
tightening.  Although the Committee now has communications tools, including the 
SEP, that it did not have at the start of previous tightening cycles, unexpected 

movements in yields and volatility, up or down, may nevertheless occur even if the 

expected policy 
rate 
path does not shift markedly.  The upper-
left panel of your first 
exhibit provides some perspective by showing the staff™s estimate of the 10-
year 
Treasury term premium over the past 25 years.  The vertical bars high
light three 
episodes:  the beginning of the tightening cycles in 1994 and 2004 and the taper 

tantrum in 2013.  Within the shaded 18-month windows around these events, term 

premiums moved substantially.  But they also did so at other timesŠ
and likely in 

res
ponse to factors other than monetary policy. 
The upper-
right panel isolates the episodes associated with the three shaded 
regions and, for reference, the current episode conditional on the staff™s assumption of 

liftoff at the September meeting.  As shown by the red line, in 1994, the term 

premium rose substantially in the months following the onset of tightening.  By 

contrast, in 2004, in blue, it moved up several months before the federal funds rate in 

response to stronger economic data that moved up the expected timing of policy 
7 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appendix 7). 
                       
     
  
       
           
   
    
  
             
 tightening.  But the term premium then began to decline and continued to do so over 

the remainder of 2004Š
the well
-known ﬁconundrumﬂ episode.  Finally, in 2013, the 
term premium began to rise around the time of Chairman Bernanke™s JEC testimony 

in late May, apparently reflecting market participants™ reassessment of the outlook for 

asset purchases and possibly policy rates.  As shown in the middle-
left panel, these 
term premium movements may, to some extent, have reflected uncertainty about the 

future course of monetary policy.  The panel shows the width of the 90 percent 

confidence interval for the federal funds rate 12 months ahead, derived from options 

on federal funds futures. The term premiums are highly correlated with this pro
xy for 
policy uncertainty in the 1994 and 2004 episodes, but less so in 2013, presumably 

because uncertainty in that episode was driven less by the path of the federal funds 

rate over the next 12 months than by the course of asset purchases and longer
-term 
rates. 
These experiences suggest that, even in a context in which the FOMC™s policy 
communications tools are more extensive than in the 1994 and 2004 cycles, it may be 

prudent for the Committee to consider its likely response to unexpected changes in 

term
 premiums that might occur around the time when it begins policy firming.  A 
special exhibit in the ﬁMonetary Policy Strategiesﬂ section of the Tealbook, Book B, 

provides some background that might be useful.  As shown by the dotted black line in 

the middle-right panel, the staff projects that the 10-
year term premium will rise at a 
modest pace after the Committee is assumed to start raising the federal funds rate. 

This slow projected rise in the term premium reflects in part the waning effects on 

longer-t
erm yields of the Committee™s asset holdings.  The magenta line presents the 
path for the term premium in a scenario, labeled ﬁTightening Tantrum,ﬂ that is similar 

in magnitude to, albeit less persistent than, the rise in the term premium that began in 
May 2013 (the green line).  As shown in the lower-
left panel, in the ﬁtantrumﬂ case, 
optimal control would call for a more gradual increase in the federal funds rate for 
several quarters, with the federal funds rate running, on average, 35 basis points 

below 
the optimal control path associated with the Tealbook baseline (the black line) 
over the four years following the shock. 
Recent public discourse has largely focused on the specter of another market 
tantrum.  However, a repeat of the 2004 experience, in whi
ch term premiums 
remained surprisingly low for a while, is also a possibility.  For example, such an 

outcome might occur through the effects of the very large asset purchase programs 

that are under way in Europe and Japan.  The yellow line in the middle-
right panel 
shows a scenario for the path of the term premium that is similar to the 2004 

conundrum episode.  In this instance, optimal control would call for a federal funds 

rate path that is 40 basis points higher, on average, over the next four years. 
The 
lower
-right panel highlights a few caveats. The tantrum scenario abstracts 
from the possibility of widespread liquidity or solvency problems, a point worth 

mentioning in light of recent commentary about reduced liquidity in key markets, 

which Simon discussed in his briefing.  More generally, the scenarios do not examine 

the consequences of term premium movements that are associated with other 

disturbances.  If, for example, the term premium fell because of weaker economic 
           
                   
        
       
         
          
    
  
  activity abroad and associated fl
ight-
to-safety flows, the optimal policy response 
could be to keep the federal funds rate lower, not higher, than in the baseline.  Finally, 

the appropriate policy response to either scenario depends importantly on the 

persistence of the deviation of the t
erm premium from its baseline path, which will be 
known only in retrospect.  In response to such scenarios, policymakers may wish to 

emphasize that they will respond to financial conditions that are judged inconsistent 

with the achievement of the FOMC™s objectives. 
Turning to the draft policy alternatives, thanks to the excellent work of Bill 
Wascher and his colleagues, I can discuss the alternatives as distributed yesterday. A 

key issue for your decision today is how to convey the implications of recent and 

incoming economic information for the likely timing of policy normalization.  First, 

as indicated at the top of exhibit 2, assuming that the Committee decides to remove 

time
-based forward guidance from the statement, it will primarily rely on paragraphs 
1 and 2 to speak to its assessment of whether its criteria for liftoff
 have been met or 
when they are likely to be met.  In broad terms, with alternative B, the Committee 

would communicate that the conditions for an increase in the federal funds rate are 

not yet in place, while alternative C would suggest that those conditions will likely be 

in place in the near future.  Alternative A would indicate that the preconditions for 

liftoff are unlikely to be met in the near future. 
The second set of bullets summ
arizes how each of the three alternatives may 
shape expectations for the timing of liftoff.  On the Committee™s criterion that it 

would need to see ﬁfurther improvement in the labor market,ﬂ alternative B states that 

ﬁunderutilization of labor resources wa
s little changedﬂ over the intermeeting period, 
citing the moderation in the pace of job gains and the steady unemployment rate.  

Regarding the second criterion, that the Committee would need to be ﬁreasonably 
confident that inflation will move back to its
 2 percent objective over the medium 
term,ﬂ alternative 
B updates the description of recent data in paragraph 1 and retains, 
in paragraph 2, the expectation that inflation will 
ﬁrise gradually toward 2 percent 
over the medium term.ﬂ  Thus, alternative B does not signal a change in confidence 
about the inflation outlook. 
In addition, the Committee noted in the March minutes that the timing of the first 
increase in the federal funds rate would also depend on the evolution of economic 

conditions and the outloo
k.  In that regard, alternative B provides the judgment that 

the Committee sees the recent weakness in economic activity either 
ﬁin part
ﬂ or ﬁat 
least in partﬂ as transitory and indicates that, despite the first
-quarter slowdown, the 
Committee still expect
s economic growth at a pace that will lead to further 

improvement in labor market conditions.  Under alternative B, the Committee would 

remain fully data dependent and offer no time-based guidance about how soon the 

conditions for liftoff are likely to be 
met. 
By contrast, alternative C would communicate the Committee™s readiness to begin 
policy normalization in the near term.  Paragraph 1 indicates that, despite a steady 

jobless rate, ﬁsome labor market indicators suggest that underutilization of labor 

resources continued to diminish.ﬂ  It expresses a more positive reading of recent news 
               
    
    
    
           
    
    
              
                   
         
on inflation and notes that, although inflation remained below the Committee™s 

objective, ﬁit was no longer declining.ﬂ  In addition, paragraph 
1 of alternative C 

attributes this winter™s economic slowdown largely to transitory factors. Paragraph
 2 suggests not only that the Committee continues to anticipate moderate economic 

growth and further improvement in labor market conditions, but also that it now has 

become more (or perhaps somewhat more) confident that inflation ﬁwill rise 

gradually to 2 percent over the medium term.ﬂ  Having made those assessments of 

recent developments and the outlook, the Committee would adopt new guidance in 

paragraph 3.  Rather than repeating t
he criteria for liftoff adopted in the March 
statement, the Committee would announce that ﬁeconomic conditions mayﬂ or ﬁlikely 

will soon warrant an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate.ﬂ  While 

alternative C reintroduces a time dimension 
to the forward guidance, it also retains 
the more general data
-dependent statement that the timing of the adjustment would 
depend on realized and expected progress toward the Committee™s objectives of 

maximum employment and 2 
percent inflation. 
Finally, with alternative A, the Committee would express heightened concerns 
about the underlying strength of the economic expansion, downside risks to the 

outlook for the labor market, and possible persistence of below-
target inflation. 
In paragraph 1, in 
alternat
ive A, 
as in alternative B, the Committee describes 
underutilization of labor resources as ﬁlittle changed,ﬂ but it stresses that inflation 

ﬁcontinued to run well below the Committee™s longer
-run objective.ﬂ  It does not 

offer any judgment on how much of this winter™s slowdown may have been 

transitory. Additionally
, in 
paragraph 2™s assessment of 
the outlook, 
under 
alternative 
A it would be report
ed that the Committee now sees the risks to economic activity 
and the labor market as ﬁtilted to the downside.ﬂ And the statement would voice 
concern that ﬁinflation could run substantially belowﬂ 2 percent for a protracted 
period, and possibly that ﬁthe pace of improvement in the labor market could remain 

slow.ﬂ 
Given these risks to the outlook, alternative A 
introduces a somewhat more 
stringent precondition for the initiation of policy firming, stating in paragraph 3 that 

the Committee would need to see inflation ﬁclearly moving up towardﬂ the 

Committee™s 2 percent objective rather than being ﬁreasonably confi
dentﬂ that it will 
do so.  In addition, alternative A emphasizes concern about the inflation outlook by 

indicating that ﬁthe Committee is prepared to use all of its tools as necessary to return 

inflation to 2
 percent within one to two years.ﬂ All told, alternative A would 
communicate that liftoff appears unlikely for some time. 
Thank you, Madam Chair.  That concludes my prepared remarks, and I will be 
glad to take any questions. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there questions for Thomas?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHA
RT.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Thomas, I™d like to ask you about your 
thinking as you drafted 
alternative C.  Specifically
, I™m referring to the bracketed choices in 
                  
             
            
             paragraph
s 2 and
 3, and I™m interested in how the staff is thinking about the choice of the 
ﬁhas 
become somewhat more confidentﬂ
 and 
ﬁmay soon warrant an increaseﬂ language
, as opposed to 
the 
ﬁhas become more confidentﬂ 
and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ language. 
These two language options could be seen as a sequence of statements over, say, two 
meetings.  They could convey increasing certainty on the part of the Committee or increasing 

probability of a liftoff decision.  Alternatively, I can imagine choosing between these two 

language options 
at the 
meeting ahead 
of liftoff
, with the choice depending on the probability of 
the 
liftoff decision. 
So I can see a case for both of these interpretations of the alt
-C bracketed 
language as something we might consider in the future, and 
I wonder if the staff had either of 
these ideas in mind or 
if 
it™s just providing an option for this meeting alone. 
MR. LAUBACH. 
We also explored the choice between ﬁmayﬂ and ﬁlikely willﬂ 
in 
previous drafts of a
lternative C and in other materials that
, if I remember correctly
, were sent to 
the Committee ahead of the January meeting.
  In my view, just focusing for now on that, one key 
question is how the Committee wants to strike a balance between, on the one hand, sending some 

advance notice and, on the other hand, emphasizing data dependence.  So I think one key 

question for you at some point will be, how firmly do you want to express that the next meeting 

might be likely for liftoff
, and how do you 
balance that against 
the fact 
that
, of course, over
 any 
intermeeting
 period, yo
u will receive data that may change the 
course of policy?  T
hat™s some 
of 
the thinking that went into the considerations about 
ﬁmay
ﬂ and ﬁ
likely will.
ﬂ As to the ﬁsomewhatﬂ in 
paragraph 2, you
™re right that you can see a pair between
Š ﬁsomewhatﬂ in 
paragraph 2 could perhaps fit better with ﬁmayﬂ in p
aragraph 3 because it still 
emphasizes a little bit more that you™re reserving judgment.  So that™s certainly a possibility. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
          
   
    
     
          
     
      
           
     MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Yes
Šthank you, Madam C
hair.
  I had a question and a 
comment.  The comment is on page 1 of the handout that you provided, ﬁMarket Expectations 
and Policy Issues.ﬂ  I thought that was a very nice set of experiments, and 
I like the idea of 

having these three possible cases
 and 
lay
ing them out.
  My own thinking is, focus more on the 
tantrum case, but, 
certainly
, it™s useful for us to keep in mind 
the conundrum case as well. 
My comment is about the use of optimal control as a way to evaluate the appropriate 
policy response here.  
Whe
n I think about what was going on in these episodes
, it wa
s really that 
there were uncertainties in markets about what the 
Committee was trying to achieve with policy 
Šand you used 
the same language, I believe
, when I was listening to you. 
But
 optimal con
trol, 
of course, involves the 
assum
ption that 
what we were trying to achieve 
with
 policy 
is all pretty 
much common knowledge. 
For example, 
in the tantrum case, we might want a more aggressive response in order to 
rebuild lost reputation, 
in some sense
, abo
ut what we™re actually trying to achieve. In the 
conundrum case
, the same is true
Šwe might want to be even tighter than what™s built in here, 
because we™re actually trying to convince markets that we are really concerned about inflation 
getting too high.  
But
 in the tantrum case, 
we might 
be even easier than what™s described by 
optimal control, because we have this need to rebuild reputation in 
the eyes of the markets 
about 

the fact that 
we really
 care about getting inflation back up to 2 
percent. 
That™s a comment.  The question I had actually builds, 
I think
, on what Dennis was 
asking about alternative C.  I™ll ask the same question about a
lter
native B.  As you described on 
page 2, which was a great way to summarize 
what™s in the various alternatives, we™re really 

relying on p
aragraphs 1 and 2 to speak to the Committee™s assessment of 
the 
criteria for liftoff.
 I         
  
   
            
       
             
         guess we™re relying on the evolution of the data over time to allow the public to figure out what 
we think 
is relevant. 
Another way to proceed is to actually be more explicit about, 
ﬁOkay, we™ve had some 
incoming dataŠparagraphs 1 and 2.  We just saw GDP now.  H
ow does that affect the li
kelihood 
of liftoff in, say, June?
ﬂ  So we could have provided more explicit guidance about that in the 
statement in 
alternative B.
  And I guess my question is, what were you thinking in not doing 
this? 
MR. LAUBACH. 
I have 
two thoughts, perhaps, on that, and maybe Simon can also 
weigh in on 
at least one of them
.  N
amely
, as Simon showed you yesterday, there was a question 
in the primary 
dealer survey on which factors market participants view as most relevant for the 
achievement of reasonable confidence.
  So there is an indirect route in the sense that what you 
say in the statement will be evaluated even though you may not have a direct statement in there 

about how 
the Committee is no
w more or less confident than before.  Presumably, 
market 
participants will
 look at your characterization of these various factors and draw conclusions from 

that about how your confidence has shifted. 
I™m not quite sure how easy it would be to try 
to come up with a summary statement for 
the degree of confidence because, well, my 
guess is that various participants rank different 
criteria differently, and I think that
™s evident from your comments.  Therefore, I believe 
this is a 
step that™s left to market participants and the public in general to draw conclusions about this. 
MR. POTTER. 
Prior to the GDP release, I think 
the 
dealers put an average 
probability of 
13 percent on liftoff in June.  Let™s assume that™s moved down to 8 
percent 
or something 
right 
now based on the 
GDP release
.  If you felt that that 
8 percent 
was way t
oo low compared 
with 
the likelihood that you might lift off in June, then you might want to try 
to indicate something.  
                                          
    
      Before it was way too high, but it 
seems a little bit 
less likely that you would want to indicate 
something at 8 percent. 
MR. KOCHERLAKO
TA.  That™s helpful.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Are there other comments or questions?  President Lacker. 
MR. LACKER.  Thomas, I wonder if you could, to help us understand these scenarios, 
refresh the Committee™s memory about the extent to which overnight 
short-
term interest rates 
that we influence directly through the federal funds rate target can affect economic activity in 
the 
FRB
/US model 
independently of the value
s of the 
5-, 7-, and 10-
year interest rates
, which appear 
to figure prominently in th
ese scenario
s. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  Monetary policy transmission 
in the 
FRB/US 
model 
is largely through 
long-
term rates
, so I™m
Šlet me think. 
MR. LACKER.  Entirely? 

MR. LAUBACH
.  Largely
Šwell, to varying degrees.  F
or example, there are some rates 
in there
, like
 the rate on auto loans, that arguably are not quite as long term.  So they are not only 
a 10-year Treasury 
yield
. But it™s true that the funds rate
, in and of itself, doesn™t carry a whole 
lot of weight in monetary policy transmission, but only through its ef
fects on longer
-term yields. 
By implication, 
these shifts in term premiums that we are considering in the scenarios are 

actually quite powerful.  So they do have 
a substantial macroeconomic effect
s. 
MR. LACKER. Well, 
I have two follow-ups.  One is, when I think about this, 
I have 
difficulty reconciling that structure with the impression that a sizable volume of bank lending 

among 
the bankers I talk to seems to be priced off LIBOR and other short
-term interest rates. 
The s
econd thing is, what would this imply for Taylor r
ules? 
Have we been wrong for 
years?  Should we have been including a ter
m premium thing that we accommodate in the Taylor 
           
  
       
   
     
      
  
  
    
  
  
               rules? 
Should we think about policy differently now that we™
ve got this transmission 
mechanism 
whose 
strength varies
 depending on what the term premium does? 
MR. LAUBACH
.  There are two separate aspects to this.  One is, what if monetar
y policy 
transmission also importantly works through term premiums?  That means that term premiums 
systematically vary with the path of short-
term interest rates. 
To some extent, that is actually the 
case in 
the 
FRB
/US model
Šnamely
, that the term premium is an endogenous function of 
expected future output gaps.  So to the extent that choices about the path of the funds rate affect 

the outlook for future output gaps, that has an added effect by moving term premiums 

endogenously 
as well. 
A separate ques
tion is, should a Taylor r
ule also take into account other financial 
conditions more broadly?
 And there, arguably, a Taylor rule that responds only to current 
economic conditions may have a shortcoming because it responds only to current inflation and, 

say, the current output gap, whereas financial conditions that you observe today, like movements 
in the dollar and things like that, clearly affect your outlook in the future.  So that is not an asp
ect 
that is captured by Taylor r
ules that
 just mechanically respond to current conditions.  Of course, 
for example, if you look at optimal control, 
it obviously knows about these things because it™
s run under 
perfect 
foresight.  Therefore, agents anticipate that changes in financial conditions 
today more broadly, including changes in term premiums, will affect the future outlook. 
MR. LACKER. 
Let me follow up further.  When I look at the plot in the upper-
left
-hand 
corner, if I took Taylor rules and incorporate this term premium, d
oesn™t that mean that an 

augmented Taylor r
ule should now predict interest rates 
2 percentage points higher 
for
 1994 than 
would a Taylor r
ule without that augmentation
?                            
         
    
          VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  That™s a
ssuming you have a time-constant equilibrium 
real rate, but the equilibrium real rate could be moving, too. 
MR. LACKER.  Yes, there
™s that.
  There™s the gap.  There™s inflation.  But now we add 
the term premium
, and that™
s poi
nting in the other direction by 2 percentage points. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  If you look just at, say, the lower-frequency movement, it now seems 
as though, 
on a
n almost secular or at least a highly persistent basis, the term premium seems 
about 2 percentage points 
lower than it was back then.
  That is an effect that arguably ought to be 
reflected already in current conditions. 
MR. LACKER.  Current conditions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  If you thought about a sudden drop right nowŠ 

MR. LACKER. 
What about the current Taylor r
ule?
  Shouldn
™t it be in the current 
Taylor r
ule, too
?  We should include 
it. MR. EVANS.  It™s in the current Taylor rule through current conditions. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  W
ell, I think the point I
™m trying to make is that this 
is a 
secular 
downshift 
in the term premium from a mean of what looks like around 2 percent in the 1990s to 
about close to 
zero
 now.  But that™
s not a recent development
, that™
s been persistent since
 the 
mid
-2000s.  T
he decline in the term premium
, in and of itself, arguably had, at some point, 
a stimulative effect
.  Assuming that this really occurred in isolation
, as I referred to in my briefing, 
you could seeŠ 
MR. LACKER.  So it
™s affected the current gap and the current inflation rate. 
MR. LAUBACH
.  Exactly. 
MR. LACKER.  But your optimal control says that, even given the current gap and the 
current inflation rate
, there should be some response of the funds rate to the term premium. 
               
  
   
     
                         MR. LAUBACH. Yes
, but those are projected future changes in the term premium, not 
where it is today
.  So my point is, if you had just observed 
in recent history a 
2 percentage point 
decline in the term premium, then if that had happened in isolation, 
that should indeed affect 
your outlook.  Your outlook should be stronger, all else being equalŠagain, wit
h the caveat ﬁall 
else 
being equal.ﬂ  If the 2 percentage point decline occurred in the context of a flight to safety, 

that™s no longer so obvious.  But if that had recently occurred, then, indeed, 
there is a little bit of 

a discrepancy in terms of your standard Taylor rule response only to current conditions.  If these 

current conditions haven™t responded yet to that decline in the term premium, then there is a bit 

of 
a tension since 
you project that 
that decline in the term premium, in itself
, actually is going to 
provide a boost. 
If you think, for example, about the staff projection, 
it is, very importantly, driven by our 
assessment of financial conditions today and over the projection period.  So the Taylor r
ule does 
take account of that over the projection period. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Governor Fischer, do you have a two-hander? 
MR. FISCHER. 
Yes, it™
s a two
-hander.  
What is the correlation between the term 
premium and the difference between the short
-term rate and the long-
term rate?  Is it high? 
MR. 
LAUBACH
.  The correlation between the term premium and the slopeŠ
sadly, I do 
not know this right off the top ofŠ 
MR. 
POTTER
.  It has to be high on a daily basis. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  It has to be high. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Yes, i
t would be high. 
MR. POTTER. 
That™s because the short
-term
 rate is not moving that much
, because the 
FOMC
 is not moving 
it, but the 10-year is moving around every day. 
                                      
    
         
         
  
         MR. EVANS.  Yes, arithmetic, I guess. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Williams. 

MR. WILLIAMS. 
My question is related to P
resident Lacker™s topic, but I guess it
™s really more about how we think about movements in the term premium in general.  A
s I understand 
the 
FRB
/US model and 
the way you described it, Thomas, is that these 
movements 
have very powerful effects because they affect all asset prices. 
They 
affect mortgage rates, the 
stock market, and the 
exchange rate. These 
movements are really spilling over throughout 
financial conditions, 
and 
so have a very powerful effect on GDP, employment, and inflation. 
The research on the effects of QE
ŠI™m thinking of the work of 
Vis
sing-Jorgensen 
and 
KrishnamurthyŠa lot of the research has looked at this and 
seems to have called into question 

whether there
™s this full pass
-through of T
reasury term premi
um effects onto private rates, 
such 
as corporate bond rates 
and 
mortgage rates, 
as well as asset prices in general.
  I guess the 
question is, to what extent are you buying into the story that maybe the term premium doesn™t 
affect financial conditions as fully as the FRB
/US model would tell you? 
Or how do we think 
about some of the more recent research in terms of these simulations? 
MR. LAUBACH
.  I think the short answer to that is, what I have here on the handout and 
what is being shown in the 
ﬁMonetary Policy S
trateg
iesﬂ section of Teal
book, Book B, of course, 
buys fully into the FRB
/US view that, to the extent that long rates matter for re
al a
ctivity, 
changes in the term premium are in 
long-
term
 rates.  So no distinction 
is drawn between
 whether 
the movement 
is in the expectations compo
nent or in the 
term
-premium component
. We could certainly 
try 
to look at how the results will change.  Broadly speaking, my 
expectation would be 
that 
the lines 
you see in the lower-
left 
panel 
are based on 100 
percent
Šthat 
                     
     
                 
        is, t
erm premiums are worth 
exactly 
as much as changes in expected future interest rates
.  Then 
you can shave that if you thought that a more reasonable estimate was, say, 50 percent. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you.  The second comment is really to President Lacker.  
This 
is why you have a 
time
-varying 
r*. In my view, this is the argument for thinking about the fact 
that the term premium changes over decades.  Other factors
, such as 
risk premi
ums
, the equity 
premium, 
and the sovereign risk premiumŠlots of things change in the 
economy
, whic
h is 
basically the argument not to have a constant 
r*. Your point is exactly right.  On its own, the term premium going down would argue for a 
higher 
r*. So what™
s really striking is that 
Laubach
-Williams, which just tries to let the data 
decide, has 
r* falling all 
of 
the way to zero, despite the fact that QE and other factors have 
pushed the term premium down.  T
he way I view this is
, there are these factors pushing 
r* up, but the other factors, the headwinds and the other things, are just so much more po
werful that
, on net, they push 
r* down.  Through the lens of 
r*, everything makes sense.  [Laughter]  Thank 
you. CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Why don™t we begin our round now?  O
ur first speaker is 
President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m looking forward to hearing 
President Williams™
s remarks through the lens of 
r*. [Laughter]  We™
ll see how that goes. 
Madam Chair, I favor alternative A.  My rationale for alternative A is based on the modal 
outlook for prices and employment, the risks to that outlook, and the zero lower bound.  On the 

benchmark outlook in 
the 
Tealbook
, Book
 A, you see 
that inflation does not return to the 
FOMC™s target of 2 percent until 2019, which is four years from now.  We should take steps to 

facilitate a fas
ter return of inflation to target.  These additional steps would also help boost 
           
   
    
                          
  
   
    employment over the medium term.  
Our congressional mandate calls for us to achieve 
maximum employment and stable prices.  If we are able to simultaneously create more jobs an
d impro
ve our performance on the price-stability goal, we should do so. 
That™
s the argument 
just 
based on the modal outlook alone.  It provides a clear 
justification for the policy course described in a
lternative A. 
I think this argument is enhanced 
by consideration of the risks to the outlook.  I agree with the Tealbook, Book AŠthe risks to the 
outlook for prices and employment are to the downside.  The standa
rd risk
-management 
considerations that are often advanced by the Committee suggest that these fut
ure downside risks 
bolster the case for current accommodation. 
When we think about the zero lower bound, as recent Brookings 
conference paper 
by 
President Evans 
and his colleagues 
makes crystal clear, these risk
-management considerations 
are significantly 
enhanced by the presence of the zero lower bound.  The past five years have 
taught us that when we™
re close to the zero lower bound, as we expect to be over the medium 
term, we will not be able to mitigate downside risks as effectively
 as we would like.  A
s President Evans™
s paper points out, this means that we should make policy choices so as to 
strengthen the economy in advance of these shocks hitting.  That, again, argues in favor of the 

kind of stance described in a
lternative 
A. So I see three arguments
 in favor of a
lternative A
Šthe modal outlook, the risks to the 
outlook, and the constraints on policy imposed by the zero lower bound. 
As I
™ve indicated in the past, I believe that it is important for monetary policy decisions 
to take account of the macroe
conomic risks created by potential financial instability.  My own 

reading of the QS report is that the main financial stability risk we face right now is actually 
          
         
      
     
   
                
associated with higher, not lower, interest rates. This will build on some of the work that 
Thomas was showing us earlier this morning. 
In May 2013, we began to tighten policy while we were still apparently several years 
away from achieving our macroeconomic objectives.  Market participants lost confidence in the 

willingness of the FOMC to buffer the economy against adverse shocks, and we saw a rapid 

increase in the term premium. If we raise the target range for the federal 
funds rate when 
headline inflation and core inflation are both running so low, we risk sending the same message 

that we did in 2013, and, accordingly, 
we risk seeing the same rapid run-
up in the term premium. 
Madam Chair, the modal outlook for inflation is too low.  We can best address this 
deficiency and simultaneously create more jobs by making clear, as 
alternative A does, that we 

are willing to use all 
of 
our tools to return inflation to target within one to two years, and that 
such a determined approach
 in 
the pursuit of our mandated objectives is also the best way to 
manage the risks we face, especially
 near the zero lower bound. 
I™d like to conclude by suggesting a topic for a possible research briefing
.  I
t builds on 
President Bullard™s comments yesterday and
, actually
, the conversation we were just having 
among 
President Williams, President Lacker, an
d Thomas.  I think it would be really useful for 
us to understand the work going on in the System on 
r*Šwhat™s determining it and 
what
™s moving it around.  It plays, actually, a pretty critical role, even in the statement itself.  So I 

believe
 exposing the Committee to the research going on in the System on this would be very 

valuable.  
With that, I
™ll conclude.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Today™
s GDP report confirms what we 
alr
eady knewŠ
that GDP growth slowed significantly in the first quarter. It™s too early to 
       
                  
   
  
       
      
     
 determine whether that slowdown will be persistent or whether it will be t
emporary, as last 
year™s first
-quarter slowdown turned out to be.  With no decision on the table, we don™t have to 
make that determination today.  
June™s decision is going to be data dependent, 
and we™ll be receiving important 
information
, including two monthly employment reports, 
to help
 come to a decision about liftoff 
in June.  Thus, I think it™s important not to signal anything today about a June decision.  
I support the spirit of a
lternative B today because
, at this point
, I favor data dependence 
and the meeting-by-meeting nature of the decision of liftoff.  
I believe it is appropriate to 

acknowledge the slowdown in growth and employment in paragraph 2, but then to maintain the 

characterization of the risk
s to the outlook for economic activity and 
the labor market as nearly 
balanced.
  However, in my view, the tone of the first paragraph on inter
meet
ing developments is 
too negative.  I think some of that negativity comes from focusing too much on short-
term 
changes 
in economic indicators instead of providing the Committee™s assessment of changes in 
economic cond
itions that matter for a policy decision. 
I do appreciate some of the changes that 
were made between the first draft of statement language that was circulated and the draft on the 

table today that addressed this issue of tone, but we have to remember that the public doesn™t see 

the evolution of our drafts. 
The 
Tealbook, Book B, 
tells us that the intention of 
alternative B is to avoid any date
-based guidance and ret
ain the option of beginning policy normalization in June if the data and 
outlook justify it.  
My concern is that 
alternative B doesn™t seem to achieve this.  My concern is, 
it™ll be read as our signaling that we™ve taken June off the table when that™s not the case, and it 

would be inconsistent with our data-dependent approach. 
             
  
    
           
                      Since our 
March meet
ing
, market expectations have shifted to a later liftoff and 
a flatter 
policy 
rate 
path.  In normal times, 
such a shift would be reflecting their assessment of the 
incoming data for the economic outlook, and we might want to take some signal from it.  
But 
as we prepare for liftoff, markets are particularly sensitive to our communications.  The shift in the 
expected policy 
rate 
path may not be providing any independent assessment of the economy.  
Instead
, it might be reflecting the market™s view of the Committee™s view. 
As former Chairman Alan Greenspan once said when discussing how difficult policy 
communications are, ﬁPeople hear what they want to hear.ﬂ  In such an environment, 
we must be 

even more careful than usual not to say things that could be misinte
rpreted
, even if they™re 
factually true.
  Of course, anticipating how the market might react to anything 
we do say is a 
difficult task. 
Turning to language specifics, in paragraph 1, I would opt to say ﬁgrowth slowed . . . , in 
part reflecting transitory f
actors,
ﬂ rather than ﬁ
at least in part.
ﬂ  And at this point, I understand 
that the rest of the language is pretty well locked down, but I would like to suggest one change.  

Instead of 
ﬁGrowth in household spending declined,ﬂ 
can we say ﬁH
ousehold spending 
continued to grow
, although at a slower pace
ﬂ? Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  So you said 
that, 
instead of 
ﬁGrowth in household spending 
decline
dﬂŠwhat did you want? Just review what you wanted to say instead. 
MS. MESTER.  Ye
s.  ﬁHousehold spending continued to grow, although at a slower 
pace.
ﬂ CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you.  
President Lockhart. 

MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I support 
alternative B, including the 
statement and President Mester
™s suggestion concerning ﬁin part.ﬂ 
                 
        
                    
I see t
he decision 
at this meeting on both policy and statement as straightforward.  So I™d 
like to spend a few minutes looking ahead and thinking aloud about statement language 
possibilities in alternative economic scenarios, obviously evidence
d by incoming data, and 

alternative liftoff decision scenarios. 
I expect it will be evident in this round that there is some desire to keep June an active 
option.  In any event, I think having various communication strategies in mind could help the 

Committee achieve as smooth a policy transition as possible and reduce the chances of avoidable 

and unwanted market volatility associated with liftoff.  For my part, I™m not so optimistic that by 

June we will be able to make a clear and plausible case that the economy is on track 
in terms of 
our two decision criteria.  Having repeatedly emphasized the data dependency of our liftoff 

decision, I think it™s important that we not cause impartial observers to scratch their heads about 

the data on which we™re basing a liftoff decision.  I expect 
that the data picture will be 
sufficiently inconclusive by the time of our next meeting to justify waiting a bit longer. 
As my earlier question to Thomas indicated, I™m trying to think through how 
communication might evolve in the coming meetings should we decide not to move in June.  As 

I suggested in framing the question for Thomas, there are a couple of ways the language options 

in this meeting™s 
alternative C might serve as a template. 
The ﬁ
has become 
somewhat more 
confidentﬂ and 
ﬁmay soon war
rant an increaseﬂ language option
, combined with the ﬁhas become 
more confidentﬂ and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ version
, could be viewed as a 
sequence of statements o
ver two meetings in advance of the liftoff decision.  
Alternatively, the 
two v
ersions could be viewed as distinct choices
, with one or the other selected depending on the 
degree of certainty or probability the Committee wishes to convey, presumably in a statement of 

the meeting just ahead of the liftoff meeting. 
         
             
             
          
        Having said all 
of 
that
, my sense of 
opinion in 
the Committee is that there is not a lot of 
appetite for signaling liftoff two meetings in advance, even if couched in very tentative terms.  I 
also doubt there™s much support for a move to language along the lines of a
lternativ
e C unless 
the liftoff decision is highly probable.  So I have difficulty actually envisioning circumstances in 

which we might choose to use the softer ﬁ
has become 
somewhat more confident
ﬂ and 
ﬁmay soon 
warrant an increase
ﬂ version in a
lternative C. 
Where 
this leaves me is the view that the most 
feasible approach to some amount of guidance in advance of a liftoff decision is the ﬁhas become 

more confidentﬂ and 
ﬁlikely will soon warrant an increaseﬂ choice.
  I apologize for walking 
everyone through my tortu
red thought process.  [Laughter] 
It™s certainly possible that we will receive a string of data reports between now and June 
that is strong enough to justify pulling the trigger.  If we were to move in June, 
the advance
-
signal decision will be moot, of cour
se.  In that case
, the question becomes whether the June 
statement ought to address what comes next
Šthat is, provide some more concrete guidance on 
what is the Committee™s expected path of policy over the subsequent meetings. 
As I said at the top of my remarks, 
I just want to air some communications 
considerations.  I think it would be helpful to further discuss the question of whether to provide 

advance guidance and, if so, how to phrase it.  And it™s not too early to start thinking about ways 

to prepare the public for the path of policy 
after 
liftoff. 
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
alternative
 B.  The data to 
date have 
not 
met the conditions we provided in the Marc
h statement for raising rates.  I am very 
skeptical that these conditions can be met by June.  
With t
wo quarters of weak real GDP growth, 
        
  
             
  
              
  
  
   
  
       
we once again are faced with a forecast of improvement
Šthe data reflect broader
-based 
weakness. 
In addition, interna
tional conditions since the 
March meeting have become more 
worrisome.  The frustration among Greek leaders when talking with European policymakers is 
palpable, while the European policymakers I spoke with seem
ed to have more confidence that 
any problems as
sociated with a Gree
k default could be readily contained. 
I am less confident 
that a smooth resolution will be achieved.  Moreover, I worry that this misplaced confidence 
in the likely 
containment of spillovers arising 
from a possible Greek default may ge
nerate 
conditions that make default even more likely. 
As I discussed yesterday, it is possible our inflation target is too low, given the 
accumulating evidence that we set the target based on research that underestimated both the 

likelihood and severity of being at the zero lower bound.  If we are willing to entertain a higher 

target, then a later liftoff would be further justified.
  In part, this would also indicate a higher 
standard for moving, shifting from reasonable confidence that we are moving toward our 

inflation target to just plain confidence that we are moving toward our inflation target. 
As the 
data to date should not make us even reasonably confident, this distinction will become more 

relevant at future meetings, presumably in the fall. 
In term
s of language, I would take out the ﬁat least,ﬂ and I would keep ﬁin part reflecting 
transitory factors.ﬂ
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
First Vice President Holcomb. 

MS. HOLCOMB.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
There
™s no denying that the bulk of data 
on real activity released since our March meeting has disappointed expectations.  However, a 
                              
       
      
    
     review of what has happened and what may be revealed to have happened argues for maintaining 
flexibility with respect to the tim
ing of liftoff. 
Labor market conditions continue to improve, albeit at a slow pace.  We™ve also seen the 
trade
-weighted exchange value of the dollar fall slightly against other major currencies and the 
price of oil move irregularly upward.  So we have some reason to think that the two main forces 

that have driven down headline inflation and which might pose a threat to long-
term inflation 
expectations are abating. 
Measures of core inflation have ticked upward. 
In the University of 
Michigan survey, longer-term inflation expectations edged downward in April™s preliminary 

report but remain within their recent range. 
Between now and the June meeting, the information that we will receive may shed new 
light on jobs, retail sales, consumer sentiment, and the overall health of the manufacturing and 

nonmanufacturing sectors.  We will also have two new reports on trimmed mean PCE inflation 

and household inflation expectations. Several of the current uncertainties hanging over the world 
economy may be at least partia
lly resolved.  It seems to me to be well within the realm of 
possibility that the information we receive between now and June will warrant a policy response. 
I believe it is important, therefore, that a June liftoff remain on the table. 
While
, technically
, there is nothing in the language of a
lternative B that takes June liftoff 
off the table, I do have some concern.  I can readily imagine people in the financial markets and 

business press drawing the conclusion that June action is all but impossible, given the lack of 

foreshadowing in a
lternative B.
  This move in market expectations could prove to be an 
impediment to Committee action.  Therefore, the language in paragraph 3 of a
lternative C with 
the ﬁmay soonﬂ option is attractive, 
as it more clearly indic
ates that June remains a viable option. 
On the other hand, a
lternative B states the Committee™s intention to take timely action once its 
         
            
    
                 
  criteria have been met
.  With the possibility of continued uncertainty on both fronts, 
I support 
alternative B.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support alternative B, although with a 
language change, which I will get to toward the end of my remarks. 
I first wanted to say that I agree with people that once w
e have removed the forward 
guidance, as we™ve now done, every meeting should be a live meeting in which the possibility of 

a change in the federal funds rate can be on the table.
  Having said that, though, we still have 
different assessments as to how like
ly it is that we think we
™re going to want to raise the federal 
funds rate target range in the next couple of meetings.  I, for one, don™t think it™
s very likely at 
all.  But I do 
believe
 that we should not do anything that formally takes it off the table. 
I wasn™t going to comment on this, but 
President Lockhart
™s 
thoughtful observations did 
provoke me to say a couple of things on how to begin moving forward.  I think I™m coming out 
in a somewhat different place, although only in a tentative way, and would 
like to hear other 
people™s views on this.  I™d be reluctant to put back into paragraph 3 at some point an indication 

that, one or two meetings from now, we are more likely to move.  T
he reason 
is, I think that 
becomes a form of calendar guidance of its o
wn.  J
ust as
, when we put in the quasi-
calendar 
guidance before, saying, ﬁWell, 
this isn™t really calendar
Šit™s all data dependent,ﬂ the markets 
all read it as calendar guidance
, I think the same thing is going to happen now if we put in 

language such as t
hat included in paragraph 3 of a
lternative C. 
My preference would be that we use paragraph 2 as the vehicle for beginning to 
communicate a change in the Committee™s collective view as to where the economy is headed, 

which
, it™s hoped, actually begins to, I would say, 
increase some volatility a little bit as people 
        
           
         
  
      
  
       begin to think 
liftoff
 is more likely but is not a done deal.  T
hat 
way, we don™t have a surprise at 
the meeting in which we eventually lift the target range, but it is not de facto occurring just by 
the inclusion of language in paragraph 3 at a meeting before we™
ve actually decided to lift the 
target range. 
As I said, my current view is that June is very unlikely as an appropriate time to increase 
the target range.  I thought that paragraph 1 as originally circulated a week or two ago actually 

hit about right the factual characterization of the economy.  It™
s fairly
 hard to argue with the 
proposition that the data w
ere 
rather 
disappointing and pretty bad, yet paragraph 1 began with 
something sayin
g that it was 
ﬁin part reflecting transitory factors.ﬂ  M
ost important, 
I think, the 
beginning of paragraph 2 communicates that ﬁAlthough growth in output and employment 

slowed during the first quarter, the Committee continues to expect
–ﬂ In other words, 
the basic 

direction of the 
Committee™s expectations ha
sn™t changed, notwithstanding the disappointing 
developments reported in paragraph 1. 
Notwithstanding the fact that I thought the original paragraph 1 got it about right, I
™m okay with most of the chang
es that have been made since the original language was circulated, 

although I wouldn™t want to see us going too much further to try to look for the cheery in a way 

that would obscure what™
s actually happened.
  The one exception, Madam Chair, is the 
sentence 
on inflation, which is the second-
to-last sentence in paragraph 1.  Back in March, that sentence 
said ﬁInflation has declined further below the Committee™s longer-run objective, largely 

reflecting declines in energy prices.ﬂ So the phrase 
ﬁlargel
y reflecting declines in energy pricesﬂ 
was, in effect, explaining how the decline had gone further below.  It was an explanation of the 

delta. 
                                
       
  
       
 I think the language that was circulated 
originally to the Committee a week or two ago is 
now in a
lternative A
, and the language is as follows: 
ﬁInflation continued to run well below the 
Committee™s longer
-run objective, largely reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and 
decreasing prices of non
-energy imports.ﬂ  There, the way I read it when that language wa
s circulated was that now this 
phrase 
ﬁlargely reflectingﬂ in effect explains the ﬁwellﬂ part
Šwhy 
it is ﬁwellﬂ below.  But as it
™s been modified, the sentence now reads ﬁInflation continued to run 
below the Committee™s longer-run objective, largely reflect
ing earlier declines in energy prices 
and decreasing prices of non-
energy imports.ﬂ 
I don™t think it
™s the case that all of the difference between the Committee™s target and 
where we are right now is explained based on the earlier declines in energy prices 
and decreasing 
prices of non-energy imports.  On the contrary, as many people pointed out yesterday and a little 
bit today already, we haven™t been hitting the inflation target for quite some time now.  And if 

you pull out housing inflationŠ
which
, of cour
se, is largely a function of rents imputed to 
homeownersŠthen you have an awful lot of continuing questions 
about how much inflation 
there is. 
As a factual matter, I think we should modify that sentence to say something like the 
following: 
ﬁInflation cont
inued to run below the Committee™s longer-
run objective, partly 
reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non
-energy importsﬂŠ
or something just making clear that that second phrase does not account for all of the difference 

betw
een the Committee™s target and where we are right now. 
Finally, like those who have gone before me, I would prefer removing ﬁat leastﬂ in the 
first sentence.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 
                   
                             MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Our March statement provided forward 
guidance only as far ahead as this meeting, and it effectively said we were going to go to a 
meeting
-by-
meeting
, data-dependent approach to decisionmaking.  From now on, that™
s the right 
thing to do, and I think 
tha
t™
s imp
ortant.
  This means we will not be in the business of 
telegraphing interest rate moves in the previous meeting™s
 statement.  I support the observations 
President Lockhart made on this.  A
n important corollary 
of that is that we should not be 
encouraging pe
ople to believe we won™t raise rates without having sent a telegraph on the issue 
in the previous meeting™s 
statement. 
Concerning 
alternative 
C as a stalking
-horse for future statements, I don™t feel the need to 
include language like that in paragraphs 2 or 3 
at a meeting prior to liftoff
.  So I agree with 
Governor TarulloŠevery meeting should be live, and we should, to the extent that we have the 

opportunity, condition people to expect that we could move without forewarning, perhaps.  
A critical aspect is today™s characterization of the economy
, especial
ly in the first 
paragraph.  As I said in the earlier round, a substantial amount of data is scheduled to arrive 

between now and our June meeting.  If those reports are reasonably close to what the Tealbook is 

forecasting, they
™re going to show a rebound in consumer spending growth, and they™re going to 

show a firming in the monthly inflation figures. 
In that case, there could well be a strong argument for raising rates in June.  Now, we 
don™t know for sure the data will come in that way, and we don™t know for sure there won™t be 

some looming concerns on the horizon that alter the outlook. We could find we™ve hit a more 

prolonged soft patch.  I
n that case
, we may be inclined to delay raising rates when we get to 
June, and I™m open to that possibility.  But, in view of the information we™
re going to get, I think 
it™s very important not to take June off the table. 
        
  
                 
   
         
          As I said, the critical aspect is how the statement characterizes the data, and that focuses 
attention on the first paragraph.  T
he revisions that were made between 
the 
beginning of last 
week and the end of last week in the first paragraph were good, important, and 
necessary
.  But I 
agree with President Mester that the first paragraph still has somewhat of a ﬁglass half
-empty
ﬂ tone, emphasizing the empty half of the glass I guess you™d say.  I support her suggestion for 
changing the characterization of household spending.  I 
also 
support Governor Tarullo™s change 
of ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpartl
y.ﬂ I think he™
s right on there. 
But I 
believe 
that the inflation sentence in 
alternative 
C is more balanced and fair
, as it acknowledges that inflation is no longer declining.  
It calls that out. 
Central bank communication i
s all about what you choose to call out, and I 
think it would be fair to call out that inflation isn™t declining
.  S
o I™d put that suggestion on the 
table. 
Regarding 
the phrase ﬁat least,ﬂ 
I™ve 
been wrestling with that in my mind.  Certainly, in 
a broad-brush kind of way, you can see how including it might make things a little more dour than 
they ought to be, as President Mester argued.  But, on the other hand, ﬁat least in partﬂ means 
that the amount that™
s attributable to transitory factors is 
ﬁin part
ﬂ or ﬁgreater than in part.ﬂ  F
rom 
that point of view, 
ﬁat least in partﬂ seems to me like a more upbeat assessment than just ﬁin part 

reflecting.ﬂ But I could be persuaded either way on that.  Those are my comments on language, 

Madam Chair.  Thank you very much. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank y
ou.  President Bullard. 
MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™m going to make three comments here.  
First of all, I support President Kocherlakota™s call for a symposium on 
r*.  We could probably 
benefit from getting a lot of views on the table about th
is important parameter in our models
Š         
  
    
                 
    
        
  
  
   how we
™re thinking about it and how that thinking shapes policy choices.  So that would be an 
excellent thing to do, if we could fit that in at some point. 
That leaves me with two comments.  One is about building credib
ility for data
-dependent 
policy, and the other is about shading policy to prevent asset price bubbles.  On the credibility 
question, as we all discussed yesterday, recent data ha
ve been relatively weak.
  We have been 
trying to build credibility 
regarding 
a data-dependent policy 
being the basis for rate decisions 
as we go forward.  
I guess my assessment so far is that we have indeed built some credibility, even 
considerable credibility, 
regarding 
a data
-dependent policy rate for the period ahead
, despite the 
fact that we haven™t moved the policy rate for six and a half years.  And that™
s an achievement. 
Markets
Šappropriately
, in my viewŠmoved the likely date of liftoff back in response to 
weaker
-than-expected readings on the U.S. economy during the intermeeting period.  That™
s exactly what you™d expect to observe if policy is data dependent.  If we can maintain this type of 

credibility as the 
data wax and wane during 2015, we™
ll be in excellent shape at the time of 
policy liftoff, whenever that should arrive, in the sense that there will be few surprises in the 

markets at that juncture. 
The more we can do to convince people that we™re going to 
react to the data
 and be clear 
about what data we™re going to react to, the better off we™
ll be
.  I™m hopeful that the day of the 
first move will be an anticlimactic event because we have credibility that that
™s what we 
were 
going to do.  T
hen we make the 
move, and it™s pretty smooth.  I think we™
re well on the way to 
that, but we probably have more work to do during the spring. 
Let me turn to the second comment on the shading 
of 
policy.  The staff™s forecast is that 
there will be a smooth glide to the steady state.  This forecast envisions unemployment only a 

few ticks lower at the end of the forecast horizon in 2017 than it is today.  This is not my 
        
                   
          
    
     
    baseline forecast. 
I envision unemployment falling well into the 4 percent range over the 
forecast horizon,
 barring any large negative shock to the U.S. economy.  This is what happened 
in the 1990s and in the 2000s, and I think it™
s a good baseline forecast of what
™s going to happen 
again this time. 
Simultaneously, the labor market conditions index, which takes 
into account all aspects 
of labor market performance, will continue to rise far above its average value
.  So we
™ll be 
talking about, 
in the years ahead
, a very robust labor market performance when compared 
with 
metrics on past labor market performance in 
the U
nited S
tates
.  This is going to constitute a 
boom phase for the U.S. economy, notwithstanding this morning™s GDP report, which I think is 
going to prove to be temporary. 
The boom will be associated with about 3 percent growth, at least for a time, in the U.S. 
economy.  That 3 percent growth, while not stellar, is still about 1 percent higher than the 

potential growth rate for the U.S. economy.  T
his is very similar to the 1990s
, when we had years 
in which 
we were at 4
 percent in an economy that had a 3 
percent potential growth rate. We
™ll be growing at 3 
percent for a time in an economy that has a 2 
percent potential growth rate. 
Inflation will rise
, go through the inflation target, and be higher than 2 percent over parts of the 
forecast horizon. 
Duri
ng this period, interest rates will remain exceptionally low by historical standards. 
We™ve already committed ourselves to that by saying 
that
, even 
when 
we start to normalize, it 
would be very small and very gradual.  You could throw in that my view is t
hat this policy rate, 
as we
™re envisioning it over the next couple of years, 
will be below the likely natural rate of 

interest, the 
r* value.  I
n this sense
, we™re going to provide accommodation as currently 
                         
        
        
      envisioned all 
of 
the way through this boom phase for the U.S. economy.  This is how I™
m thinking about it. 
Now, the boom period, combined with exceptionally low policy rate settings, is a recipe 
for asset price bubbles.  Asset price bubbles have plagued the U.S. economy during the 1990s 
and 2000s and have been a major point of debate at this Committee over the p
ast 20 years. 

These bubbles are not in our models.  They were not in the past 20 years, they™
re not in our 
models today, and we don™t see any component of this in our standard presentations on w
hat we 
should do about monetary policy.  So we do not have a good understanding of where these 

bubbles come from or how to control them when they occur.  Furthermore, bursting asset price 

bubbles can have devastating consequences for the U
nited S
tates
 and the global economy.  It™
s no small matter if this thing gets going and develops. 
The basic strategy, in my view, should be to head off this kind of possibility.  We™ve had 
boom-and-bust cycles during the 1990s and the 2000s.  What you™d like to do this time around is 
not to 
have that boom
-and-bust cycle
.  Then you™ll get a longer expansion, and you
™ll 
get better 
outcomes for everybody. 
It™s true that we have an improved macroprudential stance today, and that 
will help 
mitigate some of the more severe consequences of a bursting bubble.  But untested 
macroprudential tools alone are, in my view, insufficient to rely on, given the exceptionally dire 

consequences of bursting asset bubbles not just for the U.S. economy, but 
also 
for the global 
economy. 
The prudent policy, in my view, is to combine our efforts on macroprudential policy with 
a sensible monetary policy that hedges our bets in the direction of prevention of the kind of asset 

price boom-and-bust cycles 
that we
™ve
 experienced during the 1990s and 2000s.  I think we 
      
   
                    
       
    
     
  
  
      should be shading in the direction of slightly higher interest rates than we would otherwise have, 
on the grounds that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure on this dimension.  We do
n™t 

have very good knowledge of what these bubbles are or how they form, so we should be hedging 

our bets on this.  This is an important reason to get going on a modest normalization program 

when the opportunity ar
riv
es, which I expect it will later this y
ear. 
Let me turn just to alternative
 B for a minute.  I support 
alternative
 B, 
as written, for 
today, without the ﬁat leastﬂ phrase 
in the first paragraph.  T
he ﬁin partﬂ covers the bases there, 
and I don™t think we need to add anything more to that. 
I do 
agree with President Mester™s suggested change. 
The wording ﬁG
rowth in 
household spending declined; household
s™ real incomes rose stronglyﬂ is a little bit jarring, and I 
like President Mester™s suggestion there that would smooth that out a little bit. 
I agree with Governor Tarullo and President Lacker that we should not try to reintroduce 
calendar
-dependent language as liftoff nears.  We™re trying to get away from that, so we should 
not try to do that.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  P
resident Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  President Kocherlakota made a good case for 
alternative 
A, and I™m sympathetic to his view, but I can support a
lternative B.  I continue to 
believe that economic conditions will most likely be consistent 
with an appropriate time for 
liftoff being sometime in 2016.  I currently think, based on data, that it will take until then for me 

to be reasonably confident that we™re on course to achieve our inflation objective within an 

acceptable time 
frame. 
The information we™
ve received since our 
March 
meeting has not changed my opinion on 
this.  Indeed, I™
m a little nervous over the latest data on activity and their implications for further 
                    
                            
             slower reductions 
in resource slack. The recent stabilization of energy p
rices and 
the 
dollar are 
positives.  But, 
as I discussed yesterday, I need to see a good deal more broad
-based, concrete 
evidence before being confident that underlying inflation trends actually are heading up with 
adequate momentum.  But, having said that
, we
™ll see how the data evolve. 
Let me make a couple of comments about other things people have mentioned.  I agree 
completely that we have moved to the point 
at which 
it™s a meeting
-by-meeting decision.  
They
™re all live decisions on the rate increase, 
so data conditionality, by itself, is all we need.  I 
don™t think we need special language, 
either
, to signal our intent. 
I agree completely with Governor Tarullo on the paragraph 1 language on inflation.  I had 
noted that myself.  T
he problem is that the 
previous iteration had talked about the gradientŠ 
inflation declining
Šand now it
™s a level concept
Šﬁcontinued to runﬂŠ
but it leaves the same 
factors in place. 
So if you add, as I think you said, ﬁ
part
ly reflecting earlier declines,
ﬂ that would 
take care of 
that.
  Alternatively, if you leave the language, you could also add ﬁand resource 
slackﬂ as part of the explanation, but the more minimal ﬁpart
lyﬂ would probably be better there. 
I™m indifferent on the language about 
household spending
 growth that Preside
nt Mester 
indicated.  I™
m a little worried that it
™s going to sound like 
the message you communicate 
when 
you go out and say, ﬁI support so-and-so 1,000 percent.ﬂ  When you say, ﬁHousehold spending 

continued to grow,ﬂ the alternative to that is a recession.  If household spending doesn™t grow, 

it™s a recession, so I
™m not quite sureŠbut, 
at any rate, that
™s fine. 
On ﬁ
consumer sentiment remains high
,ﬂ these are factually correct observations, 
but
 I™
m a little worried that it might be risky.  After all, we
™re thinking that the energy price declines are 
transitory.  Gas prices are going to go up, and we know that sentiment goes down when gasoline 

prices go up.  
So we might be providing a different bright line for people looking for a bright 
            
  
    
      
                 
     
  
  
    sign here.  Then, if you see that one go down, 
it might have a little more of an implication than 
we intend
.  B
ut otherwise, I don™t have a problem with that.  I support a
lternative B. 
Thank you, 
Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 

MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B and the latitude it 
offers the Committee to consider a change in policy at its next meeting. 
In terms of guidance that we can glean from policy rules, the benchmarks in the 
Tealbook, Book B, continue to generally suggest 
that 
the funds rate should be higher than its 
current setting. Granted, the equilibrium real rate, or 
r*, we
™ve been discussing remains 
depressed and raises 
questions as to whether these benchmarks are providing appropriate 

guid
ance today. 
At the same time, common frameworks used to estimate 
r* also provide an estimate of 
potential GDP in which 
declines in 
r* go hand in hand with lower potential.  
For example, the 
current Laubach
-Williams framework indicates that 
the equilibrium real rate is negative, though 
it also implies that output is actually above potential.  So
, while policy should incorporate a 
lower equilibrium real rate into the appropriate setting of the funds rate, it also should not neglect 

the implications for potential GDP and the output gap.  For example, using the lower 
r* measure 
and positive output gap in the Taylor (1999) rule with inertia suggests a higher current funds 

rate.  The Taylor (1993) r
ule indicates a setting above 1 percent, even with the lower equil
ibrium 
real rate.
  I don™t take the positive output gap to completely reflect current conditions by any 
means, since some labor market slack remains.  However, this example illustrates 
that 
taking on 
board a lower equilibrium real rate may also imply a sma
ller output gap. 
      
              
          
              Finally, although this is not a decision for today, I note increasing uncertainty about the 
timing and effects of ceasing reinvestments.  I
™m a bit concerned in looking at the market 
participant surveys and noting that expectations on the 
timing of when reinvestments will be 
ended are quite diffuse. For example, a slight majority of dealers expect 
Treasury reinvestments 
to end in the first quarter of 2016, but then expectations are spread over the next four quarters 
into 2017.  This is somewhat concerning, especially given the risk highlighted in the QS report 

and recent IMF financial stability reports that longer
-term rates could increase sharply 
approaching liftoff.  Or the Committee could be facing another conundrum in which longer-
term 
rates 
remain low.
  I think we should try to manage some of this risk by providing more guidance 
on the timing of reinvestment, perhaps incorporating 
it into the SEP or perhaps just 
distributing it 
on an internal basis for our own use, to think about 
expectations on when we anticipate ceasing 
reinvestments.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  First Vice President Prichard. 
MR. PRICHARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I view the evolution of the draft 
alternative 
B to finally contain entirely data-dependent language.  This is a very positive 
development and, 
I believe
, an essential step on the path to policy normalization.  I also interpret 
the language in alternative B as leaving our options open for beginning normalization at any 
future meeting 
as we are
 informed by incoming data. 
My biggest concern with a
lternative B is its overly weak interpretation of the current 
economic environment.  As I mentioned yesterday, expenditure-side data for Q1 over the past 

30 years appears to be suffering from poor and pe
rhaps incorrect seasonal adjustment.  An 
ind
icator that incorporates income
-side data, GDPplus, which was posted to 
the website of 
our Real-T
ime 
Data Research 
Center this morning, indicates that the first quarter may not be nearly 
             
              
     
    
          
   as weak as many of the 
nowcasts
 being reported.  GDPplus grew at 1.65 percent in the first 
quarter after growing 3.3 percent 
on a year
-over-
year 
basis
 in 2014:
Q4. 
Further, 
I suggest that the Committee consider
, now or in the future, 
simplifying its 
assessment of the labor market. 
Many labor market indicators paint a relatively healthy picture 
of the labor market.  F
or that reason
, I would favor deleting the third full sentence in 
paragraph
 1Šagain, either now or in the futureŠand simplifying it.  T
hat sentence begins with 
ﬁA range of labor market indicators–
ﬂ  This sentence is fairly imprecise, and it adds little to the 

meaning that is already embodied in the preceding sentence.  The idea would be to seek every 

opportunity to boil the FOMC statement down to its essence by eliminating sentences that don™t 

add particularly to meaning or understanding. 
I am otherwise supportive of the suggestion to eliminate ﬁat leastﬂ and 
of the other 
suggestions that have been made.
  Thank you very much, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Presid
ent Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B.
  Let me respond to 
some of the language suggestions first.  Like others, I would not include the phrase ﬁat leastﬂ in 

the opening paragraph.  That™s not needed.  It™s even unclear. 
On Governor Tarullo™s suggestion, I think he™s absolutely right.  I would put ﬁpartly 
reflecting earlier declines in energy pricesﬂ in the penultimate sentence in 
paragraph 1. 
That™s 
exactly right.  In the recent data, core is running about 1 per
cent.  O
verall 
inflation
 is running 
at around zero over the past couple of quarters, but 
it was 
obviously negative in 
the first quarter
.  There are a lot of factors going onŠPresident Lacker made this point, too.  T
hat™s just accurate 
and, 
I think
, better.
  Paragraph 2 is really 
the place in which we do the heavy lifting and explain 
how we interpret things. Paragraph 1 is really about the data. 
         
                              
  
    
   
     
   I™ll 
make a comment about data dependence in 
paragraph 1.  T
his is part of life. We™re in 
the data-dependent mode.  Paragraph 1 is going to describe the data.  We had only a month, 
really
, of data here.  This is a very small sample, but these are the data we have, and I think we 
have to just describe them accurately. 
The part of the statement 
in which we try to expl
ain how we interpret 
them 
is 
paragraph 
2. In that respect, 
I thought 
paragraph 2 did a nice job of making the point that, yes, the data 
have been weaker.  Yes, we™ve had th
ese 
factors in terms of inflation
.  But, basically
, our outlook 
hasn™t changed much.  I™m not concerned so much about the weakness or the signaling in 

paragraph 
1 as currently stated
, because I think that™s the way the data have been.  It™s just a 
small sample, and
, of course, we™ll get a lot more data bef
ore our next meeting.  So I™m fine with 
that. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo and others who™ve commented on where the future 
statements should go, obviously President Lockhart started us down that road.  I strongly agree 
with Governor Tarullo and, 
I think
, P
resident Evans 
as well as
 some others that we shouldn™t be 
going back to trying to put some quasi-
date
-based guidance in there.  That whole thing of how 
we have to take a couple 
of 
steps before we act is a kind of straightjacket we don™t want to get 
ourselves in. We™re in a good place now on our statements, and I wouldn™t want to see us move 
back to that. 
Now, my own view in terms of the outlook hasn™t really changed based on the data we™ve 
seen in the 
past month, 
which is similar to what 
others have mentioned.  
First
-quarter 
data seem 
to be distorted by some seasonal factors and other factors.  We™ve been down this road before.  

In terms of the inflation data, I haven™t changed my view there, 
either. I still have 
the 
view that 
inflation 
will come back over the next couple of years to our target. 
                    
                               
  But this is 
all 
forecast
, and we™re now in the data-dependent mode.  When I™m asked 
when I think we™ll be raising rate
s, I say,
 ﬁI might have a view on this, but I don™t know.ﬂ 
I try to avoid tal
king about June, September, December, or whichever year because it really depends 
on how the data 
come in
, how they influence our outlook, and what the right policy is. 
That™s a hard message for us to get across
, because we™ve been focused on June versus 
September versus December or whatever.  So I™ve been thinking a little bit outside the box here 
about how we can, beyond this statement, get to a more data-dependent approach.  
Madam 
Chair, I have a suggestion for you.  I made you a special T-
shirt 
[Laughte
r].  The message reads 
ﬁMonetary P
olicy Is
 Data 
Dependent.ﬂ 
CHAIR YELLEN.  How about one for everybody? 

MR. WILLIAMS.  I have a whole box of them.  You wear this around, and then I think 
that™
ll make the point pretty clear
.  We won™t have to worry so much aboutŠ 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Fantastic. 
Love it. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you. 

MR. 
TARULLO. 
Have the softball team wear th
ose. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Another great idea.  Oh, I have one 
last comment I want to make
Š sorry
.  [Laughter] 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  You can™t top that, 
John. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  No, I know.  Actually, 
President Kocherlakota
, I can
Šin this way.  I 
would like to second the comments of 
President Kocherlakota
 and 
President Bullard about 
having more of a discussion 
regarding 
the natural rate of interest, 
with 
r* e
stimates
 obviously 
being at the center of this.  I get a lot of feedback, pro and con, about this, and there is some 
                    
              
      
  
           literature developing on 
this besides just the Laubach
-Williams 
model.  So I really do think that 
having a further discussion about 
that wo
uld be helpful. 
The basic logic of Laubach
-Williams is actually pretty simple.  Over the 
past five years
, output growth 
has been averaging 2.3 percent
ŠI™m picking up on President Kocherlakota™s 
point yesterday about 
how L
aubach
-W
illiams
 works.  The 
trend
 growth in our model is 2.0 
percent
.  I think that™s consistent with most people™s views. So we™re getting growth of 
0.3 percentage point above trend over five years, while the real federal funds rate has been about 
minus 1.7.  The only way you can interp
ret this statistically is 
to think 
that the real rate gap
Š basically
, the 
amount of monetary stimulusŠis very modest over the p
ast five years, and this 
hasn™t changed in our model. 
What 
Laubach
-Williams is telling you is simple.  We™ve had negative real rat
es for five 
straight years.  Output growth has been just a smidgen above potential.  Therefore, 
there™s really 

not much monetary stimulus relative to the neutral rate going on.  This is something we should 
discuss further, but, 
basically
, that™s how the mo
del interprets the data.  If the equilibrium real 
rate really were 
2, growth would have been a lot faster than 2.3.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Kocherlakota. 
MR. KOCHERLAKOTA.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I had read about the T-
shirt in the 
media, and I™m glad to see the real thing in front of us. 
But the 
more 
serious thing 
is, President Williams summarized a number of people™s 
comments that we want to get away from being date 
dependent.  One challenge 
with regard to 
that is the way the 
Summary of 
Econom
ic 
Projections presents our policy outlooks.  That™s very 
date dependent.  In fact, that™s what I™m often asked about
:  ﬁBoy, it looks as though everyone™s 
saying 2015. What do you think about that?ﬂ  So it™s something to be thought about
.  I
f we™re 
        
         
    
                       really trying to get away from date dependence, I think that says something about how we want 
to be talking about interest rates in the 
Summary of 
Economic P
rojections as well. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  That™s a good suggestion.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FIS
CHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d like to first discuss briefly the inflation 
target issue that arose yesterday
, and then turn to the monetary policy decision and explain why I 
support 
alternative 
B. Yesterday President Rosengren
, supported by President Kocherlakota and one or two 
others, 
suggested raising the target inflation rate, a suggestion that™s also be
en made by 
Olivier 
Blanchard.  I believe 
that 
we should constantly be reexamining all 
of 
our assumptions about 
monetary policy and the behavior of the economy, but that, 
particularly in the case of targets, we 

need to be very careful about our public stance. 
With regard to our public stance, we fixed a target inflation rate in 2011 and announced a 
2 percent target in 2012.  The setting of a 
target inf
lation rate was a major achievement and
, to 
those outside the S
ystem
, a major surprise
.  We need to be very careful indeed about reopening 
that decision and that discussion. 
The argument for raising the target inflation rate is that the higher target would permit 
normal monetary policy to attain a more negative real rate of interest than is now possible.  That 

is true, but there™s not so far been public discussion of the negative aspects of a higher inflation 

target. 
The main cost, I believe, relates to Al
an Greenspan™s definition of the desired inflation 
rate as a rate such that inflation is not taken into account in routine economic decisions.
  In 
particular, at around 4 
percent inflation
, we very likely would see the return of indexation into 

relatively 
short
-term contracts, including labor contracts.  Monetary policy becomes much more 
difficult in heavily indexed economies, in part because the inflation rate typically becomes more 
                  
        
    
  
      
               
  variable the higher the indexation rate and 
because 
the probability that t
he dynamics of inflation 
become unstable increases. 
A second cost relates to the credibility of the inflation target and of the F
OMC
.  It is possible that we should, at some future point, 
raise the inflation target
.  But if we 
go out now and 
start a public discussion about the inflation target, we will undoubtedly be asked why we™re 
raising the target and what the effects of doing so are likely to be.  
There are answers to these 

questions, but the answers may well reduce our credibility precisely at a time when reasonable 

people regard us as the most credible and most professional of the macro policymaking 

institutions in the United States. 
WeŠthat is, the participants in this meeting
Šshould not take that risk.  We should not 
go public with any doubts that we might have about the goals of monetary policy.  At the 

moment
, we™re in the middle of the process of trying to normalize monetary policy.  We should 
always be reconsidering our policy framework, but there are times to go public and times not to 
do so.  That is why our discussions of the target inflation rate should continue within the Federal 
Reserve System and within the Committee, and that is why it is fine that Eric raised the issue in 

yesterday™s go
-round, but we should not go public with that discussion. 
Turning now to the monetary policy decision, yesterday™s discussion, 
in which almost 
every participant said, 
rightly
, that 
the key issue is whether first
-quarter weakness i
s transitory or 
a signal of a longer-term weakening of growth, and this morning™s announcement 
of the first 
estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth make it clear that we should wait before making a decision 
to change the interest rate. I say that while bearing in mind an almost true maxim I once heard:  

ﬁThe situation is never clearer in the future.  It™s just unclear in a different way.
ﬂ  [Laughter] 
         
      
       
       
        
           
    I support 
alternative
 B, in which the first three paragraphs do a good job of showing that 
we are watching the data carefully
, and that the probability of a June liftoff has declined, but that 
June remains on the table. As weak as the incoming data have been and as threatening as 
the 
many black clouds that are out there 
are, it remains important to keep June as a possible liftoff 
date.  How could it be possible?  Well, we™ll receive two more employment reports before the 

June meeting.  If we see very high payroll gains in April and May and if the unemployment rate 

comes down to, say, 5.3 percent while the spending data firm as expected, it would be reasonable 

to argue 
for liftoff. 
Some might suggest that we should wait just a little longer to be sure
, since September 
isn™t really that different from June
, to perfect our communications about liftoff or to reexamine 
the tools we intend to use to raise the interest rate.
  That would mean that even in the face of very 
good data, the June versus September decision would be a close call.  But in making that call, 
we 
need also to take into account the importance of our credibility, which would require us to act 
when the conditions for acting that we have set out are fulfilled. 
Turning to the bigger picture, my views on when to lift off were influenced by the very 
helpful paper that was sent to this Committee in January by 
Oliver d
e Gr
oot, 
Etienne 
Gagnon, and Robert 
Tetlow
, whose results I quoted in the March FOMC meeting.  In that paper, they 
compared the probabilities that policymakers might regret their decisions under early and late 
liftoff scenarios.
  Using random draws from historical shocks, they show that the probability that 
we would fall behind the curve and wish that we had tightened sooner was negligible if we go on 

the early side but 
was close to 
10 percent if we wait a year longer
.  In contrast
, the difference 
between the probabilities that we would need to retrace our steps if we go earlier, 10 
percent, 

rather than later, 
5 percent, w
as not as great. 
        
        
              
           
       
Now, it™s a very good paper, but it™s not obvious where we are today relative to going 
early or
 going late.  Nonetheless, all in all, I found that analysis very useful, and it helped 
persuade me that we should seriously be contemplating lifting off soon.  It further helped 
convince me that ﬁ
early and gradual
ﬂ is a much better approach to raising the 
interest rate than 
ﬁlate and steep.
ﬂ  Of course, in the event, 
we may have to raise the rate faster or slower than we 
anticipate, but, 
at this stage
, we have to work with expectations. 
I™d also like to relate to the argument that we™re only in this relati
vely good position on 
employment and 
this 
potentially good position on inflation because the interest rate is so low, 
and that, therefore, we should not move anytime soon.  It™s undoubtedly true that the U.S. 

economy would not be in this relatively favorable position if the F
OMC
 had not moved rapidly 
after Lehman Brothers to the zero lower bound and then undertaken three rounds of QE 
as well 
as Operation Twist.  I believe history will show that the 
Federal Reserve
Štogether with the 
decision to recapitalize 
the banking system, in which the Treasury and the Congress played 
critical roles
Šsaved the United States from a second Great Depression. But we need to realize 
that, at some point, we have to put the interest rate back into action as a tool of monetary policy.  

In so doing, 
we™ll not only begin to activate a more normal way of undertaking monetary policy, 
but we™ll also be sending an extremely important signal to businesses and households that, 
after 

seven years
, the American economy is ready to exit the Great Recession and begin the return to 

normal. 
When should we do this?  The answer is, we should do it w
hen an interest rate higher 
than we have now is still consistent with 
the closing of the output gap.  I believe that, on the 
inflation rate
, the 
staff 
forecasts we heard yesterday from Bill Wascher are far less pessimistic 
than what I™ve heard around this table this morning.  I
t™s true we™ve got negative inflation in the 
          
           
  
    
                         
  
   first quarter, but it™s very important to note that forecasts of core PCE inflation 
are somewhere 
well above 1 
percent, and that when you take the special factors into account, it™s expected to 
rise not to 0.7 percent, but to 1.7 percent, which is very close to target. 
We should also note that even the 
r* in the Tealbook, Book B, is about 110 basis points 
above our current real federal funds rate, suggesting that a sooner liftoff would not be 
incompatible with further progress toward our goals if the situation improves.  Or, to put the 

criterion in the words of 
alternative 
B, we should move when the Committee ﬁ
has seen further 
improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 

2 percent objective over the medium term
.ﬂ  And I expect that will happen reasonably soon.  
Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B.  On the 
statement
, I support taking out ﬁat leastﬂ and changing ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpartly.ﬂ 
More broadly, paragraph 1 initially struck me, and continues 
to strike me
, as fairly 
downbeat.  But what saves it for me is this comment about how household real income is rising 

strongly, which I think really sets out our narrative for just how much we™re counting on 

consumer spending and is a pretty strong statement in a context of weak spending.  
So, overall, 
it achieves a level of balance, and I™m fine with it with those changes. 
In terms of forward guidance, I™ll just add that I 
believe 
it™s a very bad idea to surprise 
the market with l
iftoff.  I would avoid calendar-based guidance.  I would let the data speak.  I 

would let the statement
, the minutes, 
and the speeches speak. 
I do think the market will get it. 
It™s very unlikely that the people in this room would be approaching a decision to lift off the 

interes
t rate
, with all 
of 
the attention we™re getting, and that this would be a surprise to the 
        
         
     
   
                    
  
   
          
   market.  T
hat™s incredibly unlikely. 
In fact, my guess 
is, as we approach that, it™s not going to be 
a surprise to the market, 
in light of 
all of 
the transparency and all of the attention being paid. 
More broadly, I think that policy is right where it™s supposed to beŠlooking at incoming 
data to see whether the liftoff narrative still holds together, that narrative being reasonable 
growth that is strong enough to support further improvement in the labor market at a meaningful 

pace and inflation moving up to 2 
percent in the medium term. 
The sense I had at the beginning of the year was that the labor market would continue to 
heal fairly quickly in a context of moderate growth, and I thin
k there™s a better
-than-
even chance 
that something like that narrative will reemerge as we leave the first quarter behind, just 
as it did 

in 2014.  
So, as I said yesterday, I feel good about where the current Tealbook forecast is, and 
I consider that to be still on the same path we were on
Ša little bit slower, but a reasonable path. 
I do have to admit I have a concern now, though, that the speed limit on U.S. growth may 
now be closer to 2 percent than 3 percent, because of the drag gen
erated by
 the behavior of net 
exports, and that improvement in the labor market will also slow down as a result.  TimeŠand 

dataŠ
will tell
.  Monetary policy can respond and really has already done so through 

expectations.  It may 
limit further tightening bu
t doesn™t feel 
as though 
it can reverse 
the 
tightening 
in financial conditions that we have already experienced. 
In the case of returning closer to the old path that had strong job growth, we™re close to 
the natural rate.  Monetary policy works with long lags.  Zero isn™t the right number.  This 

remains for me a very satisfying approach if we do get back to that path, and, 
again, that™s my 

modal case. 
The lower path is just much tougher. We™re still close to the natural rate. We™re still 
eliminating slack
, but at a much slower pace, and I think 
that, 
more important, 
the economy is 
       
                      
              more vulnerable to an unwanted tightening 
in financial conditions and probably in a nonlinear 
way. 
I would still want to lift off, just a little bit later
.  But I would point 
out that the 
communication challenges and the risks are much less attractive. 
I™d be very happy to see data come in that would justify liftoff in June or at any meeting 
subsequent to that
.  But, 
having resisted predictions so far for the most part, I™ll co
ntinue to do so 
today.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you.  I support a
lternative B.  It seems appropriate for the 
statement to recognize that incoming data ha
ve shown softness across a range of 
spending 
categories
, in industrial production as well as in labor market conditions. 
Although there is reason to believe that some of the weakness reflects transitory factors 
or statistical noise, my best guess is that some of it also reflects a more persi
stent slowing in 
economic momentum.  In particular, the negative effects of dollar appreciation and weakness in 
activity abroad on net exports and business investment, as well as the negative effects of earlier 
oil price declines on drilling and mining, appear to be greater than expected, and the boost to 

consumption has not materialized. 
This softness of recent data
, along with the advance estimate of GDP, 
leads me to favor 
removing the bracketed ﬁat leastﬂ language from the first sentence. 
I also support Governor 
Tarullo™s modification to the sentence on inflation.  T
hat is simply a more accurate statement. 
By the same token, reflecting our uncertainty about the persistence of these effects, it is 
appropriate to include mention of some continuing positive economic signals, such as the 

relatively high level of consumer sentiment.  For that reason, I support the additional words in 
        
  
           
            
        
       paragraph 2, which stress that, 
despite the weaker data, the Committee continues to expect the 
economy to expand at a moderate p
ace. 
For those who worry 
that p
aragraph 1 is too downbeat, I would note this is significantly 
counterbalanced by the fact that a
lternative B makes few changes to 
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the 
March statement, including importantly reiterating that the risks to
 the outlook and the labor 
market are nearly balanced rather than emphasizing downside risks in light of recent data. 
In my view, the incoming data, on balance, do not suggest we™re appreciably closer to our 
two conditions for liftoff.  The incoming data on the labor market do not provide evidence of 

further improvement.  If anything, the softer tone of the aggregate spending data raises the 

possibility that labor market improvement may stall this year.
  My reading of the data on 
unemployment, labor force p
articipation
, and the number of employees working part time for 
economic reasons is that slack remains.
  Nonetheless, we™ll have two additional labor market 
rea
ding
s to help with our assessment before the June FOMC deliberations. 
Meanwhile
, the modest improvement we™ve seen in putting a floor under inflation falls 
short of our standard of reasonable confidence.  We™ve seen some encouraging movement in 

core CPI, although core PCE remains persistently soft relative to our 2 
percent target. 
The recent 
firming
 of oil prices and the recent 
plateauing 
in dollar appreciation raise the possibility that we 
might be seeing an inflection point
, but further appreciation seems likely
, accelerating wage 
growth has 
yet to materialize, and market
-based measures of 
inflation expectations remain soft, 
although they™ve shown some improvement as the price of oil has firmed. 
It™s possible that the data we 
will 
receive 
in the coming months 
will reveal the weakness 
in the data to have been a temporary aberration, and that momentum in underlying activity is 

undiminished.  It could also be that incoming data and economic developments abroad will show 
                  
     
                  
       
 foreign activity to be on more stable footing than now appears to be the case.  
If so and if price 
inflation 
and 
measures of in
flation expectation
s show further signs of firming, then liftoff could 
be appropriate.  On balance, my assessment is that
, although June should remain on the table, the 
probability of liftoff has shifted from June to later in the year.  Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLE
N.  Thank you.  
Vice Chair
man
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you.
  I support a
lternative B.  Given the 
slowdown in growth, the weaker payroll trend, and a host of other weak economic data, I think 

it™s unlikely, speaking for myself, that I™m going to see su
fficient news in the next seven weeks 

that™
ll cause me to want to lift off at the June FOMC meeting.
  That said, I wouldn™t rule it out 
completely
, because, as 
Governor 
Fischer makes clear, it™s possible that we could see two strong 
employment reports and a big upturn in economic activity.  So we could get there.  I just don™t 

think that™s very likely at this point. 
I hope the economy is going to cooperate and is going to make a September liftoff 
feasible, but I 
don™t even 
really have that much confidence about that, 
either. 
The Tealbook 
forecast is actually interesting now in the sense of how flat the unemployment rate trajectory is. 

So modest shortfalls in growth could actually cause the unemployment rate trajectory to be 

completely flat or even tick up.  In that case, we might not find ourselves yet 
able to pass the 
ﬁfurther improvement in the labor market
ﬂ test. 
I think that 
ﬁfurther improvement in the labor marketﬂ and ﬁreasonably confident [about] 
inflation
ﬂ are really good tests, and I feel very comf
ortable using those 
when 
speaking about my 
own views in terms of the tim
ing 
of liftoff
.  We should talk about that in speeches and make 
those our criteria, and that will help the market participants think along with us. 
       
                                
   
     
             
In terms of language, I™m with every
one else. I would delete ﬁat least.ﬂ  I™m not that 
confident that it™s all due to transitory factors
, so 
I think ﬁat leastﬂ goes a little too far. 
With respect to President Mester™s suggestion to change the sentence about consumption, 
I believe 
the meanin
g is the same. 
MS. MESTER.  The meaning is the same. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
Given 
that 
the meaning is the same, I guess I prefer to go 
with the more parsimonious number of wordsŠ
a more direct approach.  So I think 
I prefer what 
we have. 
MS. MESTER.  I 
think second derivatives are harder to understand. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo™s ﬁpartlyﬂ versus ﬁlargely,ﬂ 
I think you really could go either way.  You think about the gap between our target of 2 
percent 

for inflation and where we 
are. 
My judgment would be 
that
 about two-thirds of that gap is due to 
lower energy prices and the stronger dollar, so about one-third is due to other things.  You could 
call that ﬁlargelyﬂ if you wanted to
, or you could call that ﬁpartly.ﬂ 
It™s really wh
at the 
Committee wants to communicate in terms of how concerned they are about inflation being low 
that should drive whether you want to be ﬁ
largely
ﬂ or ﬁ
partly.
ﬂ  I would slightly favor ﬁ
partly
ﬂ because I™m not as concerned about inflation today as I was six weeks ago, but I™m happy to 

accept the judgment of the Committee. 
With respect to the statement, I™m really glad that we™
re now in a data-dependent place, 
and I don™t feel bad about that in the slightest.  The market should be able to think along with us 

as they see the data
, as long as they can interpret them through the prism of labor market 

improvement and 
whether we are
 becoming reasonably confident about the inflation outlook 

over the medium term.  
If the market starts to diverge from what our expe
ctations are, there 
are 
                    
     
                        
       
 plenty of forums in which to remind people of what the data mean to us in terms of those two 
criteria.  I think we can easily pull the market back. 
Lastly, Chair 
Yellen 
opened the meeting by recognizing Chris Cummings
, so I want to 
close my remarks similarly.  I want to acknowledge Chris™
s service to the New York Fed
, the 
Federal Reserve System
, and this Committee.  On several occasions during the crisis
, Chris was 
forced to sit in this chair and provide the New York Fed™s views on monetary policy, and she did 

that very ably.  We hope that will never have to happen again. 
In terms of Chris™
s contributions to the 
System, they™re very large.  She™s been a great 
colleague to me and to many others throughout the Federal Reserve System.  I™ve heard many 

people comment to me over the past few days and weeks about how much they™re going to miss 

her and how important she™s been in contributing to the Federal Reserve System writ 
large, as 
opposed to just the New York Fed.  She embodies, in my mind, the modern central banker 
in that 
she has a 
very deep and broad portfolio, ranging from 
serving as p
roduct d
irector for the 
Wholesale Product Office to chairing the Financial Stability Board™s Cross
-Border Crisis 
Management Group.  That™s a pretty wide span of responsibilities. 
I want to thank her personally for her wise counsel and support during my tenure.  And, 
of course, I wish you the best in all 
of your future endeavors.  [Applause] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thanks, everybody.  
First of all, 
let me acknowledge 
that I 
heard the support for 
a Committee discussion about 
r* and the factors influencing it, and I also 
think that™s a good idea
.  W
e™ll work with Thomas and others to see if we can put that together.  
It™s a great idea. 
I heard
, in gene
ral
, broad-based support for 
alternative 
B for today, and we have a few 
language issues to review.
  First, starting at the top of 
paragraph 1, we have the bracketed ﬁat 
         
       
               
   
               least,ﬂ and I actually heard a large number of people who suggested we not include the bracketed 
ﬁat least.ﬂ
  Let me give anybody who wants it in there an opportunity to say 
so.  President 
Lacker
, I heard you support putting it in there, but are there others?  [No response] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Then I will
Š MR. LACKER.  I c
ould support deleting 
it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Great. 
So we will remove the bracketed ﬁat least.ﬂ
  The next 
change suggested was President Mester™s recommend
ed change in the language about household 
spending.  Just to remind you, she suggested changing the words ﬁGrowth in household spending 

decline
dﬂ to ﬁ
Household spending continued to grow
, although at a s
lower pace.ﬂ 
I heard a little 
bit of support, not a great deal, and a couple of people 
were opposed.  Let me just ask
ŠI think I 
heard two supporters in addition to 
President Mester.  Is there widespread support for that 

change?  If so, please indicate if you support that change. 
MR. FISCHER.  I do. 
PARTICIPANT.  I support the change. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I see 
three
 people who are supportive.  And how many are 
opposed?
  [Show of hands]  Okay.  I™m going toŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Chair™s prerogative. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Chair™s prerogative
.  I think leaving it as is
, rather than going with the 
suggestion, is, frankly, my own preference. 
Finally
, we have Governor Tarullo™s 
suggested change
.  That would be in the ﬁinflationﬂ 
sentence, the next
-to-last sentence in 
paragraph 1, and the suggestion is to change ﬁlargely 
reflectingﬂ to ﬁpartly reflecting.ﬂ 
I did hear quite a bit of support for that.  Personally
, I™m also 
               
  
   
      
                
   open to making that change, but let me see what people think who didn™t weigh in on that.  H
ow 
many people wouldŠ
President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  C
ould I ask a clarifying question? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes, sur
e. 
MR. EVANS. 
Vice Chair
man
 Dudley, you mentioned two-
thirds o
fŠ 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  That would be my characterization. 

MR. EVANS. Was that 
of 
headline inflation or 
core? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Headline 
is zero
.  Core is running about 1.3-ish on a 
year
-over
-year basis
. MR. EVANS.  So you™re saying two-thirds of the low headline inflation. 

VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  Yes, exactly. 

MR. EVANS.  Ye
s.  That™s fair. I agree. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. 
It refers to inflation.  It doesn™t refer to core inflation. I 
think you can argue it either way, frankly. 
CHAIR YELLEN. 
Inflation is running about ¼ 
percent.
  Core is running about 1.4 or 
something like that. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY. Yes.  So about two
-thirds of the gap is in these transitory 
factors
, and about one
-third is
Š MR. EVANS.  When I s
ay inflation
, I™m thinking underlying inflationŠ
something closer 
to coreŠso that™s why I 
believe 
ﬁpartlyﬂ is important
.  But you™re right.  If this was nailed down 
and 
it said headline inflation
, that would be okay.  At any rate, I support Governor Tarullo™s 
recommenda
tion. 
             
          
        
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
            CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay. 
Let me see support for Governor Tarullo™s suggestion.  [Show 
of hands] 
I see broad
-based support.  Is there anyone who feels strongly opposed?  Okay.  So let 
us also make that change. We will change the word ﬁlargelyﬂ to ﬁpart
ly.ﬂ
  And those are all 
of 
the suggestions that we need to review, s
o I think we™re ready, Matt
. MR. LU
ECKE.  The vote will be on a
lternative B 
as depicted 
on pages 7 and 8 of 
Thomas™
s handout, with the changes of taking out the words ﬁat leastﬂ in the fir
st sentence and 
replac
ing ﬁlargelyﬂ 
with 
ﬁpartlyﬂ in the penultimate sentence in 
paragraph 1
.  It will also cover 
the directive on page 12 of Thomas™s handout. 
Cha
ir Yellen 
Yes 
Vice Chairman Dudley 
Yes 
Governor Brainard 
Yes 
President Evans 
Yes 
Governor Fischer 
Yes 
President Lacker 
Yes 
President Lockhart 
Yes 
Governor Powell 
Yes 
Governor Tarullo 
Yes 
President Williams 
Yes 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  You should have your gavel.  [Laughter] 

CHAIR YELLEN. 
Okay.  
We need 
to confirm the date of the next meeting, which is 
Tuesday and Wednesday, June 16 and 17.  Thanks, everybody, for your participation.  The 

meeting is adjourned. 
END OF MEETING 
