Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
 on 
April
 26Œ27, 2016 A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors was 
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in 
Washington, 
D.C., on Tuesday, April 26, 2016, at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, April 27, 2016, at

9:00 a.m.  Those present were the following:
Janet L. Yellen, Chair
 William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
 Lael Brainard
 James Bullard
 Stanley 
Fischer
 Esther L. George 

Loretta J. Mester
 Jerome H. Powell
 Eric Rosengren
 Daniel K. Tarullo
 Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, and Michael Strine, 
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
 Jeffrey M. Lacker, 
Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C. Williams, Presidents of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
 Brian F. Madigan, Secretary 
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary
 David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
 Michelle A. Smit
h, Assistant Secretary
 Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel 

Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel 

Steven B. Kamin, Economist 

Thomas Laubach, Economist 

David W. Wilcox, Economist 
Thomas A. Connors, Troy Davig, Michael P. Leahy, David E. Lebow, Stephen A. Meyer, 
Geoffrey Tootell, and William Wascher, Associate Economists
 Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Account 
Robert deV. Frierson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of 
Governors 
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Governors 
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director,
 Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the Board, Office of Board Members, 
Board of Governors 
Andrew Figura, Ann McKeehan, David Reifschneider, and Stacey Tevlin, Special 
Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of 
Governors 
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors 
Eric M. Engen, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of 
Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, 

Board of Governors 
Antulio N. Bomfim, Egon Zakrajıek,
1 and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of 
Monetar
y Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of 
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
 Mark Carey,
2 Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors; 
Joshua Gallin, Associate Director, Division of R
esearch and Statistics, Board of 
Governors 
Shaghil Ahmed, Deputy Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of 
Governors 
Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Associate Director, Office of Financial Stability Policy and 
Research, Board of Governors 
Glenn Follette and John M. Roberts, Assistant Directors, Division of Research and 
Statistics, Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust, Assistant Director, Division of 

Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
1 Attended the discussion of the relationship between monetary policy and financial stability.
 Penelope A. Beattie,
2 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of the Secretary, Board of 
Governors 
Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Bora Durdu,
2 Section Chief, Office of 
Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of 
Governors 
Jae Sim,
2 Principal Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors 
Andrea Ajello, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 
Kelly J. Dubbert, First 
Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
 David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Jeff Fuhrer,
2 and Glenn D. Rudebusch, Executive Vice 
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, Boston, and San Francisco, 
respectively
 Tobias Adrian,
2 Micha
el Dotsey, and Samuel Schulhofer-
Wohl, Senior Vice Presidents, 
Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis, respectively 
Joseph G. Haubrich, Anna Paulson, and David C. Wheelock, Vice Presidents, Federal 
Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Chicago, and St. Louis, respectively 
Richard K. Crump
2 and Marco Del Negro, Assistant Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York
 Jim Dolmas, Senior Research Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
 Nina Boyarchenko,
2 Financial Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
 2 Attended Tuesday session only.
 Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on
 April 26
Œ27, 2016 April 26 Session
 CHAIR YELLEN.  
I suggest that because
 we™re all assembled, we begin.  
Today™s 
meeting will be a joint meeting 
of the FOMC and the Board of Governors.  I need a motion to 
close the Board meeting. 
MR. FISCHER.  So moved. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Without objection. 

Our first agenda topic 
this morning is a special session on the relationship between 
monetary policy and financial stability.  I™d like to start off by thanking Mike Kile
y and Egon 
Zakrajıek
 of the 
Board
™s staff, Anna Paulson of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, and 
Geo
ff Too
tell 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.  These individuals formed the steering 
committee that solicited contributions on this topic from across the 
System and selected the four 
memos we received as background for today™s discussion.  
I also, of 
course, want to thank the 
staff that produced and contributed to these background documents.  
And so with that, let me 

turn things over to Jeff Fuhrer
, who is going to begin the staff presentations. 
MR. FUHRER.
1  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to begin w
ith the traditional 
Federal Reserve greeting at events such as this, which is to say I will be referring
 to the material in your packets labeled ﬁThe Linkages among Monetary Policy, 
Macroprudential Policy
, and Financial Stability.ﬂ 
The topic that we will d
iscuss during this session is sprawling, complex, widely 
discussed, tenaciously argued
, and little understood.  Its aim is to help us avoid the 

kind of crisis we just went through.  
That crisis begat massive unemployment and left 
in its wake long
er-term da
mage in the form of wealth loss and labor market scarring. 
 We certainly hope we can do better next time
, but the question is, how? 
We begin by sketching the key features of financial instability on exhibit 2 of the 
handout.  
The two main ingredients are r
apid growth in debt and in asset prices, most 

often in the real estate sector. 
 The two can interact with one another in ways that are 
1 The materials used by Messrs. Fuhrer, Adrian, and Sim are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).
 no doubt obvious t
o you by now:  
Rising collateral valuations and debt issuance 
mutually reinforce one another.  
But if t
he merry
-go-round stops and prices drop, an 
all
-too-
familiar chain of events ensues: 
 Defaults rise, liquidity seizes, fire sales 
spread, prices fall further, solvency is threatened, and we lurch into a full-blown 
financial crisis, complete with a huge rec
ession. 
It is unlikely that we will forever avoid the dynamics that have historically led to 
financial instability, no matter the regulatory environment
 and no matter who wins 

the presidential race
.  Strong capital buffers and other structural tools will m
ake the 
financial system more resilient in the face of disruptions, but they will likely not 

eliminate all financial instability and the potential for financial crises. 
 Thus, it is 

critical to think about how best to minimize the effects of financial disr
uptions on 

households and businesses using cyclical, time-
varying tools to complement 
structural tools like capital ratios.
  A key question is whether monetary policy should 
be one of these tools.
 As emphasized in exhibit 3 in your packet, if macroprudential tools had already 
proven reliable and fully effective at curtailing financial instability, there would be 

little need to consider using monetary policy to address financial instability concerns. 

Other things 
being equal, it would be better not to charge 
monetary policy with 
additional goals beyond those specified in its d
ual 
mandate, but instead to allow 

macroprudential tools, if effective, to
 address financial instability.
 We briefly summarize research on the efficacy of cyclical macroprudential tools 
in the balance of this exhibit.  
Developed economies have typically chosen 
not to use 
monetary policy to address financial stability concerns. 
 Instead, they have often used 

housing-
related macroprudential tools
Šnotably, loan-
to-value
, or 
LTV, and debt-
service
-to-income caps. 
 Mark Carey™s memo examines the effects of such policies in 
eight advanced foreign economies, or 
AFEs
, and concludes that the effects on 
borrowing, while mixed, are somewhat hopeful.  Those countries that put in place 

LTV 
caps saw a decline in LTVs for newly originated loans
Šyou 
sort of hope that at 

least that much happens.  Reductions in LTVs likely reduced losses to banks, 

improving somewhat the resilience of the system. 
 The effect of these caps on the 

trajectory
 of hous
e prices is less clear.
 Exhibit 4 provides some history on LTV caps and house prices.  
It displays house 
prices for four AFEs, indexed to 100 in 2010.  
The vertical dashed lines indicate the 

dates of the implementation or reduction of LTV caps.  
Spain and 
Singapore™s LTV 
caps began in 2000, at the far left side of the chart.  You can see that the imposition of 

LTV caps in these countries left little near
-term imprint on the subsequent trajectory 
of housing prices.  In countries whose prices turned down, it 
was either four years 
later (as in Singapore, the black line) or in the wake of a wrenching financial crisis (as 

in Spain, the red line)Šperhaps not exactly 
what was hoped
 for
.  It may be that the 
limited effects of LTV caps to date reflect a too
-timid app
roach
, for 
as long as asset 
prices are expected to continue rising rapidly, the incentives to continue borrowing 

are strong. And the longer and higher prices rise, the greater is the risk of price 
collap
se. 
 This is why slowing price appreciation is a much
-desired goal for 
macroprudential tools.
 In view of 
current uncertainty about the efficacy of macroprudential tools, we 
consider whether monetary policy can and should be used to address episodes of 
emergent financial instability, the subject of your next exhibit. 
 To do so, 

policymakers must be able to detect unsustainable increases in debt and asset prices 

early enough to take preventative action.  
They must also have confidence that 

monetary policy actions of moderate size can have sizable effects on deb
t accumulation and asset price increases. 
 I would note that t
hese two challenges are 
also faced by macroprudential policymakers.
 With respect to the first hurdle, recent U.S. history is not encouraging, and neither 
is longer-
term global history.
  It is notoriously difficult to identify undesirable 
combinations of asset price and debt buildup early enough to take preventative action.  

The recent experience of this Committee during the buildup to the financial crisis is 

sobering. The paper summarizes
 the res
ults of a little trip down
 memory lane via 
the 
transcripts 
of FOMC meetings in 
2005 and 2006.  
I will not dwell further on painful 
memories.
 With respect to the second hurdle, typical estimates of the elasticities linking the 
federal funds rate to
, say, house prices or household debt appear to be relatively 
small.
  This implies that only large movements in monetary instruments would have 
sizable effects on the evolution of these key variables. 
 And our confidence about 

policy™s effects is especially low 
during a credit boom or bubble periodŠ
how will 
bubbles respond to a change in fundamentals?  It™s hard to know.  
Whether monetary policy should address financial instability depends in part on 
how much such actions are estimated to reduce the probability o
f a crisis and its 
severity
, should it occur.  
But these benefits must be balanced against the potential for 
monetary policy to inflict collateral damage on the rest of the economy while seeking 
to mitigate financial instability. 
 As indicated at
 the bottom of this exhibit, employing 
a conventional model, Lars Svensson finds that in almost no case does a monetary 

policy that leans against the winds of financial instability do more good than harm.  

We need more research to assess these tradeoffs, but what we
 know today suggests 

we might want to tread lightly in using monetary policy to lean against the winds of 

financial instability.
 As discussed in exhibit 6, because both monetary policy and at least some 
macroprudential tools are likely to remain in the too
lkit for U.S. policymakers, we 
need to consider the interactions between the two sets of tools and their policymaking 

bodies.  
Arguably, the long
er-run goals of both policies coincide, although the short-
run goals differ, and, of course, 
the tools differ. 
 It is clear that monetary 
policymakers at the least need to take into account the effects that macroprudential 

policies might have on employment and inflation.  
Similarly, macroprudential 

policymakers need to take into account the effect that interest rat
e policy may have on 

risk
-taking, borrowing, and asset price appreciation.  
As illustrated in the diagram on 
this e
xhibit, in view of the potential for multiple rounds of feedbackŠnote the 
primary policy effects that are 
indicated by the red arrows and the 
secondary effects
 indicated
 by the yellow arrowsŠ
a closer coordination of policies might avoid arm™s
-length policymaking that ignores or only partially captures the i
mplications of these 
feedbacks.
 Institutional implications of these interactions are addr
essed in your next exhibit
, exhibit 7.  Whether monetary and macroprudential policy should be set by the same 

or different committees, within the same institution or not, and what the makeup of 

those committees 
should be 
are the subjects of much recent dis
cussion.  
As indicated 
in the middle of the exhibit, the United Kingdom employs a structure in which two 

separate committees set monetary and macroprudential policy
, but with fairly close 
coordination.  They sit in the same building, and there is high-level overlap in 

membership across the committees. 
 Whatever the structure, it seems likely that 
strong cooperation would be beneficial. 
Exhibit 8 discusses what to conclude.  
In light of
 uncertainty about the 
effectiveness of macroprudential policies, we shou
ld consider the use of monetary 
policy to address financial instability.  However, because it would add another 

potentially conflicting goal, because recognition of instability is difficult, because the 

effects of monetary policy on asset prices and borrowing during a boom are uncertain, 

and because the collateral damage may wel
l outweigh the benefits, we suggest relying 
least on monetary policy for addressing 
financial
-stability concerns. 
 The first order 
of business is to make the financial system as resilient as possible, 
and we hope 
before facing another episode of financial 
instability.  
Macroprudential tools could 

then be the primary targeted and time
-varying approach to slow the buildup of 
financial imbalances and lower the risk of a crisis. 
 But
, as the exhibit notes, we need 
to do more to improve our confidence in employi
ng macroprudential tools.
 Your final exhibit provides a to-
do list to that end.
  It includes expanding the 
available set of macroprudential tools, shortening the implementation lags of such 

tools where possible, adding to extant research on the effectiveness of tools and new 

transmission channels, considering better coordination of monetary and 

macroprudential policies, assessing the potential for regulatory arbitrage, and 

developing strategies to mitigate it. 
 Effective implementation of many of these tool
s may also require greater independence of macroprudential regulators.  This is indeed 

a formidable set of tasks. 
 Tobias will now discuss ﬁ
Financial Vulnerability and 
Monetary Policy: 
 The Empirical Evidence.
ﬂ 
MR. ADRIAN.  Thanks, Jeff
.  I will now speak about the empirical evidence of 
financial vulnerability in the risk
-taking channel of monetary policy.  
This 
presentation is based on work with Nina Boyarchenko, Richard Crump, and Matthew 

Plos
ser, all from the New York Fed.
 Exhibit 1 explains two views of the relationship between monetary policy and 
financial stability.  
One view is that monetary policy and financial stability are 
separate.  In that view, the transmission of monetary policy is via the expected path of 
interes
t rates.  Policy rate expectati
ons capture all financial market information, and 
risk premi
ums
 are either constant or move around exogenously.  Another view is that 
monetary policy transmission and financial stability interact.  In that view, monetary 
policy influences risk
-taking of fi
nancial intermediaries.  Risk
-taking, in turn, 
influences financial conditions and vulnerabilities.  Financial vulnerabilities matter 

for the macroeconomy, particularly for 
the downside risks to the dual mandate.  This 
second view is the risk
-taking channe
l of monetary policy transmission.  We review 
the existing evidence of this channel and present some new evidence
. 
Before reviewing the so-
called risk
-taking channel of monetary policy, I will start 
by reviewing financial stability considerations in the cr
edit channel of monetary 
policy on exhibit 2.  
In the traditional credit channel of monetary policy transmission, 
a lower short-term policy interest rate spurs lending and spending.  The credit channel 

features an amplification mechanism beyond the interes
t rate channel but does not 
incorporate risk
-taking or vulnerabilities of financial institutions.  Empirically, b
ased 
on a data set spanning 16 advanced economies over 140 years, Jordà, Schularick, and 

Taylor find sizable 
responses to
 lower short-
term poli
cy interest rate
s of credit and 
house prices.  
Furthermore
, credit growth can threaten financial stability.  They 
estimate that credit growth one standard deviation above its sample mean is 

associated with a reduction in the level of real GDP by 3 
percent.  These costs of 

activity might suggest interest rates should be raised preemptively to slow credit or 

housing 
prices.  However, increasing interest rates preemptively to slow credit or 

house price growth potentially comes at the cost of distorting
 the dual-mandate 
objectives.  Svensson argues that such costs of leaning against the wind always 

outweigh 
the
 benefits.  But Svensson™s calculations 
do not allow for the risk
-taking 
channel of monetary policyŠthe focus of our memo. 
Exhibit 3 explains the 
three key features of the risk
-taking channel of monetary 
policy.  
First, m
onetary policy influences the risk
-taking of financial institutions.  
Risk
-taking, in turn, determines leverage and maturity transformation, which are 
vulnerabilities for the system
.  Second, r
isk premi
ums are endogenous and time 
varying.  
Put differently, the 
pricing of risk determines financial conditions.  
Third, 
endogenous risk
-taking increases downside risks to real activity.  
Hence
, financial 
vulnerabilities create risks to the
 dual mandate. 
Exhibit 4 presents the existing evidence on the risk-
taking channel, which relates 
the stance of monetary policy to the risk-
taking of financial intermediaries.  A number 
of studies have examined different dimensions of risk
-taking, finding that U.S. banks 
ease lending standards and charge smaller premiums to riskier borrowers during 

periods of easy monetary policy; a similar result has been found for European banks.  

Ex ante risk
-taking as measured by the risk-rating of the bank™s new loans 
is 
negatively associated with increases in short
-term policy interest rates.  Furthermore, 
balance sheets of nonbank financial 
intermediaries
 tend to expand when monetary 
policy is expansionary.  In sum, existing empirical evidence shows that looser 

moneta
ry policy increases financial intermediaries™ risk
-taking. 
We ne
xt turn to additional evidence from financial markets.
  Exhibit 5 presents 
evidence that monetary policy announcements are associated with significant 
increases in financial market volatility.
  The figure shows the variability of financial 
indicators on FOMC announcement days in red triangles and the variability on all 

other days in blue circles.  The x-
axis indicates the specific financial 
indicators, 
while 
the y-
axis presents the variability as measured by the average absolute two
-day 
change in units of standard deviations.  The first two indicators, the ACM path and 

the BHP path, represent estimates of the expected near
-term path of policy.  The thir
d and fourth indicator
s, the ACM and the BHP term premiums, show metrics 
pertaining 
to Treasury term premiums.  
They indicate 
that variability of the expected path and of 
term premi
ums
 is significantly higher on FOMC announcement days.  The fifth and 
sixth
 indicators show the variability of the equity market return and that of 
the bank 
stock return
.  In these cases, there is 
not significantly higher variability.  The seventh 
and last indicator is equity market implied volatility as measured by the VIX.  In 

addition, in the memo we show that variability is significantly higher even after 

controlling for news about monetary policy. 
Exhibit 6 provides background on our thinking about financial vulnerability.  
We use a measure 
of vulnerability called CoVaR.  CoV
aR is defined as the 
value
-at-risk 
of the financial system conditional on the distress of a particular financial institution. 

CoVaR as a summary measure is correlated strongly with measures of leverage, 

maturity
 transformation
 and liquidity transformation
, as well as
 other measures of 
vulnerability.  Financial vulnerabilities are amplification mechanisms that can 

generate systemic risk, defined as the risk that the intermediation capacity of the 

financial system as a whole becomes impaired. 
 Exhibit 7 summ
arizes our main empirical results from regressions of two
-day 
bank equity returns on an announcement-
day dummy, a measure of changes in the 
expected path of interest rates, a measure of the term premium, CoVaR, and 

associated interaction terms.  
Our empiri
cal approach exploits differential cross
-sectional variation in asset prices
Šhere, bank equity returnsŠaround FOMC 

announcements relative to non-announcement days.  Monetary policy announcements 

significantly affect the performance of bank equity returns, 
and even more so for 

firms with higher CoVaR.  A 25 basis point increase in the expected path of interest 

rates on an FOMC announcement day, on average, lowers bank equity returns 36 to 

50 basis points.  A 15 percent increase in the term premium risk on an 
FOMC 

announcement day lowers bank equity returns 8 to 13 basis points.  Comparing the 

most vulnerable 
with
 the least vulnerable banks, the decline in returns in response to 
either a higher expected path of interest rates or a higher term premium is 20 to 

24 percent larger
 than 
for more vulnerable banks.  Our results thus show that there 
is significant interaction between monetary policy announcements, the evolution of 
term
 premi
ums, and the performance of relatively vulnerable institutions. 
Let me conclude on exhibit 8.  The empirical evidence that I presented today is 
consistent with the risk
-taking channel of monetary policy transmission.  Easier 
policy increases risk
-taking, compresses risk premi
ums
, and thus could create 
financial sector vulnerabilities.  These findings suggest further work to quantify the 
effect 
of risk
-taking on downside risk to the dual mandate.  Incorporating the risk-
taking channel in macroeconomic models might change the trade
off 
regarding
 preemptive moves in interest rates.  Next, Jae Sim will talk about 
such 
macroeconomic models in the presentation ﬁMonetary P
olicy and 
Financial 
Stability: 
Lessons from DSGE 
Models.ﬂ 
MR. SIM.  Thank you, Tobias.  As highlighted in exhibit 1, the central question of 
our memo, 
written with 
coauthors Bora Durdu and Matthias P
austian
, is what advice 
a range of DSGE models have to offer about the appropriate response of monetary 
policy to financial imbalances.
 The liter
ature has offered a range of perspectives, highlighted in exhibit 2.  One 
strand emphasizes the idea that various frictions in credit markets lead to inefficient 

saving and investment decisions and may contribute to excessive volatility in 

employment or inflation, calling for a role for monetary policy to 
lean against 

excessive credit
 fluctuations.  This view is often rationalized with the notion that 
monetary policy transmission partly involves changes in 
bank 
risk
-taking
. 
The 
second bullet of 
exhibit 2 il
lustrates one example of how the risk
-taking 
channel works
.  Low interest rate
s 
may 
tilt
 the capital structure of banks toward more 
debt, which then 
gives banks an incentive 
to choose riskier projects
, as the higher 
leverage increases the value of banks™ d
efault option.  If credit expansion is 
accompanied by increased spending and inflation, a central bank pursuing 

conventional dual-
mandate goals automatically stabilizes the financial system.  
However, such divine coincidence may not exist in reality.  While a blunt tool, 

monetary policy may ﬁget 
in all
 the
 cracks.ﬂ  Accordingly, monetary policy should 
react to a measure of financial imbalances
, such as 
the 
credit
-to-GDP gap or credit 
spreads.  However, the increase in interest rates required to curb risk
-taking may be 
gre
ater than what is needed to attain price stability and maximum employment.
 Exhibit 3 highlights some of the factors weighing against the use of monetary 
policy to lean against financial imbalances, including the issue of coordination with 

macroprudential p
olicies.  In many DSGE models, monetary policy is an indirect tool 
with which to address the underlying microeconomic distortions leading to 

inefficiency.  Depending on the source of inefficiency, macroprudential tools may 

more directly affect the underlyi
ng distortion.  For example, distortions related to 

inefficient leverage of financial institutions may be addressed more directly through 

capital requirements, and the presence of robust, countercyclical capital requirements 

may eliminate the role for mone
tary policy, as stressed by Collard, Dellas, Diba, and 
Loisel.  These authors also show how the combination of monetary and 

macroprudential policies can improve economic outcomes, a topic I will touch on 

later.
 A central challenge confronting the use of mo
netary policy to lean against 
financial imbalances is the measurement of the relevant imbalance, the topic of 

exhibit 4.  DSGE models differ in the imbalances they emphasize.  Even focusing on 

an individual imbalance, such as the ratio of nonfinancial cred
it to GDP, raises 
difficu
lties.  The figure shows that real
-time estimates of the credit
-to-GDP gap, 
shown by the green line, can substantially differ from the final estimate, shown by the 
purple line, indicating the risk that any attempt of monetary polic
y to ﬁlean
 against 
the windﬂ may be informed by noisy and imperfect assessments.  Of course, this issue 

also 
applies equally to the measurement of resource utilization in the pursuit of 

conventional monetary policy goals. 
So far, my discussion has been largely qualitative, in line with much of the 
literature.  Our memo emphasized some of the quantitative lessons from the literature 

through simulations of a model I developed with Michael Kiley.  As highlighted in 

exhibit 5, in this model, financial intermedi
aries choose their
 leverage ratio 
in a 
manner that maximizes their own profits but fails to take into account the social costs 

imposed by these choices.  Importantly for our purposes, the model is estimated and 

contains many of the features relevant for mo
netary policy analysis, allowing for a 
quantitative evaluation of the potential for monetary policy to 
lean against the credit 

cycle.
 Some of our results are presented in 
exhibit 6.  The impulse responses of output, 
hours worked, and inflation show the response of the economy to a reduction in 

perceived risk facing 
financial 
intermediaries.  The black lines, 
showing essentially 
no response, 
represent the efficient outcomes: 
 Changes in idiosyncratic risk should 

lead to no movement in the macroeconomy under 
ideal conditions because 
diversification would insulate the economy from such idiosyncratic factors in the 

absence of inefficiencies in financial markets.  However, a credit boom follows the 

shock under a standard inertial Taylor rule approach to monetary policy, as shown in 

the blue lines.  Augmenting the monetary policy strategy with a term reacting to the 

credit
-to-GDP ratio, shown by the red lines, helps stabilize the credit cycle and limit 
the fluctuations in the labor market and inflation that otherwi
se would ensue.
 As we emphasized in the memo, not all, and probably not even the majority, of 
fluctuations in credit reflect inefficiencies
Šrather, credit fluctuations 
are due 
importantly to the savings and investment choices of firms and households trying to 

manage the time profile of consumption, the adoption of new technologies, and other 

factors.  As a result, the quantitative importance of a role for monetary policy in 

leaning against the wind depends on the relative importance of different factors.  The 

figure in 
exhibit 7 summarizes the overall 
performance of the
 economy under 
monetary policy approaches that do not lean against credit and those that do lean 

against credit, as implied by the model.  
More complicated analyses that take account 

of the fu
ll range of shocks that can hit the economy find that, if the optimal monetary 
policy already 
responds to
 output, inflation, and the lagged funds rate, there™s little to 

be gained in terms of improved macroeconomic performances by adding the credit-

to-GDP 
ratio to the rule.
  This is in stark contrast to the Ramsey allocations shown at 
the bottom.  The Ramsey allocation with only a monetary policy instrument, shown 

by the green dot, achieves a significant efficiency gain.  As shown by the red dot, 

with an ad
ditional macroprudential instrument implemented by a time
-varying 
leverage tax, the planner achieves even greater efficiency gain.  Such large efficiency 

gains are feasible when the planner directly responds to driving sources of credit 
cycles, d
istinguish
ing inefficient credit cycle
s from efficient ones, but may not be 
achieved when a 
monetary policy rule reacts to endogenous fluctu
ations in 
the 
credit
-to-GDP ratio.
 As I mentioned earlier, the types of inefficiencies emphasized in DSGE models 
often point to a role for macroprudential policies.  Earlier, Jeff Fuhrer reviewed some 
of the resulting coordination issues.  The DSGE literature has also confronted these 

issue
s, and I discuss a sample of this literature on your final exhibit.  De Paoli and 

Paustian 
study a setting in which separate institutions conduct monetary and 

macroprudential polic
ies
, respectively, and each institution is assigned only a subset 
of the stabilization objectives that are relevant for welfare.  They identify three 

circumstances in which the coordination problem can be made less severe
:  First, 
when
 both authorities have effective instruments, 
the monetary authority can operate 
independently, taking as given macroprudential policy
makers™ effective mitigation of 
credit distortion
s; second, if both authorities credibly commit to actions in the future; 
and, third, if the macroprudential authority does not review instrument 
setting
s as frequently as
 the 
monetary authority
, this 
can take
 macroprudential tools as fixed in 
the short run.  However, we note that this literature has not yet reached a strong 

consensus on these questions. 
That concludes our prepared remarks.  We would be happy to answer your 
questions.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Questions for any of our presenters?  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  A question for Jeff.  Just to go back to 
your very first exhibit, exhibit 2.  Back in the ™
70s there was an event called ﬁBankhaus Herstattﬂ 
that involved 
missed payments
.  And it may have been hyperbole, but at the time, there was 

concern that the payment system would break down, 
and it would create a financial instability 

event.  Did you consider payments in 
thinking abo
ut 
these sort of high
-level definitions? 
MR. FUHRER.  
There™s a bit written about that.  We did not spend much time in our 
memo discussing the possibility of 
payment-system disruptions, but there are folks who are 

worried about that.
  To date in the U
nited S
tates
, I think, 
that has not been a terrific problem
, and 
around the world, while there are some examples, that has not been nearly as prominent a 

problem as the accumulation of debt with rising asset prices.
  But it
™s a fair point, 
that that is 
another possible margin of vulnerability.
 CHAIR YEL
LEN.  Thank 
you.  Other questions for the presenters?  President Rosengren.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Jeff in his presentation talked about monetary policy being the 
ﬁthird resort.
ﬂ  I would just be interested if each of the paper-
givers agree that 
ﬁthird resort
ﬂ 
rather than 
ﬁn
ever
ﬂ would be your answer.  And if ﬁ
third resort
ﬂ would be your answer, what is 
the most likely scenario 
in which you think that third resort would actually apply? 
MR. FUHRER.  Somehow I knew Eric was going to ask that question.  
[Laughter]  I 
think one word that I didn™t use during my presentation but is essential to keep in mind is 
ﬁhumility
,ﬂ in that none of us, I will submit, know exactly how macroprudential tools work, 
whether circumstances might arise 
in which monetary policy was the best option available, and 
how that would work during such an episode of financial 
instability.
 My imagination is fertile enough that I can imagine circumstances in which either we 
have chosen not to or are unable to pursue what we call our first choiceŠ
that is, use cyclical 

time
-varying macroprudential tools
Šand yet we have identified what we think 
are
 troublesome 
buildups 
of financial instability
.  And if we are constrained in that way, it is conceivable that we 
would use monetary policy to address it, 
with due concern to the issues that 
are
 raised in the 
paper and in the briefing.  
First, critically
, freighting monetary policy with an additional 
objective that may be competing with its other objectives
Šwe already have tradeoffs to make 
within the dual 
mandate
Šis not to be done lightly.  And the 
second
 isŠuntil research overturns 
this result, if it is 
found to do soŠthe possibility for collateral damage or the possibility that 
modest movements in monetary policy instruments will have little or no effect 
on the very strong 

incentives that build up in a financial boom.  Those considerations are to be taken seriously, but 

if we are so constrained, I can imagine that that™s a resort
Šnot never, but a last resort.
 MR. ADRIAN.
  Lars Svens
son
™s cost
-benefit analy
sis has had a big 
effect
 on many 
people™s thinking on this topic, and one of the things that I learned from reviewing Svensson™s 
work is that the relative size of the cost
s 
and the benefit
s depends on the magnitude of the shock.
  And so what he basically s
hows is that
, when you think that the crisis is very, very large, then 
actually the costs are relatively higher than the benefits
.  But if you think that the crisis is not as 
large
Šthink about a crisis on the order of an unemployment 
increase of 
5 percent
age points 
versus a crisis on the order of an unemployment 
increase of 
2 or 3 
percentage points 
or something like thatŠ
this cost
-benefit calculation can flip around.  
So, intuitively
, the cost is 
sort 
of 
first order.  
The distortion of leaning 
against the wind relative to the dual
-mandate objectives 
today is a 
first
-order cost while the benefit is second order, but when the magnitude of the crisis 
is not as large, the benefit can
 actually
 be larger than the cost.
 One point I would make is that t
his is important in the context of the magnitude of 
prudential regulation.  
If prudential regulation is inadequate, you would think that the tail risk is 
very large, and hence you don™t want to use monetary policy.  
But if 
prudential policy is actually 
at 
a more stringent level so that the tail risk of the financial crisis is smaller, the cost
-benefit 
analysis actually tells you that leaning against the wind is relatively more beneficial, which is 

somewhat counterintuitive, but that comes directly out of th
is analysis.
 The second point is, our memo basically shows that there™s a tight interlinkage between 
monetary policy transmission and financial stability topics
.  I think that taking these interlinkages 
seriously in our thinking 
about macro models is very important to really understand threats to the 

downside risks of the dual mandate, along lines 
similar to the memo that 
Jae Sim described.
 MR. SIM.  I don™t have completely different view
s 
from 
those of the 
first two speakers, 
but I have 
several
 points to r
aise 
for consideration
.  I think it™s possible that 
the monetary policy 
inte
rest rate becomes 
the 
first,
 second
, or even third resort, but it™s not crystal clear in which 
direction to use
 monetary policy to ensure financial stability. 
Let me remind you tha
t from 
the 
second half 
of 2004 to the second half 
of 
2006, the 
Federal Reserve increased the 
policy 
rate 450 basis points.  Now, there is some 
empi
rical
 evidence that
 the increase
 decelerated
 the expansion of the balance sheet of the commercial 
banking sector.  
However, there is some evidence that 
the deceleration in the expansion of 
commercial banks™ balance sheet 
caused lending activity to
 migrate to 
the unregu
lated 
shadow 
banking sector.  
So it is not always clear 
that the 
use 
of an 
increase
 in the 
monetary policy rate 
will 
alw
ays bring financial stability. 
Another reason to think about the use of monetary policy 
is that
, during 
the period from
 2004 to 2006, the 
increase in interest rate
s 
created huge interest rate differential
s 
between 
different continents, 
between 
Europe and the 
United States
 and
 between
 Japan and 
the 
United 
States.  That really accelerated capital inflow to the U.S. market.
  There may be some situation
s 
in which you may want to lower the interest rate to 
fight
 carry
 traders
 whose behavior 
may
 enhance financial stability.  So it is not always one direction.
 Another point that I want to make 
is that
, in a situation like 
the 
current 
one
, raising the 
interest rate 
because of
 financial stability 
concerns may weaken the cre
dibility of your 
commitment to 
the 2 
percent inflation target
.  That was a substantial concern in Sweden a few 
years ago.
 My last point
 is that
 there can be a situation 
in which monetary policy can be an 
important tool to achieve financial stability.  That
 is, when the economy reacts to 
a shock in a 
history
-dependent wayŠ
for instance, if 
the response of the economy to a given size of the shock 
depends on the credit history of the economyŠthen there may be 
a stronger case for leaning
-agains
t-
the
-wind monetary policy to reduce the tail risk.  However, that should be empirically 
tested before 
it is brought into the actual policy arena. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Further questions? 
MR. FISCHER.  Yes.  When you sit around discussing a crisis with veterans of cris
es, 
which I have done, they all have words of wisdom for you, and the wisdom is typically not ﬁdebt 

is a big problem
,ﬂ it
™s ﬁthe problem is leverage.ﬂ
  Do you know how to differentiate between 
those two and tell us which one is more likely to be correct?
 MR. 
FUHRER.  I™ll take a stab
 at it
.  I think the historical evidence says that, yes, 
leverage 
certainly 
matters.  So having really risky leverage ratios, borrowing a whole bunch 

against an asset whose price can fluctuate significantly, that is the problem.  I think that™s fair.
  I
f the leverage ratios weren™t so troubling and there was some borrowing 
and
 the asset price 
moved, perhaps we wouldn™t get into 
quite as much trouble.  I think that™s a fair distinction to 

make.
  That said, when assets prices are increasing rapidly, the historical evidence of the 
past 
eight centuries or possibly more is that concern for leverage ratios tends to go out the door 

beca
use, after all, that ratio is going to look better, and the coverage of the a
sset price is going to 
look better next year and the year after and the year after.
  That™s the historical experience
, and 
we seemed
 very capable of getting ourselves into that ki
nd of trouble
.  But your distinction is 
fair, and if you were to observe that the leverage was not as severe, that might not portend as 

serious a problem.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Why don™t we begin our go-round.  
There are som
e discussion 
questions that were circulated, but I look forward to your comments.
  Let™s begin with Governor 
Tarullo.
 MR. TA
RULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I
n the past
, President Evans has noted that 
answering the questions posed by 
the 
staff in a special
 topic discussion is a rookie mistake.  
[Laughter]  
So, while I do want to begin this discussion by addressing those questions, I™m going 
to be careful not to answer them, and instead I am going to question some of the premises that lie 
behind the first question and then underscore the importance of the direction in which I think the 

second question leads us, albeit with some modifications in that premise as well.
 The first point is
, I would take some issue as a factual matter with the assertion in the first 
question that there is an emerging consensus that macroprudential instruments are the primary 

means through which policymakers should address financial stability issues.  In purely numerical 

terms, there may be a majority for this view, especially a
mong long-
time monetary policy 
economists, but there are quite a few other voices, some of whom have been cited by Tobias and 

Jae in
 their presentations today, who 
I think would argue for a considerably more important role 
for monetary policy in protecting financial stability.
  So 
I would urge people to pay attention to 
the nuance in the presentations that were given today and in the background papers.  
I do resist 

this notion of a consensus.  Maybe it™s true numerically
.  But that™s not a consensus, t
hat™s 
just a 
majority
.  I think it sweeps aside important questions that have been raised in the background 
memos.
 Having said that, I do want to reinforce the suggestion that is implicit in the second 
question:  The FOMC should be considering, 
in a somewhat sys
tematic way
, how we might 
respond to specific circumstances in the world as we find it
Šnot in our idealized world, but in 
the world as we find itŠ
where we could face some difficult tradeoffs between traditional 
monetary
 policy
 goals, 
or at least monetary 
policy 
goals as they™ve been traditionally understood, 
and financial stability.
  Let me say at the outset that while I resist the 
premise
 that a consensus 
has em
erged on the conceptual issues pertaining to monetary policy and financial stability, I 
myself d
on™t, 
at present
, hold a position on the other side of that purported consensus.  It™s just 
that I think the issues bear considerably more discussion, including how they may relate to our 
overall conduct of ongoing monetary policy and not just a few decisions 
in a few discrete 
moments.
 Let me also say 
that I™m not going to try to cover a lot of issues
, like the importance of 
building 
ex ante
 resiliency in the financial system, the 
effect
 of global capital flows on financial 
stability, the limited value of 
preceden
ts provided by countries in which financial intermediation 
is 
pre
dominantly 
bank-centered when thinking about the U.S. position, and the very real 
constitutional, legal, and political factors that could be raised by the creation of new policy 

instru
ments.  I™ve got enough to say just on the narrower issues as it is.
 In trying to explain why I find myself reacting against that premise in the first question, I 
did find myself thinking about why I
™ve
 thought what I regard as a kind of conventional 
monet
ary policymaker™s response to financial stability is an incomplete or perhaps premature 
one.  
I want to try
, at the risk
, obviously, 
of some oversimplification
, to characterize that 
response.  This is not being imputed to the staff or the memos
.  And 
I think you™ve all heard a 
variant on what I™m about to say. 
That response is composed of, I think, four or five parts.  
One,
 monetary policy is too 
blunt a tool to counteract asset 
price 
bubbles because it would adversely affect other parts of the 
economy.  Two, indeed, the amount of monetary policy tightening that would be needed to 

counteract asset bubbles by the time they develop would be so substantial as to risk bringing 

economic growth to a screeching halt.  
And
, therefore, 
three
, supervisory
 and other 
regulatory 
tools should be relied on.  
And
, finally
, four
, if serious financial stress or a full
-blown crisis 
nonethel
ess occurs, then monetary policy can be brought to bear to try to mitigate its effects.  
A variant on this position is that monetary poli
cy may be held in reserve as a 
ﬁlast resort
ﬂ 
if financial stability risks are high enough and other tools are ineffective.
 What I™m now about to do is to give you just a partial and only a suggestive list of some 
of the reasons why I do find the position I
™ve just characterized
Šor caricature
d, depending on 
your perspectiveŠ
less than fully satisfying
.  But let me again emphasize that it™s quite possible I 
would emerge from the kind of analytic exercise I™m suggesting with a similar view that 
monetary policy 
actions explicitly for financial stability purpose
s 
might be the unusual rather 
than regular case.
 First, I think the position as I just stated it rather 
elides the important question of whether 
monetary policy has itself been an important contributor to t
he buildup of financial stability 
risks
.  And, as was evident in the background memo, the models traditionally associated with 
monetary policy gave very little independent significance to the financial system, to the 
apparently asynchronous nature of busin
ess and credit cycles
, and to other salient factors.
  Indeed, this is slightly unfair.  It
™s hard to escape the observation that the traditional monetary 
policy view failed to see the seriousness of the risks building 11, 12, and 13 years ago.  
For 
example, one might at least ask the question whether the failure of accommodative monetary 

policy to effect significant improvement in 
economic 
growth and employment in the absence of 

inflation may sometimes be due to an absence of sufficient numbers o
f promising projects to 
increase capacity and the consequent diversion of abundant liquidity into asset markets rather 

than toward increasing productive capacity or innovation.  
Such metrics as historically high asset 

value levels, substantial increases in
 the amount of credit extended in the economy, and the 
increasing leverage of financial intermediaries could buttress such a case.
 Second, 
and related
, is the more basic question of how monetary policy is transmitted in 
the first place
.  The background memo did a very nice job, and Tobias Adrian underscored some 
of this today in drawing our attention to the distinctions between New Keynesian and risk-taking 
channels™ transmission mechanisms for monetary policy.  Those favoring a dominantly New 

Keynesian mod
el will understandably see less likelihood both of monetary policy contributing to 

financial stability risks and to its efficacy in counteracting them.  But if a risk
-taking channel is 
an important transmission mechanism, one™s conclusions may be different
.  Our former 

colleague Jeremy Stein continues to churn out interesting papers that give increasing credence to 

variations on this view.  
Here I take note of the fact that the traditional view tends always to find 

the cost of monetary policy adjustments 
made for
 financial
-stability 
reasons 
to be higher than its 
benefitsŠ
this is the 
Svensson hypothesis that Tobias 
Adrian
 was talking about
Šby assigning a 
very low probability of a financial crisis at any point in time.
  But if the buildup of financial 
stabilit
y risk is substantially endogenous to monetary policy, this argument for rejecting 
monetary policy as a financial stability tool becomes less persuasive.
 Third, and even more foundational, 
is the question of whether the secular increase in the 
debt-
to-GDP 
ratio since World War II, whatever its causal relationship to slowing potential 
economic growth, may warrant an evolution in how we think about monetary policy, particularly 

because credit booms tend to be followed by deeper recessions and slower recoveries, and 

particularly if we believe we may be facing a prolonged period of slower economic growth and 

low productivity gains.  These last two points have been examples of how thinking about 

financial stability may not be the addition of a new policy aim, but
 instead something which is 

inherent in and important to the traditional dual mandate.
 Fourth, t
he relatively easy answer of the traditional view that other tools should be relied 
on not only glosses over the important question as to whether those tools exist, but also the 
question of how effective they might be even if we had them.  I do think it plausible that 

macroprudential tools directed at real estate lending could be effective in some circumstances, 

putting aside for the moment the important question
s of who should have those tools and 
whether they would be wisely used.  
But this view is based on the unusual characteristics of real 

estate lending, including the term of mortgage instruments, the relative illiquidity of its 

collateral, and its simple pe
rvasiveness.
  And
, of course, with the large fraction of mortgage 
credit extended by nonbanks, an effective policy instrument would have to apply to mortgage 

lending from all sources.
  My suspicion is that whatever one™s conclusions on the broader issues 
I 
am raising now, there will be a pretty good theoretical case to be made for something along the 

lines of macroprudential instruments for real estate lending.  Whether our political circumstances 

and legal system can comfortably accommodate it is another s
tory entirely.
 On the other hand, it does not seem at all clear to me that other assets are so segmented 
and thus susceptible to targeted measures
.  That is, I suspect that to some degree taking steps 
against some perceived asset bubbles will be rather lik
e squeezing on a water balloon.  The 
liquid will simply slosh around to another part of the balloon unless you squeeze hard enough to 

burst the whole thing.  
The question of whether asset markets other than real estate are 

sufficiently segmented as to be m
anaged through targeted sectoral or other measures is a very 
important one and one that I think, 
up 
to this point, 
has been underresearched
.  If the answer is 
generally negative, then the only macroprudential measures that are likely to work would be 

somet
hing akin to interest rates, such as taxes on widely used funding channels. 
Anoth
er relevant point here is that when traditionalists concede that monetary policy 
might be used as a last resort, they cannot mean that in a purely temporal sense.  If there re
ally is 
a buildup of highly intermediated credit supporting unsustainable asset prices, waiting until it™s 
clear nothing else has worked would indeed likely require huge interest rate jumps to have an 

effect.
  Imagine waiting until late 2006 and then saying, ﬁWell, nothing else has worked, maybe 
it™s time to try monetary policy.ﬂ  It would actually, of course, have led to exactly the wrong 

monetary policy response at that moment in time.
  It seems quite likely to me that if monetary 
policy is to be use
d effectively without risk of substantial, unnecessary collateral damage, it will 
need to be used earlier rather than later
, when its signaling effects may help have an 
effect
 beyond what our models suggest a 25 or 50 basis point increase would have. 
Turning now much more briefly to the second question posed by the staff, I very much 
want to reinforce the importance of asking ourselves how we would approach the question of 

whether and how monetary policy decisions should be affected by the financial stability 
considerations mentioned today well in advance of a timeŠunlike, 
in my view
, the present 
moment
Šwhen that issue may be highly relevant.  The staff question implies that we should do 
this because the optimal macroprudential tools may not be available.  I would reserve judgment 

on that point.  Indeed, I think the exercise itself may help inform our understanding of some of 

the more foundational questions to which I have alluded. 
While everyone is entitled to her or his opinion on what statutory changes may be 
desirable, I think our first responsibility lies in considering how we would execute the powerful 

but limited statutory tool that 
the Congress gave the FOMC, taking the world as it is at that 
moment rather than how we would like it to be, just as we do 
with fiscal or other economic 

policies that some or all of us might prefer to be different than they are.
  Obviously, 
there™s a 
subset
 of the FOMCŠ
to wit, the members of the Board
Šthat 
has 
a different set of tools, and we 
presumably would be in a position 
to communicate to the FOMC what our actions and intentions 
are
.  But even then the communication channels may not be perfect, 
because there are other parts 

of the government that have other tools that may be disinclined to as much communication and 

perhaps even more disinclined to cooperation.  I think those are all reasons why we need to 

hypothesize that we™re not going to be in a textbook situation, but instead one that has substantial 

frictions in the perception of what™s going on and the implementation
 of policy. 
I don™t think we can do full justice to this responsibility in a single discussion today, so I 
would suggest more of an ongoing project involving work by Governor Fischer
™s 
and 
President 
Rosengren
™s 
financial stability committee
sŠsorry, guys, I didn™t let you know beforehand I was 
going to suggest this.  
I think we might profitably begin with a retrospective view of an actual 

decision point rather than a hypothetical view of a future one.  My candidate would be sometime 

during 2003 when inflatio
n was quiescent
, the economy was taking quite a while to recover from 
what had been only a mild recession, 
but when prices and leverage across a wide range of assets, 

not just real estate, were already well into the high end of historical ranges.
  Gaming out the 
optimal response at that time could be a very useful heuristic exercise in preparing for a parallel 

moment in the future when sluggish economic growth and low inflation coexist with rapidly 

rising asset prices and credit and leverage extensi
on.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I want to thank the Chair and the Vice 
Chair
man
 for placing this topic on the agenda and the staff for their very thorough briefing 
papers on the subject.  
I™ll o
nly discuss the questions posed to us now and will discuss some 
more specific concerns in the financial stability discussion later in the agenda.
 To the f
irst question, do we have the right tools or governance to address f
inancial 
stability concerns?  As the staff papers discussed
, financial instability has tended to occur when 
there is significant borrowing against an asset whose value has declined substantially.  Financial 
instability, both domestically and internationally, has been most commonly associated with real 

estate assets, either residential or commercial.
  As a result, many emerging economies and, 
increasingly, many developed economies, have used loan-
to-value and debt-
to-income caps as 
their main macroprudential
 tools, as Mark™s paper discussed.  For example, in 2014, the Bank of 

England Financial Policy Committee set debt
-to-income caps to address some of 
its concerns 
with escalating prices 
in real estate markets.
 The QS report that we will discuss later today d
oes not address these most commonly 
used tools because 
the Congress has not given any regulatory body the authority to set such caps 
across all financial institutions in the United States.  Without a direct way to influence levered 

purchases of real estate
 across all financial institutions, the Federal Reserve is left with only tools 
that build resiliency to a real estate price decline over a subset of intermediaries, lending, and 
real estate markets.
 The tools that policymakers do have are subject to diffuse governance.  
Because
 real 
estate loans are conducted by a wide variety of intermediaries, bank and nonbank, it is unclear 

that altering regulations that affect only banking organizations will be as effective as might be 

desired, in view of the potential for regulatory arbitrage.  And any changes, even for banking 

organizations, require concurrence among bank regulators that have historically not been focused 

on financial stability concerns.  
As a result, there will likely be long delays in implementation
 and final actions that are heavily compromised compared 
with
 original intent.  A good example 
is the 2006 real estate guidance, which took two years to negotiate and was substantially watered 
down
 when it was finally issued.  The result was a rather timid
 response to a period of 
significantly heightened risk to financial stability.
  So my answer to the first question, in short, is 
ﬁno.ﬂ 
Question two, should financial stability goals 
affect
 monetary policy deliberations?  
Monetary policy tools, both interes
t rates and our balance sheet, should be focused on our dual 
mandate.  However, even this narrow focus can be distorted by actions of others.  For example, 
both in the United States and most other developed countries, economic policies have been 

overrelian
t on monetary policy tools.  This is not by choice.  Fiscal authorities have chosen to 
react little to the shocks to the global economy, which has forced monetary policy to extremes to 

meet its legislated mandates.  Had fiscal policy been more aggressively
 deployed, we might not 
have seen so many countries at historically low interest rates for such an extended period. 
Ideally, financial stability concerns would be addressed with supervisory or 
macroprudential tools
, but their effectiveness and our ability 
to react speedily to building 
pressures are highly uncertain.  Diffuse governance makes their deployment even more difficult.  

Hence, if macroprudential tools were not used to offset increasing risks of financial instability, I 

would be left with a dilemma
, not unlike the problem we have faced with fiscal policy.
  The 
Congress has given the FOMC only the ability to influence interest rates on the balance sheet.  If 

serious financial stability concerns were not being addressed by those who do have financial 

stability tools to deploy, I would have to consider using monetary policy to address any financial 

stability concern that could adversely influence the policy of employment and inflation over 

time.
 We might, thus, be forced to address building instability with either somewhat higher 
interest rates or reducing our balance sheet somewhat more aggressively.  One can certainly 
argue t
hat a more effective structure is provided by the Bank of England, in which 
monetary 
policy, supervisory policy, and financial stability policy are more integrated, and a more 
comprehensive flow of information occurs between different areas of the bank.  Such a structure 

would likely make the need for using monetary policy to 
address financial stability concerns 

much less likely.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I
™d like to start by thanking the authors of 
the four papers and all 
of the other staff who have worked on this project, which was designedŠ
and, on the basis of what 
the first two speakers
 said
, successfully
Što make members of the 
FOMC think about important policy questions related to financial stability.  And I
™d also like to 
thank the people who provided the expositions today.  The slides are really very, very good.  If 

I™d only known they were coming, I wouldn™t have had to read th
e memos
.  [Laughter] 
MR. T
ARULLO.  That™s the problem with good in-class presentations.  [Laughter] 
MR. FISCHER.  Most central bankers, when asked whether monetary policy should be 
used to deal with problems of financial stability, reply that they would prefer to devote monetary 

policy
Šdefined typically as the monetary policy interest rate, but it could be unconventional 
policy tools as well
Što attaining the major macroeconomic policy goals, which, 
in our case
, are 
maximum employment and stable inflation.
  They go on to say that the
y would use 
macroprudential policy tools to deal with potential financial instability.
 This, as noted in the fourth paperŠ
in which
 Mark 
Carey updated earlier work by David 
Aikman and othersŠis how macroprudential policy has been used in and after the G
reat
 Recession to deal with in
cipient financial instability, particularly in the real estate sector, in 
several mainly small countries.
  The financial systems in most of these countries remained 
reas
onably healthy through the G
lobal 
Financial 
Crisis
.  Most of 
the countries had reduced their 
interest rates to very low levels during the 
crisis to prevent large-scale capital inflows they would 
have faced had they left their interest rates at the levels most suitable for the nontraded sectors of 

their 
economies.
  But because their interest rates were very low and their financial systems 
healthy, the demand for housing finance rose rapidly
, and the public flocked to take out low 

interest mortgages.  Housing prices rose and continued rising for some time.  
Well, what was to 

be done?  If some financial-
sector regulator or regulators had the authority to impose 
macroprudential measures on housing finance by setting maximum loan-
to-value ratios or debt-
to-income ratios, or 
by requiring mortgage lenders to rai
se the risk rating of mortgages, the 
authorities could impose such measures.  Examples are presented in the fourth paper we 

received.
 These measures appear to have met with mixed results.  In several countries, house prices 
continued rising rapidly.  But as pointed out by Fuhrer and others
, borrowers with a lower LTV 
ratio have a larger cushion of equity and are therefore protected against subsequent declines in 

the price of houses.  Further, as noted in the 
Carey paper, some studies have found evidence of 
effectiveness
, and hints are emerging that macroprudential policies can have more effect
 on vulnerabilities associated with debt volumes and riskiness.
 Well, so far so good.  These are cases of countries 
whose central bank is using the 
interest rate to attain its macro goals
, and some entity, usually the central bank, has the 
macroprudential tools to deal with resultant threats to financial stability.
  Presumably, if there 
were other asset markets behaving in a manner that seemed a threat to financial stabi
lity, they 

could be dealt with via additional macroprudential instruments.  And taken to the limit, all in all, 

this sounds like the policy literature of an earlier era 
whe
n a policymaker faced with 
X goals 
needs 
X noncoll
inear tools to attain them
, although, u
nfortunately, there is one tool missing in 
this story
:  The central banker has only the interest rate through which to influence both inflation 
and employment. 
What if the country doesn™t have a full array of macroprudential measures?  In discussing 
this question, we need to remind ourselves that we are generally dealing with markets in which 
lending and borrowing is a central activity, and which are, therefore, to some extent, influenced 

by changes in the interest rateŠthat is, by macroeconomic and mo
netary policy.
 What if financial markets generally seem to be overheating and financial instability 
seems to be threatening to become a macroeconomic problem?  There are at least two reasons 

why the interest rate could then become the best instrument to deal with the financial stability 

problem.  
First, it may be much more efficient to raise the interest rate than to try to deploy a 

wide range of macroprudential measures, one aimed at each deviant market, both because 

managing a wide range of macroprudentia
l measures would require extensive coordination and 
because the operation of each macroprudential tool certainly 
also 
has an effect in other markets.
  And so you would be getting into a mess, I believe, of using a lot of instruments 
whe
n one of 
them, the i
nterest rate, would suffice to deal with a large part of the difficulties that are causing 
the financial stability problem.
  And the second reason that it may be useful to use the interest 
rate is that there may be too few macroprudential tools to deal 
with the generalized financial 

overheating problem with which the authorities have to contend. 
I would, by the way, just like to make 
an academic point, but I think it™
s important even 
soŠI usually think academic points are important.  In footnote 7 on page 5 of their paper, Fuhrer 
and others 
state that
, ﬁMany developing economies do not enjoy an independent monetary policy 
to address either macro
 stabilization or macroprudential concerns.  As a consequence, they have 
used ma
croprudential tools much more heavily than have advanced economies.ﬂ  
Well, in th
ose country cases with which I am familiar, that
™s not the story.  It is not that developing economies 
do not enjoy an independent monetary policy, but rather that they have more macroprudential 

tools at the
ir disposal than do many of the advanced economies, including the United States, and 
therefore use these tools more actively.
 Now, 
in the case of
 the United States, the Fed
eral Reserve
 and even the FSOC have 
relatively few macroprudential tools.  One solut
ion to that problem has been emphasized by 

those implementing the Dodd-Frank law
:  to strengthen the institutional structure of the financial 
system as much as possible, for instance, by requiring much higher capital ratios than existed 

before the crisis, 
and through a host of other measures with which the regulators and the 
regulated have been struggling over several years.  That will, no doubt, help a great deal.  This is 

what the Fuhrer 
and others
 paper calls 
ﬁearthquakeﬂ 
measures
Šthat is
, make your buildings 
stronger so that they can withstand an earthquake.  And, 
as some have pointed out, stress tests 
can also, to some extent, be used as macroprudential measures, though I think using them would 
take probably quite a long time, and they might 
not 
be very 
useful.
  But not only do we have few 
macroprudential measures in the United States to deal with the banking system, we also have 

very few 
to deal with the shadow banking systemŠ
that is
, we have a serious problem.  
Now, to answer the questions posed by Mic
hael Kiley 
and others at the beginning of the 
package of papers we received
Šit is on page 28 of 28 in today™s handout.  Number 1
(a)
:  
ﬁNo,ﬂ 
policymakers in the United States do not have a sufficiently powerful set of macroprudential 

tools to ensure financi
al stability most of the time.
  For 
1(b)
:  ﬁYes,
ﬂ 
there is a useful distinction 
between structural, which are 
ﬁearthquakeﬂ 
measures, and cyclical
, which are called 
ﬁmalaria
ﬂ 
measures in the paper
Šbetween structural and cyclical tools for dealing with 
risks.
  Third
, is 
coordina
tion among U.S. financial regulators potentially a problem in the use of macroprudential 
tools?  I think this question was put in just to check whether the reader was awake?  [Laughter]  
ﬁYes.
ﬂ 
For 
2(a)
:  I would support using the
 stance of monetary policy to pursue financial 
stability goals 
in the circumstance in which the problem of financial instability is reaching 
macroeconomic proportions and cannot be addressed with other tools.  I would view such a use 

as being consistent wi
th the maximization of an expected utility function, dependent only on 
inflation and output over the course of time.  In other words, we may have to give up some utility 

in terms of attaining our inflation and output goals today to produce higher utility in 
the 
future.  

And I find the argument that, well, we would have to raise the interest rate so high to deal with 

this problem, 
as quite a complicated and possibly inconsistent one.  What it is saying is, ﬁY
es, 
we can mop up cheaply.ﬂ  
Well, we are still tr
ying to mop up cheaply, and we haven™t done it 

yet.  So I don™t think that the argument, ﬁW
ell, you can™t do it at some point because it really 
becomes extremely expensive
,ﬂ may be a way of keeping us out of political trouble but is not 
entirely logically 
correct.
  And 2(b) 
is, 
ﬁWhen w
ill 
we want
 to do this?ﬂ  It is very hard to know 
today when such policy adjustments would be called for.  Most likely they would be called for in 

relation to problems in housing and real estate markets, and most likely we would be taken by 

surprise by such an event even after talking about it for a long time. 
Well, how can we prepare for future financial instability?  First, by strengthening the 
structure of the current financial system as the regulators have been doing and have been doing 

well.  Second, I think we have got to recognize some political realities.  There is a line about how 

the macroprudential regulators should be made independent.  You make independent regulators 

who are controlling housing and see how long the 
independence will last.  It
™s a very tough 
proble
m to be a macroprudential regulator focused on a particular sector, and I am not sure we 
could rely on that.  You know that in the Bank of England, 
the 
Treasury is more represented
, I think, 
in the Financial
 Policy Committee than in the Monetary Policy Committee, and that™
s because they regard
 it as more of a political issue.
 But I think
Šand this goes along with what Governor Tarullo 
suggested a few minutes 
agoŠ
we can prepare for future financial 
instability by doing research on how to strengthen our 
existing macroprudential tools, of which we don™t have many, and by asking what other tools we 
need to add to our collection of policy instruments.  We may not want to have a whole lot of 

them because 
I think you then get in a very complicated instit
utional setting when you decide to 
change seven instruments in order to stabilize the financial system.  And
, as was also emphasized 
by Dan, 
we can also prepare 
by asking what institutional framework the United States economy 

needs to control the potential instabilities that are present in every modern financial system.
 You may say this is all a waste of time
, that they are not going to listen to us.  My 
experience with plans for dealing with future eventuali
ties is
, you never get it right.  You never 
have written a plan 
that
 is just exactly ready to be taken off the shelf and put into practice.  But 
the fact that you did that exercise and asked the questions about how you are going to deal with a 

variety of plans means that you will deal much better with the next crisis when it comes than if 

you had just left events to take their course.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  First, I, too, want to thank the authors and the 
project managers for preparing such a solid set of memos and briefings.  I found them very 

helpful, and they give us a lot of food for thought.  As the memos articulate, there are a lot of 

interdependencies between the financial system and the real economy.  Moreover, the research 
and model
ing that helps guide our thinking about these interconnections is still being developed.  
But the world waits for no one, and it won™t wait for policymakers, so we need to come to some 
decisions about how we would proceed, 
in view of
 our responsibilities for ensuring our dual-
mandate monetary policy goals and for promoting financial stability.  I view today™s discussion 

as a first step toward that.
 I would like to suggest that the Committee
 set itself the goal of working toward a 
statement articulating the way it will consider financial stability in the context of our statutory 

responsibilities.  
We know from hard experience that getting the needed consensus among 

participants to produce suc
h a statement can be difficult to achieve.  But even if we end up not 
publishing something, either as part of our longer-run monetary policy strategy statement or 

separately, I think working toward such a goal will help drive us to some conclusions. 
Now, r
ather than answer the specific questions posed in the staff memo, which I guess
, 
according to President Evans and Governor Tarullo, 
means I am not a rookie, I am go
ing to 
make five broad points. 
Point one, the FOMC cares about financial stability to the ex
tent it affects the health of 
the real economy.  Minor disruptions or volatility in financial markets that represent the ebb and 

flow of a dynamic economy but do not threaten the health of the economy are not something the 

FOMC should respond to.  In gener
al, the goals of monetary policy and financial stability are 
complementary, just like the two goals of our monetary policy dual mandate.  In this, I agree 

with Governor Tarullo.  However, at times, actions that could be taken to foster financial 

stability 
might be in conflict, at least in the short run, with those taken that promote our monetary 

policy goals, and we need to consider the tradeoffs.  
In the U
nited Kingdom, the F
inancial 
Services 
Act 
recognizes this potential tradeoff and explicitly says that the Financial Policy 
Committe
e is not authorized to act in a way that it feels is ﬁlikely to have a significant adverse 
effect on the capacity of the financial sector to contribute to the growth o
f the U
.K. economy in 
the medium or long term.ﬂ 
Point two, our experience from the recent financial crisis underscored the importance of 
creating and maintaining a resilient financial system, one that lowers the probability of instability 
and that limits t
he damage when financial shocks arise.  The first memo discusses some of the 

tools that can be used, including higher capital requirements and liquidity requirements.
  Living 
wills and a credible method for resolving failed institutions are very important 
tools for 
eliminating moral hazard
, and work is being done to implement many of these types of resiliency 
tools. 
Point three, incentives matter in all of this
Šthe incentives of the financial institutions, 
but also the incentives of regulators and policymak
ers.  There are
 considerable time 

inconsistency problems here.
  To the extent possible, policymakers should take a systematic 
approach in applying financial stability policy rather than rely on discretion.  We can issue 

guidance, b
ut if we aren™t willing t
o aggressively support it, then it becomes less effective.  The 

benefit of a systematic approach wasn™t covered in the memos, but it is related to the distinction 

between the static and cyclical macroprudential tools.  Static through
-the-
cycle tools promot
e resiliency because they are known and permanent.  But the cyclical macroprudential tools can be 

made systematic by laying out in advance the contingencies in which they would be invoked.  

For example, we can write down a formula for a countercyclical cap
ital buffer
, and
 we can 
define an explicit trigger fo
r contingent convertible bonds. 
Point four, any macroprudential action, whether it be by the FOMC or by another 
authority, must be communicated in a clear way to avoid creating a conflict with or causing 
confusi
on over actions taken to foster our monetary policy goals.  Careful thought should be 
given to the types of communications that we should use. 
Point five, 
following 
my reading of the literature and the memos, I think our first line of 
defense shoul
d be the macroprudential tools that are focused on increasing the resiliency of the 
financial system
.  Capital liquidity, living wills
, resolutionŠt
hese are the structural tools.
 I believe the important work that Governor Tarullo and the 
staff are doing to
 implement 
Dodd-
Frank is consistent with this.  I
™m less convinced that we have enough knowledge and 
experience with the countercyclical tools to use them effectively at this point, but I think they are 
worth further study.  The complications of the financ
ial system in the U
nited S
tates
, including 
multiple regulators, does need to be considered, 
as 
they 
limit the speed with which certain tools 
can be wielded and potentially limit their coverage.
  Taking an action that pushes risk 
away 
from 
one set of instit
utions to another doesn™t eliminate the risk.  It just lets it move around, 

potentially to a part of the financial system 
in which 
the risk is more difficult to monitor and to 
control.
 These considerations lead me to think that we should set the standards 
and the resiliency 
tools a tad higher than they would be if we had more confidence in the other tools and our 
ability
 to use them effectively.  It also leads me to believe that while I™d
 want to rely on the financial 
system
™s structural resiliency tools first, and perhaps some of the cyclical macroprudential tools, 
to the extent they™
d be effective
, in a situation in which these tools prove to be inadequate and 
risks to financial instability continued to grow and spread more broadly throughout the 
financial 

system, monetary policy should be on the table as a possible defense.
  I note, however, that in 
this case
, the blurring between financial stability goals and monetary policy goals would be high. 

If we assess the risks of the financial instabilit
y to be great, achieving our dual-
mandate goals 
would be i
n jeopardy as well.  And this is an illustration that, 
in most cases
, the goals of price 
stability, maximum employment, and financial stability are complementary. 
 Thank you, Madam 
Chair.
 CHAIR YELL
EN.  Thank you.  President Williams. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  First, I™d like to lodge a complaint about 
Brian Madigan.  I asked to go early
, but 
he put me after the last four speakers, who have said 
everything that I think needs to be said and said it very clearly.  So here we go with my 

somewhat uncertain view on many of these subjects, 
some of which have already been 

characterized
Šor should I say, ﬁ
caricatured.
ﬂ 
The staff memos and presentations help frame the many issues related to monetary policy 
and financial stability.  They point out that, 
ideally
, macroprudential tools should be the first line 
of defense for financial stability.  But, unfor
tunately, as 
table 1 in the first briefing
 makes clear,
 these tools are hard to find in the U
nited States.
  It™
s one of these cases 
in which 
economists 
assume a can opener
, and the problem is solved. 
The reality is that nearly all of our tools are micropru
dential in nature. 
 I
n the U.S. 
context, when I think about macroprudential, it™s LTVs and things like that.  In the United S
tates
, it™s really about how do we take a macroprudential perspective kind of approach 
when
 thinking 
about the use of our microprud
ential
 tools.  M
y favorite example is CCAR, the stress test, 
because these 
tests can and have been designed to penalize activities that are viewed to be a 
financial stability concern.  Basically, you put into the severe adverse scenario things that you™
re 
worried about.  You could think about doing this back in 2003.  If we had that tool, you would 

put a housing bubble in, and then that clearly would penalize institutions that have a lot of 

exposure to that, creating a ﬁshadowﬂ cost to doing that and, 
we wo
uld hope, 
creat
ing
 an 
incent
ive to have less exposure to that.  Obviously, countercyclical capital buffers are a tool 
down the road that could have a macroprudential aspect. 
Now, there is no question to my mind that the improvement in our 
microprudential tools 
have created a much more resilient financial system today.  But there are practical limits to 
mitigating macroprudential concerns using microprudential tools on banks.  And I think, 
more 

importantly
Šand this was already mentioned
Šour 
tools have significant gaps in coverage.
  It™
s a poor carpenter who blames his or her tools, but when it comes to macroprudential policy, the 

shortage of tools does limit our policy choices. 
Just because we have the shortcomings of a 
macroprudential toolbo
x, that doesn™t 
argue 
for 
the 
systematic use of monetary policy to address credit or asset price 
imbalances.  Of course, 
we can™t and don™t ignore financial stability concerns or financial market conditions in making 

monetary policy.  And, in particular, as highlighted by Tobias 
Adrian
™s presentation and the 
paper, we need to take into account the possibility that monetary policy actions do contribute to 
imbalances that threaten financial stability and ultimately undermine the achievement of our 
mandated go
als.
  In this regard, I do think something that Tobias Adrian 
said 
is important.  
You 
have to think of this as situation
 dependent.  You can™t just have a general rule saying, ﬁShould 
monetary policy lean against imbalances?ﬂ  I do think it matters what the situation is, so let me 

give you a little bit more on that. 
There is considerable uncertainty about the drivers of imbalances and effects of monetary 
policy.  So one concernŠand this was brought up a few times, specifically by Governor 

Fischer
Šis the pot
ential for a very high cost of trying to burst the house price bubble or some 
other bubble that™s already become a huge concern.  The work that was done by 
Jorda, Shularick, 

and Taylor, which was cited in the staff briefing, does suggest that trying to pop a huge bubble 
could be ve
ry high.  Just to put some numbers to that, if monetary policy had tried to offset the 
run-up in the house-
price
-to-rent ratio that peaked in 2006Šagain, thinking about it, you
™ve already got this bubbleŠ
their empirical estimates
 indicate that real GDP
 would have to decline 
by 12 percent.  Now, you can debate the specific numbers or their analysis, but 
the results
 still 
suggest 
that these are significant costs and roughly twice the peak
-to-trough decline in real GDP 
per capita that we saw in the 
Great 
Recession.
 Everyone has talked about 
Sweden
™s experience as well, and I think that
 the situation 
there
 is relevant and
 illustrate
s some of the challenges when you are basically trading off 
macroeconomic goals with financial stability or credit imbalance concerns.  They have high 
unemployment and very low inflation, and tightening monetary policy in that situation moved 

inflation fur
ther from their target
.  And that does bring up this risk, which has already been 
mentioned, that fighting financial imbalances could undermine the credibility of the central bank 

in achieving its mandate goals.  There is a risk that tightening monetary policy when inflation is 
persistently running below target undermines confidence in the central bank™s commitment to 
that 
target
.  W
e actually saw some evidence on that, both 
in Sweden and Norway.  Both of those 
central banks did highlight in their public st
atements the fact that they were using monetary 

policy to address financial stability concerns at the cost of their inflation and other goals, and we 

did see, at least in some surveys, a decline in longer
-run inflation expectations while they did 
that.
  Since then, they have backed off that, and we have seen inflation expectations move back 
some
, but it 
causes me to 
worry about some of the longer-
term costs associated with
 the nominal 
anchor. 
Now, on 
the basis of 
the analysis and 
the evidence, my own view a
t this stage, 
recognizing all 
of 
the uncertainty and all 
of 
the work that still needs to be done on this, is that the 
primary
 line of defense is microprudential.  It
™s about capital, it™
s about liquidity, it
™s about 
strong supervision of our deposit-oriented institutions and, we hope, 
a financial system
, as well 
as we can.  I think that should be complemented increasingly by macroprudential approaches, 
such as with CCAR and other tools that we do have, that even if they are microprudential by 

design
, they
 c
an be implemented with more of 
a macroprudential perspective.
 In thinking about monetary policy, I am drawn to the Hippocratic Oath of doing no harm.  
Our primary focus should remain on our dual-mandate goals.  We know from the history of 

central 
banking that when you lose focus on price stability, that has very significant costs to 

society.  But assuming that we are in the vicinity of our goals, we should take care that monetary 

policy does not inadvertently contribute to fostering the emergence o
f imbalances in the 

economy, 
because the cost of trying to use monetary policy to tame imbalances after the fact are 

simply too large.
 Early on in my career, I had to 
write down what 
my area
 of research
 was
.  Mine was 
monetary policy under uncertainty.  I always thought that was a good choice for research.  I think 

this area is one 
in which we really are very uncertain about how our tools affect the economy, 

and I would go back to President Mester™s point that, in view of 
the uncertainty, the argument I 

wou
ld make is that we want to have as robust and resilient 
a financial system as we can without 
having to really think that monetary policy is going to be the thing that saves us in the end.  

Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Harker.
 MR. HARKER.
  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I™d also like to thank the staff for some 
excellent work.
  I agree with much of what has been already said.  I™ll keep my remarks short.
 Firs
t and foremost, I don™t think financial stability concerns should be elevated to the 
lev
el of a third pillar of the monetary policy mandate.  I share the view of the memos that 
systemically setting our policy instrument in reaction to financial indicators requires knowledge 
we don™t yet have, and 
the 
economic costs most likely outweigh any po
tential benefit
s.  Those 
economic costs, as stated before, could be fairly large
, because 
it would likely take a very 

significant change of policy to reduce credit and asset prices.
  Also, as we know, 
all run
-ups in 
asset prices do not necessarily signal t
hat something is amiss.  So it™s very possible that we could 
make systemic mistakes when trying to regularly employ policy toward affecting asset prices.
  Basically, I am skeptical that we can navigate a stability
-growth frontier in a reliable manner.  
Tha
t said, and as others have said, there may indeed be instances when the Committee is fairly 
confident that it can identify financial imbalances.
  In those cases, a monetary policy response 
may be warranted, but I believe such cases would be 
infrequent and should be handled on a case-

by-case basis.
 Macroprudential policy should be our tool of choice, especially when considering 
systemic risk.  I believe our current expansion of regulatory powers has made the banking system 

more resilient
.  And should new risky behavior ensue, we have the abilities in this sphere, albeit 

imperfect, to avert it.
  A recent case in point is the March 2013 guidance to curb risky lending in 
the leveraged loan market.  It is true that it took some time for leveraged l
oans to begin 
contracting in 2014, but it appears that macroprudential intervention was an important element in 

changing behavior.  But just because regulatory interventions do not work instantaneously, that 

should not be used as a rationale for substituti
ng monetary policy
, because monetary policy is 
unlikely to result in instantaneous responses either.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAI
NARD.  Thank you
 very much
, Madam Chair.  The discussion so far has been 
rea
lly excellent, and the papers prepared to inform us were 
quite
 excellent as well.  I think the 
discussion is timely
.  If, as current research suggests, we™re in a world 
in which
 the equilibrium 
rate of interest is depressed for a prolonged period of time
, these kinds of tradeoffs between the 
setting of monetary policy appropriate for achieving full employment and our inflation target and 
the risks of financial imbalances associated with a so
-called risk channel of monetary policy are 
likely to be more commo
n.  In fact, we are seeing that in some foreign economies. 
I think there are a few conclusions that these papers suggest
, as do external research and 
close observation of several foreign jurisdictions.  
The research does support the reality that 
we™re obse
rving, which is that there can be an important 
effect
 on monetary policy through 
changes in risk premi
ums
 and risk-taking in financial markets and, of course, beyond. 
It™s difficult enough
, though, 
to get monetary policy settings just right for the specifi
c inflation and employment objectives that we operate under.  If we further burden our single 
policy instrument, powerful as it is, with a third objective related to credit intermediation, our 
challenge will become even more complicated.
  The conclusion of 
some of the research in this 
area 
hints at
 the complexity
 as it
 suggests
 that the efficacy of such an expanded objective 
function will depend on the source of the shock, which is likely to be unobservable
.  A
nd, of 
course, several people have mentioned th
e work by Lars Svensson that just points out that, under 
many conditions, 
the benefits 
arising 
from adjusting monetary policy to address credit growth are 
likely to be outweighed by the greater cost 
in terms 
of higher unemployment and lower inflation, 
which magnifies the cost of a possible crisis.
  On the other hand, I think the research that was 
presented today does raise some important questions, and I hope that we will return to this 

because the research agenda is highly dynamic.
  It leads
 me, though, 
to the same conclusion that 
many have
 drawn, 
that it is highly desirable to have time
-varying, sector-
specific 
macroprudential tools that operate more directly on the incentives of firms and households to 
take on excessive leverage in particul
ar asset classes.
  That bring us squarely to consideration of 
our own institutional environment and the adequacy of our authorities in this regard. 
To start, I think it™s worth pointing out that we are in a much better position than we were 
pre-
crisis in t
erms of the authorities that we have
 and the rigor with which we are exercising 
them, and, in fact, there have been very important structural innovations.  The Commi
ttee
 on Financial Stability has been created here at the Board with overlapping membership with the 

Committee on Bank Supervision, and of course overlapping membership with the monetary 

policy c
ommittee, the FOMC.
  More broadly, because regulatory authorities in the United S
tates
 are fragmented, the Financial Stability Oversight Council has brought 
all of those regulatory 

authorities together for the first time.
  We have and are exercising a greatly expanded set of both 
micro and macroprudential tools that have greatly increased the structural resilience of the 
banking institutions that are at th
e core of our system.
  We have implemented greatly enhanced 
requirements that have resulted in much more and higher-
quality capital throughout the banking 
system, and we™ve put in place on top of that a set of very stringent macroprudential capital and 
liquidity requirements that are tailored to the systemic footprint of the largest firms.
 Of course, these are through
-the-
cycle safeguards
, meaning that they impose structurally 
higher standards that are better suited to building resilience than to leaning ag
ainst the buildup of 
risks.  In fact, because of the institutional environment we sit in, we probably put greater 

emphasis and build even greater resilience than we would if we had a very complete set of 

macroprudential tools.
  They are generally cumbersom
e to tailor to sector
-specific risks.  Beyond 
this, our capital and liquidity stress tests provide critical capabilities to tailor scenarios in each 
annu
al cycle to ensure that the largest institutions have capital buffers that are relatively robust to 
specific risks that we may see building, for instance, on CRE or on leveraged lending.  In 
addition, when the risks of financial stability increase overall, the Board, in consultation with 

other banking regulators, 
will temporarily increase the amount of capi
tal that the large banks are 

required to hold in order to build resilience and to restrain undue risk-
taking on a cyclical basis.  
This does ensure that we will systematically and routinely have to consider a quantitative and 

qualitative set of indicators 
and vote on whether to impose those buffers.
  This is important, I 
think, as a signaling device, and it puts a lot of responsibility on us, which is new.  Of course, on 

the other hand, it is slow to implement and, again, not 
sector
-specific.
 So all of thos
e things, I think, should give us some confidence that we do have a set of 
additional tools.  Nonetheless, I remain uneasy for the specific risk that we™ve highlighted here 

with regard to housing bubbles 
in particular
Šwhich appear, 
historically
, to be the most deeply 
damaging source
s 
of periodic financial crises.
  Given our current authorities, the banking 
agencies could, perhaps, impose higher risk rates on mortgage loans with particular 

characteristics either directly or through e
xpectations for the stress test, but it would require 

upwards of a year to adjust.  
Moreover,
 as others have noted, it would be narrow in its scope of 
application
, becaus
e a large share of mortgage lending is undertaken by nonbanks, and it may 
prove ineffective at times when bank regulatory capital comfortably exceeds the required 

thresholds. 
In this arena
, our authorities fall short of other jurisdictions that have deployed time
-varying, sector-specific macroprudential policies to cool their housing bubble
s.  We noted earlier 
that financial authorities in the U
nited Kingdom, Sweden, Switzerland, and New Zealand, among 
others, have confronted rapidly rising residential housing prices in precisely the kinds of 
environ
ments when there were compelling reasons n
ot to use the policy rate as the first line of 
defense.
  Many responded by tightening restrictions on borrowing through loan-
to-value or debt-
to-income caps
Šin some cases
, in concert with disincentives for lenders
, and in many cases
, in 
an escalating patte
rn.  And, indeed, the research that the IMF has undertaken, among others, has 
shown that macroprudential measures imposed directly on borrowers can have greater and more 
immediate efficacy than restraints imposed on lending.
 In our environment, responsibilities for financial stability, on the one hand, are largely 
separated from those 
for consumer credit pro
tection
, which the CF
PB does have across both 
banks and nonbank lenders, for instance, through imposing L
TV caps through their QM rules.  
So these autho
rities exist, but they are fragmented.  In order to get agreement across regulators, it 
may take an unduly slow and cumbersome process working through the F
SOC
.  That should give 
us some pause.
  Under these circumstances, as I think others have also conclu
ded, monetary 
policy might
, by default, 
carry a greater burden as a second line of defense.
 All of that said, I think the research that we should be undertaking should include not just 
the possible 
tradeoffs 
involved in using monetary policy to 
address the
 buildup of risks in the 
credit system, but also contemplate the authorities that we have and do not have and the 
tradeoffs 

in the possible setting of those authorities
.  Again, in circumstances 
in which 
we have more 
authorities to build structu
ral resilience
, there may be tradeoffs at keeping those settings higher 
through the cycle as compensation for not having a full set of macroprudential authorities.  A
nd 
it™s something that I think we would benefit from specific research on.  Thank you, Mad
am 

Chair.
 CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Lockhart.
 MR. LO
CKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I, too, want to thank the staff members 
who participated in teeing up this conversation.  Before wading into this topic by reading the 
materials, I had some ge
neral predispositions on the issues highlighted in the memos.  My views 
going 
in were
, first, that the use of monetary policy tools ought not to be the preferred approach 
to addressing a buildup in financial stability risks
; s
econd, that continuing refinem
ent and 
implementation of macroprudential tools and programs, 
although 
imperfect in a number of 

dimensions and no guarantee that tail risk will be avoided, still represent the best practical 

alternative
; t
hird, that a resilience
-oriented policy and supervi
sion focus will likely have a greater 
payoff than an emphasis on prevention; and, finally, that sharply raising the policy rate or 

initiating sizable asset sales in an attempt to 
prick an asset bubble or to discourage credit 
expansion and growing leverage 
or 
to 
discourage types of risk-taking or even to 
correct a 

perceived economic imbalance is likely to entail undesirable, even unacceptable
, costs and 

consequences.
 Those 
were
 my views before thinking about this.  The staff memos did not really move 
me much 
from
those views, although the discussion this morning may do so.  My thinking 
actually kind of fits Governor Tarullo™s caricature of most monetary policymakers.
  But the 
memo
s did serve to deepen my understanding of the challenges and uncertainties involved. 
I understand today™s session to be largely a high-level discussion asking for an 
initial 
response.  I™ll just make a few comments in response to the questions posed.
  Are 
macroprudential tools enough ﬁ
most of the time
?ﬂ  Yes, I think macroprudential tools should be 
sufficient, and by that I mean more advisable as a first resort in most circumstances
.  And ﬁ
most 
circumstances
ﬂ 
in my mind, in my imagination, are likely to
 be ambiguous and not clearly far 

advanced.  That said, I don™t think mobilization of monetary policy tools should be ruled out, 
if only
 because we can™t anticipate all circumstances.
  On the question of any distinction between 
tools through-the-
cycle or 
structural
 tools versus tools for cyclical buildups of risks, 
I start with 
an opinion that risk-taking accretes over time with sustained benign conditions.  
Said differently, 
our policy success sows the seeds of financial instability
.  And this suggests to 
me that systemic 
risk vigilance probably should be pro-
cyclical and 
the 
application of macroprudential tools
, at 
least for cyclical purposes
, may have to be time 
variant.
  As I said earlier, I see macroprudential 
tools that promote resilience as an importa
nt complement.
  Do the dispersion and fragmentation 
of regulatory 
responsibility
 and the attendant coordination challenges affect my views of 
macroprudential tools?  Yes, this reality reduces the probability of effective action.  

Unfortunately, this is not a problem likely to be remedied in the foreseeable future.  I
t™s a 
problem I simply think has to be worked on 
as best we can.
  And it goes without saying that the 
Fed
eral Reserve
 still holds powerful cards in formulating macroprudential policy and its 
implementation.
 Would I support using monetary policy tools for financial stability purposes if the dual-
mandate objectives had to be subordinatedŠthis is the way I understood the qu
estion
Šand, 
if so, under what conditions and how likely are they?  My view is, only in very extreme 

circumstances.
  If the Committee had full or very high conviction that the risks of severe 
financial instability were approaching an untenable state, I coul
d imagine tolerating some higher 

unemployment or deviation from our inflation target for a time in the interest of avoiding 
a much 

more costly development.
  In these rare cases, using monetary policy to promote financial 

stability would be consistent with, not contrary to, achieving the dual mandate over the medium-

term horizon.  
What constitutes an untenable state is subjective but could be informed, I believe, 

by comparisons with earlier episodes of incipient instability
; 
attention to quantifiable 
benchma
rks for debt buildup and aggregate leverage, for example; and, possibly, 
recognition of 
widespread unsound practices and behavior.  
Nonetheless, the existence of a sizable, evolving
, and opaque shadow banking system in this country makes arriving at such j
udgments extremely 
challenging.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Thanks to the presenters and their colleagues 
for providing a collection of insightful memos on a particularly challen
ging topic.  And the 
discussion this morning has been fascinating.  I
™m apparently going to change
 my normal 
behavior today.  I™m going to largely frame my remarks around a couple of the explicit questions 

that wer
e suggested to us.  [Laughter] 
Question 2a asks about our support for using monetary policy ﬁto pursue financial 
stability goals.ﬂ  
In some cases, such as in the depth of the financial crisis, the policy settings to 

achieve monetary and financial stability goals are complementary, and there is no 
policy 
dilemma.  But I am extremely skeptical about using monetary policy to support financial stability 
goals in situations when doing so would in any way counter or degrade the FOMC™s attainment 

of our maximum
-employment and price
-stability goals.  
Importantly, if this dilemma arose, I 
expect we would need to make large increases in our policy rate to have a meaningful effect on 

financial instability risk
s.  I think the briefings were fairly clear on that.  The recent experiences 
of Sweden and Norway suggest that moderate tightening has pretty limited effects.  
Such large 

rate increases likely would have large and deleterious consequences for outp
ut, employment, and 
inflation.
 If our only option to mitigate financial instability risk
s 
were
 a very large monetary policy 
action, this would be evidence of a substantial flaw in our regulatory regime.  The U.S. economy 
ough
t to have adequate resiliency in the financial system so that this Committee does not face 
that choice.  If we had to take such an action, I think it would be a huge credibility problem for 
the Federal Reserve.  We
™d be raising the funds rate at a time 
when
 that 
action presumably would 
lead to higher unemployment and 
lower inflation, and
Špresumably, 
because
 it™s a dilemma
Šthat would be the wrong direction 
to go
.  The public would lose confidence in our abilities, both 
as monetary policymakers and as financial regulators.  The aftermath of such an event would 
include, I expect, a serious postmortem.  It is critical that this
 Committee has substantial 
confidence that the Board and other regulatory bodies have the appropriate tools to address risks 

to financial stability
, and that these tools will be deployed with the appropriate timing and vigor. 
I found Governor Tarullo™s com
ments particularly provocative and interesting
 when he 
mentioned that monetary policy might have to consider weighing in periodically, 
or he
 at least 
asked
 a question about that.  I have a former colleague, Pedro Tel
es, who™s now at the Bank of 
Portugal, a
nd he is a theoretical economist
.  He studied models 
in which 
he basically inserted 
marginal tax rates all around the economy on consumers, on businesses, and things like this.  

Well, these taxes are additional instruments
, and he could make the entire mod
el dance and 
overcome distortions and achieve first
-best allocations.  That™s what can happen if you have 
enough instruments to pursue what you want.  The question is, why not fiscal policy?  Why not 

something like that?  We talk about 
macroprudential tools, but fiscal policy or the structure of 
the economy could also do it.  
Well, it
™s because we just assume that it can™t be done
, that the 
fiscal authorities can™t decide on things like that.  It
™s a presumption that monetary policy can 
be 
bent to address these issues
.  But that™s broadening our goals.  If we™re going to do that, we really 

should have a very serious discussion about 
it.  That
™s how, in many cases in the past, in 
different contexts completely, we
™ve gotten ourselves into t
rouble.  Take the 1970s when we 
were
 trying to get the economy going 
because
 we thought it wasn™t going fast enough, and we 
ended up with 
a lot of inflation.
  I agree 
very
 much with Governor Fischer™s comments about 
how you need the same number of instrume
nts as 
goals. 
Circling back some, question one asks our opinion of the adequacy of the current 
macroprudential toolkit.  Well, maybe I
™m naïve, but I am relatively optimistic that our post
-Dodd-
Frank regulatory efforts are building greater resiliency into 
the financial system.  That 
said, as these memos highlight, significant challenges remain. 
 I was sympathetic to the memo™s 
discussion of how difficult it is to identify risks and respond in a timely fashion with regulatory 
tools.  Accordingly, 
as others h
ave mentioned, 
tools 
that
 are either explicitly or realistically 
through-the-
cycle
 seem most promising to me in this regard.
  The strong role played by enhanced 
capital requirements 
in our current regulatory approaches is an excellent step forward.  Regula
r stress testing is another strong tool.  Regular stress tests help build confidence in banks
™ 
resiliency, may uncover previously underappreciated risks, and can enhance a baseline discipline 
that would prove useful in addressing some unforeseen stress in 
the future.
  And resolution 
planning is beginning to seem promising.  When I hear that Citi garnered only shortcomings and 

not deficiencies, that sounds like real progress to me.  Now, all of 
that i
s in the public domain, 
right? 
I fully appreciate 
that 
these are extremely difficult regulatory issues, and some risk
s 
will 
always remain.  
And 
I will readily admit that I
™m not an expert.  B
ut I am listening carefully to 
these experts™ views, and I hope they will continue to be shared with the Committee to bu
ild 

further confidence that 
financial
-stability risks will not intrude on monetary policy 
implementation except in the normal monitoring
-the-
effects role, which we always do.
 My not
es say
 ﬁf
inally
,ﬂ but I 
probably have a couple more comments after this.  
[Laughter]  
Finally, as the
 Fuhrer, Haubrich, 
and 
Peek
 memo discusses, it
™s reasonable to ask 
whether it™s a good idea to separate monetary policy authority from 
financial
-stability 
responsibilities.
  The feasibility of effective separation depends on the s
tructure of the economy 
and the financial system.  Some scholars have studied economic environments in which the 
authorities have enough policy instruments to approach these objectives separately.  But other 

environments exhibit too much interdependence so 
that economic distortions emanating from the 

real side and
 from
 the financial side cannot be fully separated and controlled without more tools 
and authorities, which are currently absent.  Again, that™s Governor Fischer™s point.  In these 

environments, more coordination between monetary and financial regulatory authorities would 

be required.
  So even though the Committee and the Board have distinct statutory responsibilities 
when it comes to monetary and financial stability objectives, we should continue to build a joint 

understanding of the effectiveness of all policies for dealing with any emerging risks that could 
threaten our best approach to setting monetary policy. 
Now, I believe that Governor Tarullo offered up a suggestion to the 
Committee 
on Financ
ial Stability on a to
-do 
list 
to look at the early 2000s period.  I think that™
s appropriate.
  I would also suggest looking at the 2013 ﬁ
taper tantrum
,ﬂ because in one of the sections of Ben 
Bernanke™s book 
in which I found new information, not things I already knew, was his 
description of the taper tantrum and the events that led him to make certain comments
.  It seemed 
to me that he was 
perhaps highlighting concerns in Washington that I had not felt were 
represented well in our March 2013 discussion on financial stability.  I walked away from 
the 

Committee discussions
 thinking that we were all pretty comfortable with not adjusting our 
approac
h on the basis of financial stability.  But in his book, he suggested things 
a little bit 
differently.  Anyway, I think the taper tantrum is one thing to look at.
 Okay, f
inally, if we decide that financial instability risk
s, when things are really brewing 
in large, will trump achieving our dual-
mandate responsibilities with monetary policy
, then
 I™ve 
got to be concerned that our inflation objective is almost surely too low, because that would be a 
circumstance 
in which we would need to create a contractionary monetary policy that would 

drive inflation below our 2 percent objective.  I don™t think that™s anything that we™
ve 
contemplated in the setting of this inflation objective
.  And it would at least be fair game, if we 
were going to go that route, 
to reconsider that.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Bullard. 

MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I thank the staff for an excellent set of 
memos on this important topic.  I regard this as the issue of our times, and I have reviewed the 

memos i
n some detail with my staff.
  My main conclusion is that the state of thinking on 
macroeconomics and financial stability interlinkages remain
s 
in flux, perhaps not surprisingly
.  And I would think it will be some considerable time before professional conse
nsus forms 
on these issues.  In the meantime, this Committee must make monetary policy decisions in the 

absence of professional consensus.
 I have five main comments
, which I™ll list here and then comment on each of them.  
Number one, I™ll talk a little bit about how many elements of the conventional wisdom on this 

issue do not ring true to me, and this will echo some of Governor Tarullo™s 
earlier 
comments.
  Number two
, this set of memos has a glaring omission
:  a type of theory that receives substantial 
attention in the 
research
 literature but zero attention in policy circles.  So I™ll talk about that.
  Number three, my reading of the empirical evidence presented is that it is broadly consistent with 
ideas
 that suggest monetary policy may intersect importantly with financial stability.
  Number 
four, the theory literature is extremely clear that
, under appropriate assumptions, 
financial 
stability would be an important co
ncern for monetary policymakers, and the caveats to this are 

unconvincing.  
And
, number five, the international experience suggests that, although 
some 
foreign economies have experimented with macroprudential policies, it is far from clear that 

sufficient 
macroeconomic policy tools exist in the United S
tates
 to maintain
 satisfactory financial 
stability in the absence of monetary policy adjustment.  
So let me comment on each of these 

points. 
First of all, many elements of the conventional wisdom do not ring true.  I interpreted the 
Fuhrer, Haubrich, and Peek memo as characterizing portions of the conventional wisdom on this 

topic.  Aspects of the conventional wisdom include
:  (a
)  Do not 
freight
 monetary policy with too 
many conflicting goals.
  This is common
ly said.
  In my view, multiple goals can be perfectly 
fine.  Monetary policy in the 
United States
 famously has a dual mandate.  The entire purpose of 
preventing a financial crisis is to prevent the 
effect
 on the dual-mandate goals.  Unemployment 
spiked to 10 percent following the financial crisis.  Surely this is worth preventing by any means, 

including monetary policy, 
if necessary.
  I agree totally with President Evans™
s comments on 
many tools.  It would be nice to have many tools available.  And in models, if you ha
ve a lot of 
tools available, you 
can do 
a lot of things.  The whole point of the discussion is that this is a 
second
-best world.
  Also, multiple goals can always be reconciled through an appropriate 
specification of an objective function. 
Another part of the conventional wisdom is
:  (b)  It may be
 difficult to identify emerging 
instability risks early enough.  This is something that™s commonly 
said
.  I don™t think this is 
right, either.  Both the tech bubble and the housing bubble were readi
ly apparently to all 
observ
ers and were hotly debated
, even around this table, 
as they were occurring.  It wasn™t a 
matter that we didn™t know that the bubble was upon us.  The idea was, we didn™t know what, if 
anything, to do about it.
  So, in my view, the idea that these problems sneak up on us does not 
ring true. 
A third part of the conventional wisdom is: 
 (c
)  T
he effects of monetary policy 
on asset 
prices and credit growth during a bubble are uncertain.  This also doesn™t ring true as a reason for 

refraining from taking action.  The effects of monetary policy are always uncertain.  The 
effect
 of monetary policy is certainly to mitigate the bubble.  It™s just a question of 
the 
magnitude of 
that effect.
  By using monetary policy, 
one may be preventing a disaster like the one that 
unfolded 
from
 2007 to 2009. 
And p
art 
(d) 
of the conventional wisdom is that significant collateral damage may arise 
from using monetary policy tools to address financial instability.  This line of thinking, which 

has been echoed around the table here, has the flavor that you™re going to make a policy mistake.  
If you make a policy mistake, yes, there™s going to be a lot o
f collateral damage.
  The question is
, is there an optimal monetary policy that would work that would take care of financial stability?
  So we™re talking not about policy mistakes, which are always a risk; we™re trying to talk about an 
appropriate application of monetary policy.  An appropriate application of monetary policy in a 

bubble situation holds the promise of a smoother growth path for the economy as opposed to one 

that is characterized by a boom-and-bust cycle.  In sum, I think much of the conventi
onal 
wisdom summarized in this memo is questionable.
 My second comment 
is, there™s a large gap in the coverage of these memos 
compared 
with
 the 
research
 literature.  There is a large literature on the multiplicity of equilibri
a and the 
possible contributio
n of monetary policy to creating and sustaining that multiplicity.  Many of 
the exot
ic 
equilibri
a that 
exist in models feature substantial economic volatility
Šexactly the sort 
of boom-
and
-bust phenomenon that the literature on financial stability is attempting to explain.  
The
 ﬁextraﬂ 
equilibria, which often exist, 
may seem exotic or special in some sense, but they are 
fully consistent with rational expectations and market clearing
Šand so are at least as legitimate 
as the other equilibri
ums
 that we re
ly on to inform monetary policy choices.  
As an example, 
even in the very simplest New Keynesian model, 
which ultimately informs much of the analysis 
presented to this Committee, an interest rate peg is associated with 
a fundamental equilibrium, 

which is t
he one we often use for policy analysis, but also with many volatile equilibria, which 
could be thought of as implying boom-and-
bust cycles.
  See, for
 instance, 
Jordi Galí 
in his basic 
book explaining the New Keynesian model. 
Furthermore, appropriate polic
y could easily eliminate these boom
-and-
bust cycles
, and 
so monetary choices in this kind of thinking would have 
an enormous 
effect
 on whether you™re 
going to get financial crises of the kind that we think we™ve observed in the 
United States
 recently.
  My point would be, 
policy rules can help define the equilibri
ums
 that are even possible 
in the economy.  And in this sense, good monetary policy could put you on a path 
on which 
you wouldn™t 
experience any of the deleterious equilibrium effects that you think
 we™ve experienced 
in the p
ast few years.
  If you don™t believe me on this, just think about Diamond-Dybvig.  A lot 
of you know Diamond-Dybvig models of bank runs.  That™s a multiple-
equilibrium model.  
There™s a normal equilibrium
, in which people deposit in the banks and everything goes fine.  

There™s a run equilibrium
, in which everybody runs on the bank.  The run equilibrium is bad.  In 

that model
, you put in deposit insurance, i
t eliminates the run equilibrium
, and everything works 
fine forever.
 That™s 
a model 
in which policy has 
an 
enormous 
effect
 on the kinds of things that can 
happen in that particular economy.  The same kinds of things are true in the New Keynesian 
economy.  And I think it™d be worth thinking 
a little bit more about these kin
ds of issues before 
saying that monetary policy can™t do anything about bubbles or asset price volatility.  T
his is an 
example of a conception of financial volatility that has considerable support in the literature but 

is not represented
 in the span of this discussion.  I think the omission of this area of research is 
inappropriate for discussion at the level of this Committee, which purports to provide a review of 

current thinking on macroeconomic
s, monetary policy
, and financial stability.
 My third commen
t is on the 
memo by Adrian and others, which was on e
mpirical 
evidence.  I just have a brief comment.  The empirical evidence seems to run counter to some of 

the conventional wisdom on the subject I was reviewing earlier.  In particular, the empirical 

resu
lts seem to confirm the intuition that monetary policy has an important 
effect
 on risk-taking 
in the economy.  And so I found these results quite interesting.  I™d encourage more work in this 
area.
 My fourth comment is on the 
Durdu and others memo.  The th
eoretical literature is 
extremely clear that
, under appropriate assumptions, financial stability would be an important 
concern to monetary policymakers
, and the caveats to this view are unconvincing.  
What does 
the theoretical literature say that is so compelling?  It™s a simple argument.  The basic friction 

that motivates monetary policy in leading models is sticky prices.  
This
 means, if taken seriously, 
that observed prices across a variety of market
s do not represent true market-
clearing prices.  
This
 motivates monetary policy intervention to help the inappropriate pricing going on in the 
economy.  
But 
this
 is in the context of perfectly operating credit markets.  If one assumes an 
additional frictio
n analogous to sticky prices that 
also causes credit markets to work imperfectly, 
then a
n appropriate monetary policy will want to take this friction into account as well.
  Furthermore, it™s unlikely in the general equilibrium that you™re going to be able 
to separate the 
reaction to these two frictions.  
Because
 many economists
Šand, 
I believe
, many of youŠthink 
that there are tangible frictions in actual credit markets, this argument strikes me as extremely 
powerful, independent of exactly which model one w
ants to talk about in this area.
  This
 would 
say, if you™re designing an optimal monetary policy and you think there™s sticky-
price friction 
and you think there 
are
 things going wrong in credit markets, then you™re going to want to take 
into account both of these frictions when you™re making your monetary policy.  
The caveats to 

the argument struck me as rather weak
, as they concede th
is theoretical point and start arguing 
about other matters.
 And
, finally, my fifth comment
 is on 
the international experienc
e.  The memo on this 
topic showed that some foreign economies have experimented with macroprudential policies.  

The U.S. financial system is far deeper, broader, and more complex than the financial systems in 
many of these countries, and on this I agree wi
th Governor Fischer
™s and President Williams™
s 
comments and those of many others.  
It™s far from clear to me that sufficient macroprudential 
tools exist as of today in the 
United States
 to ensure financial stability through this channel alone 
in the absenc
e of monetary policy adjustment.  F
or this reason, I think that it will likely be 
necessary to consider the use of macroprudential policy in conjunction with interest rate policy in 

order to maintain financial stability in the 
United States
.  Thank you, Ma
dam Chair.
 CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Lacker.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Because
 I might be one of the last speakers 
between you folks and lunch, I™ll be brief.  I construed the discussion topic as the narrow 

question of the way in which the setting of monetary policy instruments should vary with the 
financ
ial stability considerations
, or observations of conditions, rather than the broader question 
of appropriate public policy in relation to financial stability.
  I agree that the 
state of 
understanding is relatively limited, and so my comments are basically two suggestions for further 
research.
 The staff™s focus is almost entirely 
on the buildup, or boom, phase, in which financial 
conditions are evolving in a way that might lead to future distress.  I agree with the staff™s memo 

that highlighted the difficulty of determining whether some observed developments represent 

inefficient departures from healthy market f
unctioning.  I agree, therefore, that humility should 

be our watchword.  
For me, this is a powerful 
argument 
for central banks to stick to their price
-stability knitting
, because
 responding to sectoral developments per se runs the risk of entangling 
us in 
distributional politics
.  Besides, the economic basis for doing so seems not obvious to me in 
many circumstances.
 For
 me, this
 is also a powerful argument for more research on how we should know, in 
real time
, what the appropriate response should be.  And 
here I guess I differ from President 
Bullard about what we knew in 2005 or 2006.  Maybe there was agreement on overvaluation of 

housing, but exactly how that would play out and exactly how different approaches to monetary 

policy would affect that were, I t
hink, quite uncertain.  And 
I contrast this kind of research on 

how we should know with what I see as the bulk of research that has been cited for us, 
in which 
the policymaker 
is absolutely sure of the model 
he™s in
:  H
e™s in the model 
that the modeler 
wro
te down.  
As a result
, 
it™s just a matter of deciding what to do about what he knows, 
as opposed to having to sort through different theories, different models, different estimates, and 

then different understandings of how to proceed. 
In the o
ther direction from leaning against 
booms, there appears to be little controversy 
that, as one paper put it, ﬁmonetary policy should be used to stabilize the economy 
and financial 
markets 
in the wake of a 
financial 
crash
ﬂŠin 
other
 words, respond to a 
full
-blown recession.  
But I™d like to suggest that there™s a third ca
se that deserves attention as well
:  instances in which 
financial market turbulence arises but does not end up leading to a full-fledged crash and thus 

ultimately proves transitory.  Examples would include the stock market break of 1987 and the 

LTCMŒRussian 
debt default crisis in 1998
Œ99.  It™s natural at such times to make monetary 
policy more accommodative out of concern for the downside risksŠ
that is, the increase in the 

probability of
 adverse 
outcomes for economic 
growth and 
inflation
.  And I view that as the 
standard monetary policy response to information about the prospects for the fundamental things 

we care about
Šemployment and inflation
Šnot 
an additional reaction to financial stab
ility.
  But 
even if the financial market turbulence settles down without causing a recession, it™s common at 

times like that for monetary policy to remain more accommodative for some time.
 Clearly, though
, it can™t be optimal for the monetary policy reacti
on to be permanent in 
the sense that the policy rate path is forever 
deflected downward by a one-
time ratchet effect in 
response to every instance of financial market tumult.
  Even short of a strictly permanent 
reaction, I be
lieve what happened in 1998
Œ99 illustrates that there™s a very real risk that when 
monetary policy remains more accommodative for too long and sets off a response, it could leave 

us substantially 
ﬁbehind the curve.ﬂ
  So 
I think this portion of the monetary policy reaction 
function to 
financial
-stability considerations deserves attention from researchers as well.
  Thank 
you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President George. 
MS. GE
ORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I, too, thank the staff and have found today™s 
conversation useful in 
refining our expectations for the role of financial stability in policy 
decisions.  I would just say, 
the tools we have available in the 
United States
 today strike me as 
the ones we inevitably come back to after crises
, a matter
 of basic supervisory and financial 
concepts related to capital adequacy
, 
risk diversification
, and limits on interbank and market 
exposures.  The challenge remains, I think, in 
gaining confidence that such tools are calibrated in 
a way that keeps up with the dynamic financial system as it innovates and evolves.  And, of 

course, that confidence depends on understanding whether we can reliably detect the buildup of 

unhealthy financ
ial pressures and then deploy the appropriate tool 
before it™s
 too late.  I think 
today™s discussion suggests we probably should continue to talk more about that. 
I would not draw stark distinctions between through
-the-
cycle risk
s and those that are 
more c
yclical.  
Adequate capitalization, low-
to-moderate leverage, appropriate risk-taking, and 
strong liquidity within a robust microprudential supervisory framework
, I think, 
is a good 
foundation for fostering financial stability.  And I think our stress-
testi
ng approaches have 
certainly strengthened that framework.
 As it relates to the stance of monetary policy to pursue financial stability goals, the 
tabletop exercise led by President Rosengren™s committee last year considered the role of 

monetary policy rela
tive to financial stability goals.  As I did then, I continue to think that 
monetary policy is the wrong tool for responding to financial imbalances, and that it is too broad 

an instrument to effectively incorporate a specific financial stability mandate.
  That said, the 
pursuit of other macroeconomic objectives cannot ignore the important influence of the stance of 

policy.  And keeping rates low for long periods with an eye only toward achieving our dual 
manda
te over the medium term can facilitate conditio
ns that 
encourage 
risk
-taking or 
misallocations.
 Policymakers certainly bear responsibility for carefully calibrating the cost and benefits 
of such policy settings.  However, raising interest rates seems an extreme response to the 
possibility of an imbalan
ce and risks slowing the entire economy in an attempt to address a 
specific segment.
  For this reason, I prefer to lean on more targeted tools
, which coordinate with 
and complement monetary policy objectives.  And I think it would be worthwhile for us to think 

about a plan that would respond to a future financial stability scenario.  I like Governor 

Brainard™s ideas about considering the tradeoffs that might be associated with 
that
 as we go 
forward with this thinking.  Thank you.  
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Kashkari.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I am generally in the camp that the costs 
of using monetary policy exceed the benefits.  I don™t want to say ﬁnever,ﬂ 
but I think it
™s unlikely I™
d find myself in a situation 
in which 
that
™d be t
he tool I would be going toward first.  
A couple of people around the table have used the word ﬁhumility.ﬂ  I think that™s probably the 

most important word to remind ourselves of 
in these types of situations.
 You know, 
Governor Tarullo mentioned an exercise.  We ran a similar exercise in 
Minneapolis in which 
I asked our staff, with the benefit of perfect hindsight, 
to 
tell me when the 

FOMC
 should have raised rates in the 
past 
100 years to deal with 
a bubble.  And we couldn™t 
reach agreement
, whether it was the Great Depression or the Great Recession or the tech bubble.
  If we couldn™t reach agreement 
when having
 perfect hindsight, I™
m skeptical that we
™re going to 
reach agreement on a go
-forward basis
.  And I think about 
two examples.  One is, since the 
crisis
, we™ve all been laser
-focused on 
financial
-stability risks, and I don™t know anybody who 
saw t
he price of oil going from $150 
per barrel
 to 
$30.  That
™s a heck of an economic shock, and 
we all missed it.
  Now, 
I don™t know if it was a bubble, and I don™t know if monetary policy 
should have been deployed to do anything about itŠprobably not.  But just that example says 
that while we were looking, we still missed it.  That
™s how hard these things are to identify. 
Then I go back to 2003.  Where do bubbles come from?  They come from widespread 
delusions.  We all know that societies are prone to mass delusion
.  And I think the bubble we 
experienced in the 2000s was a housing bubbleŠthat we believed home prices would only go 

up.  It™s so difficult for an individual regulator to stand up to the country and say, ﬁHey, you™re 

all wrong.  We know better.  You™re all wrong about where home prices are going.ﬂ  And it™
s even harder to then say that we™re going to put the 
country in a recession
, we feel so strongly 

about that.  So I think that some of the other 
macroprudential 
tools, even if they
™re imperfect
, could be more credible tools that we could reach for rather than saying, ﬁWe know better, and, as 

a result, we
™re g
oing to put the whole country into a recession.ﬂ 
So I would like to see us further explore what tools we have available.  One of the memos 
mentioned the idea of a shelf registration of certain policy tools.  I know countercyclical 
capital
 buffers are an ex
ample of that.  I would love to see us exploreŠI just don™t know the answerŠ
how much power there is in shelf-
registering potential tools that we could use at a future date.  
I™d like to learn more about that. 
And, finally, I also see the benefit of potentially using the bully pulpit.  T
he hardest part 
about all of this is for us to have 
confidence that it really is a bubble
, and 
that 
we really should do 
something about it.  If we really had confidence that there was a bubble and we should do 

something about it, if we spoke out about it with enough conviction long enough, I think we 
could have
 an effect on markets even if we don™t have a specific policy instrument at our 
disposal.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kaplan. 
MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  And thank you to the authors of these papers 
and the team that worked on this project. 
When I think about financial stability, I tend to separate structural issues from cyclical 
issues, specifically
 cyclical excesses
, 
such as market valuati
on, the 
level of risk
-taking.  And in 
thinking about structural issues, I 
try to 
focus on 
five in particular, a
nd should note that
 we™
ve 
made good progress on many of these.  
Number one
, do we have enough capital adequacy in our 
financial institutions, bot
h banks and large nonbanks?  
Number two, is there liquidity of capital 
in a stress scenario
?  T
hat is,
 can 
a 
balance sheet be 
ﬁmonetized
ﬂ to provide capital?  I think our 
stress testing has gone a long way here. 
The t
hird one, which was extremely problematic in the last crisis, is the level of 
interconnectedness in the financial system.  This is harder to track because usually counterparty 

transactions are netted.  But we found in the last crisis that there were a significant number of 

counterparty transactions
 that caused a domino effect.  
By some estimates,
 there was as much as 
$80 to $90 trillion notional amount of CDS versus about $10 
trillion of debt issued globally.  

AIG was obviously an example of a party that had a substantial number of counterparty 

transactions.  
We 
need
 to track this so that you don™t have one weak institution potentially 
threaten
ing others. 
The f
ourth thing I watch 
is mismatches between asset liquidity and either duration or 
capital structure, which include redemption provisions.  
For example,
 recently we
™ve talked more 
about these high
-yield mutual funds, which have relatively illiquid assets but offer daily 
liquid
it
y.  That™
s a good example of a structural issue that creates a financial instability.  It may 
not be big enough to create a systemic risk, but I view that as a structural issue. 
And the fifth issue that I try to track is the overall debt relative to GDP 
in the economy by 
sector
:  household sector, financial sector, nonfinancial businesses, and then the government.  
For example, what we found 
looking at
 the last crisis was that there was 
an extraordinarily high 
level of debt in the household sector relative to GDP, but it didn™t look that significant because of 
asset values in the household sector, particularly home prices. 
Those are the five things that I still think, even sitting here today, we should keep 
track
 of.  It strikes me that
, yes, 
all of these structural issues lend themselves to macroprudential tools
 as a first line of defense
.  But they also require regulation from other entities outside the Fed, 

plus fiscal oversight
, and that, through the FSOC and others, requires good coordination among 
agencies.
 As a second line of defense, I do believe that monetary policy does need to be cognizant 
of cyclical excesses.  Cyclical excesses
 can be dangerous because they amplify or expose 

structural faults
.  And monetary policy
, as a second line of defense,
 can certainly help damp 
some of these cyclical excesses.
 I think we have made great progress in the United States through CCAR, stress tests, and 
all the 
good work that has been done to addr
ess 
many of the
se structural issues.  But 
the last 
issue that I
™ll mention 
is 
that 
I™
m conscious of the fact
 that many structural faults exist outside 
the United States in places like China, and those risks threaten 
to spill over to other countries.  

We saw some evidence of an episode of this during the first 
four
 months of th
is year
, when
 you saw structural faults in China threaten to create some destabilization in the rest of the world
.  When that happened, 
I thought it was a very appropriate time for mon
etary policy to act, in this 
case by no
t acting
.  And I think that helped cushion instability that was created from outside the 
United States.
  As we go forward
, we need to keep in mind that 
some structural issues may be as 
likely to occur outside the 
Unit
ed States
, and we™re going to find ourselves dealing with them 
without any
, or very few, 
statutory tools.  
In that regard, 
I believe that we will have to consider 
monetary policy as a second line of defense.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  O
n these issues, I have for some time 
generally accepted
 the conventional wisdom 
that 
called 
for 
macroprudential tools as the primary 
line of defense 
and for monetary policy to be used rarely.  
But at the same time, I am quite 

uncomfortable with the implications of that
 recommendation
 and 
whether we really have an
 understanding of why that is the right approach.  And part of that 
discomfort 
is just having been 

familiar with 
work by Jeremy Stein and many others, including some of you around the table, 

which call
s those things into question for various reasons.  I would say these excellent memos 
and today™s discussion have, I hope, 
moved me closer to clarity, but certainly not all the way 
there.
 As these papers 
and 
the wider literature illustrate, many of the fundamental questions 
concerning 
the relationship between monetary policy and financial stability remain unsettled.  

There
™s significant uncertainty about our ability to identify threats 
ex ante
 and how to think 
about the tradeoff between t
ype I and 
type II 
errors.
  The effectiveness of our macroprudential 
tools is untested.  It™
s not clear whether and 
under 
what circumstances monetary policy is likely 
to reduce threats to financial stability without im
posing too high a cost.  A
ll of this suggests to 
me that
, as President Mester suggested,
 the road to achieving an addition to the consensus 
statemen
t 
in which
 we were all agreeing on the relationship between monetary policy and
 macroprudential and
 financial stability could well be a long and challenging one. 
Although I regard the question as somewhat unsettled, my working view is that 
regulation, including macroprudential policies, should be the primary line of defense against 
financial in
stability.  In the 
United States
, increasing the system™s overall resiliency with 
through-the-
cycle policies seems like our best
 available tool for addressing these risks.
  Higher 
capital ratios, larger holdings of liquid assets, and the near el
imination of 
ﬁrunnableﬂ bank debt 
have made the banking system and our overall financial system safer.  If these measures had 

been in place before the financial crisis, I feel fairly sure that the consequences would have been 

much less severe.
 The 
efficacy of time
-varying tools remains questionable.  CCAR could be used in a 
targeted and reasonably timely way if financial
-stability risks 
pertain primarily to
 the banking 
system.  But the interagency process is slow and will remain so, inadequately add
ressing 
problems even in cases 
in which there is direct authority to do so.  I don™t expect that to change.  

There are also important sectors of the financial system 
in which 
transparency and the reach of 
macroprudential tools are limited, and I don™t expe
ct that to change either.
 All that said, some of the research comes very close to saying that monetary policy is 
simply the wrong tool and highly unlikely to 
ever
 play a constructive role in addressing threats to 
financial stability.  And I am 
uncomfortabl
eŠ
like
, it sounds, 
others around the table are
Šwith 
categorical statements about what one will or will not do in a crisis.  Several have noted that 

humility is an appropriate 
watchword
 here.
  I think Mike Tyson actually said it so much more 
colorfully when
 he noted that everyone has a plan until they get punched in the mouth.  
[Laughter]  In unusual circumstances, therefore, I could be open to using monetary policy to 
addres
s financial stability threats.  There would be an obvious tension between moving early 
before the evidence is clear and waiting too long for clarity.  And, of course, the earlier the 
intervention, the less clear it would be that higher rates would actually reduce the already very 

low probability of a financial crisis.
 Despite these challe
nges, though, there are two key features of the U.S. context that call 
for keeping one™s mind open and that I don™t think are adequately faced by the literature.  First, 

as many have mentioned, the U.S. institutional setting is very challenging for macroprudential 

policy, with our unwieldy regulatory apparatus and vibrant shadow banking sector.  Second, 

while this is not my baseline, it
™s plausible to me that rates will have to remain very low for a 
very long time to achieve stable prices and full employmen
t, but that such low rates will drive 

excessive credit growth and create irresistible upward pressure on asset prices, including real 

estate prices.
  I™m thinking of a situation in which a broad range of asset prices are moving up 
well beyond what fundamen
tals would justify
; 
where the other tools we have don™t seem to be 
addressing the problem or have failed to do so; 
and where low interest rates are pushing up asset 

prices and driving credit to excessive levels, probably over many years, and thus are a principal 

cause of the threat.
  Recalling that we have had two major real estate blowups in the past 
25 years, I would not rule out a policy of leaning against the wind in such a case as one tool 

among many.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice 
Chair
man
. 
MR. DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
First, I want to thank the staff for their 
thoughtful memos.  
I thought that how you framed the discussion 
was great
. 
While I agree that macroprudential policy measures are the
 primary instruments through 
which policy ﬁshould,ﬂ 
with quotes around it, promote financial stability, I view the institutional 
cons
traints in the United States as making this very difficult to operationalize in practice.  I think 
that t
he 
dif
fusion of re
sponsibility among many different regulatory agencies and the difference
s 
in mandates 
across these agencies are very important constraints.
  In my own experience, a 
number of regulatory agencies do not seem to g
ive
 much weight, if any, to broad financial 
stability objectives.  In particular, they do not appear to place much emphasis on the 
effect
 of 
how the behavior of any particular firm generates externalities that affect other firms and the 
broader financial system.
  Thus, rules and regulations tend to have a microprudential focus and a 
consumer and investor protection focus rather than being oriented toward mitigating risks to the 

broader financial system.
 There
™s also a meaningful coordination problem, which suggests that implementing 
macroprudential to
ols in a timely way would be very difficult to do in practice.  Yes, we do have 
the FSOC
.  B
ut the reality is that the individual agencies guard their prerogatives
, and the f
act that the FSOC is chaired by the 
Secretary 
of the 
Treasury
Špart of the 
executiv
e branch
Šcan 
introduce a 
political element in the pursuit of its responsibilities.
  So 
under 
the U.S. institutional 
setup, I think tools that work automatically 
through-the-
cycle
 might be more effective than those 
that would have to be implemented on a more discretionary basis.  But such automatic tools are 

difficult to design and calibrate in a world 
in which 
the threats in the future are likely to differ 

significantly from those
 in the past.  When you think about the different bubbles we™ve had over 
the p
ast 30
 or 40 years, they™
re all very, very different
.  And I imagine that one set of tools that 
would work very well over the cycle for one set of bubbles might not be totally adequate for 

another. 
As a result, I don™t view macroprudential policies 
as being
 at a level of maturity in the 
United States
 that we would likely be able to deploy them very successfully to achieve our 
financ
ial stability objectives.
  That said, I do think a number of policies that have up to now been 
primarily microprudential in nature, such as CCAR, CLAR, and supervisory guidance, could also 
be used to achieve macroprudential objectives.  I suspect that having a CCAR stress test include 

a significant stress to one particular asset class or activity that we were concerned about from a 

financial stability perspective
Štake commercial real estate lending as an example
Šcould 
influence the credit provision to that sector by driving up the 
shadow 
price of capital for that 
activity.
 This suggests to me that we should do more work in three areas:  
First, work with other 
regulatory agencies to sensitize them to the importance of financial stability and to broaden our 

collective macroprudential toolkit; s
econd, continue to develop how our microprudential 
instruments could be adapted to pursue macroprudential objectives
; and, third, explore in what 
circumstances monetary policy might play a role.  Can it be used effectively to fill in the cracks, 

or are 
its financial sta
bility effects likely to be very limited relative to the consequences to broad 
macroeconomic activity?  And what™s the 
cost
-benefit tradeoff here?
 With respect to monetary policy, I have to admit some skepticism about its efficacy to 
achieve financial stab
ility objectives.  As I see it, in most cases the benefits of a tighter monetary 
policy in curbing excess in a particular sector are likely to be outweighed by the costs 
in terms of 
greater deviations from the Committee™s medium
-term
 employment and inflati
on objectives.  
But 
I think this conclusion depends on the particular circumstances.  For example, how big the sector 

is and how sensitive it is to monetary policy probably matter in terms of that cost
-benefit 
tradeoff.  If the sector that
 is out of balanc
e is large
Šthink residential housing
Šand that sector 
is very sensitive to interest rates, then I would think the benefits of monetary policy would likely 

be higher. 
Also, m
onetary policy might be useful in terms of signaling our concern.  One thing we 
didn™t talk about very much today was expectations, and I think expectations do matter.  And if 
the central bank 
protested against how a sector was evolving, 
this
 might result in meaningful 
changes in behavior beyond those just generated by the change in the prospective path of short-

term interest rates.
  In monetary policy, we really have a very well developed theory of how 
these expectations tend to influence beh
avior.  We don™t really seem to have that same work 
developed on the macropruden
tial
 side yet.  
I recall how the Carter 
Administration™s 
implementation of credit controls in the spring of 1980Šand one could argue that was a 

macroprudential measure
Šhad a very powerful 
effect
 well before the controls actually were 
binding.  
Now, 
this
 was not a particular
ly successful experiment, 
as it worked a lot more 
effectively than they imagined.  But it does, I think, underscore the importance of expectations. 
So 
the bot
tom line for me is
, I wouldn™t rule out using monetary policy to achieve 
financial stability objectives, but I certainly would try to use microprudential and 
macroprudential tools first to the extent that that was feasible.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR Y
ELLEN.  
Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  
It™s m
aybe a bit unfair to have the first word and then try to have one 
of the last words
, but I did want to make a couple of observations about the tenor of the 
conversation. 
First, I guess I don™t agree with those 
who say that we understand how monetary policy 
works really well
, we just don™t understand how macroprudential policies work.  I™ve spent seven 
years here being surprised at how much uncertainty there actually is on the transmission 

mechanisms for monetary
 policy.  And I keep coming back to our reliance on inflation 
expectationsŠ
something that
™s undertheorized, undocumented, and hard to pin down 
empiric
ally.
  So while there
™s certainly more work to be done, I just don™t think it™s as radical a 
distinction a
s some have suggested.
 A corollary to thatŠand this is what I thought Stan and I were trying to get at early on, 
without 
success
Šis, in thinking about the idea, it™s not just popping bubbles.  The popping 
bubbles 
thing
 is an enormous problem.  If you get to the point 
at which
 you have the bubble and 
you™re going to try to use monetary policy to pop it, then the sort of thing Charlie was talking 
about is absolutely going to ensue.  
But
, presumably, monetary policy, and ho
w it operates and 
what 
effects
 it has
, differ
s 
across conditions of countries as well as
 within particular economies 
as those economies and their financial systems evolve.  And I think we at least have to be 

somewhat open to the possibility that the ways in which our economy and financial system have 

evolved 
are
 such that it™s not just a Hippocratic 
Oath thing 
in which
 you can™t use monetary 
policy to do something about financial stability because you may do harm.  It may be, and I 

underscore may be,
 that m
onetary policy itself is creating some of the problem.
  And I think we 
just, 
intellectually
, need to be a bit more open to that. You know, there are many times in the p
ast 
two years 
when
 I™ve missed having Jeremy on this corridor.  Today is way high up on 
my list of 
times when I wish Jeremy were here to give what I regard as his very powerful, somewhat 

alternative view of the way in which monetary policy operates. 
MR. EVANS.  Can I ask you just a clarifying question about what you™re talking about?  
Because
 I thought that the premise of what I was talking about was, you™re about to make a 

monetary policy decision on the basis of how you think the economy is going, and then all of a 

sudden somebody says, ﬁWait a minute.  Financial stability is more of a probl
em.ﬂ
  Then you do 
something different
, and 
that™s presumably
 going to push you away from what you thought you 
were trying to achieve.  That™
s the context.
 MR. TAR
ULLO.  
Charlie, the point I was trying to 
makeŠand I think a number of other 
people did try 
to makeŠ
was
, it is not at all clear that there is a sharp distinction between the 
traditional dual
-mandate and financial stability considerations.  And 
that is 
certainly
 the case
 in 
the way in which some have described 
the situation
 in which if you pursue a monetary policy 
that raises a reasonably high risk of a financial stress period resulting in the diminution of 
employment and, indeed, of inflation, then you can question whether, 
just within the dual 
mandate, 
you
™ve perceived the proper policy.  
Now, th
at depends on your own assessment of 
what those causal relationships are, but I was trying to suggest that i
t™s something that
, intellectually
, is perhaps more appropriately on the table than some would have it. 
All right
.  Let™s p
ut aside the intellectual
 stuff for a second.  I really want to underscore 
just the practical things
, which
 Governor Brainard, 
President Kaplan,
 and several other people 
mentioned.  
First, the ﬁweﬂ of the FOMC
 has only one toolŠ
or set of tools, but it™s basically 
with regard to
 monetary policy.  We don™t have all these regulatory, supervisory, other tools.  
Now, a subset of us has some more, but not unlimited ones.  And I really do think it™s important 

to consider how we would react, in view of all the things that we don™t like about the absence of 

tools and the fact that I have been singularly unsuccessful in getting the market regulators to 

think in terms of prudenti
al market regulation.
  I think we s
till need to think about that.
 Moreover, you can™t just fall back on saying, 
ﬁThe Board needs to do a better job in 
regulating and supervising financial institutions.ﬂ  T
he reasons for that
, I think, 
are pretty self
-evident.  
We™ve already seen
, as we increase regulatory requirements
Šwhich I am all for
, as people knowŠyou begin to see leakage out of the system.  And the longer we have tougher 

requirements in place, the more incentive there™s going to be for 
those who to this point have not 

tried to create synthetically large balance sheets in order to do things that right now only a Citi or 
a J.P. Morga
n can do.  There™s going to be more incentive to do that.  And so even if you think 
the Board has the responsibility for being tough on banks and all of that, that™s not going to be 
effective over the medium term
, either.
 And so I think we have to contemplate, as I said earlier, the world as it may be.  W
hat I 
worry about is that some people just want to say, 
ﬁIt™s somebody else™s problem.  It™s not our 
problem.ﬂ  
Just as
, in the fiscal area
, we may wish that some people did a better job
Šand several 
of you may wish that the five of us did a better job than you think we™re doingŠb
ut that™s going 

to be the case sometimes
.  And that™s what I want to think about.  And, 
President Kashkari
, I™m 
not too worried about the fact that you couldn™t get everybody at the Minneapolis Fed
eral 

Reserve
 to agree.  You™ve only been here a few months.  I™ve been here seven years.  You can 

never get everyone around this table to agree.  [Laughter]  B
ut we still have to make decisions
 sometime
s.  Sorry, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Let me just wrap up 
quickly so we can get to lunch.  
I want to 
again thank all the staff involved in this effort for your work and thank everyone around the table 

for very thoughtful comments and for sharing your views. 
I think
, listening to what I heard around the table
, the
 bottom line 
is that
 everyone 
recognizes how important macroprudential tools are
 and 
the progress we have made
, at least in 
putting in place through-the-
cycle
 or earthquake-type policies to strengthen the banking system 
and other aspects of the financial s
ystem as well.
  But I™ve also heard most of you recognize that 
we have very significant gaps in our toolkit and that the framework for coordination among U.S. 

agencies in implementing macroprudential policy leaves much to be desired.  On occasion there 

have been political constraints in deploying these policies.  And probably the legislative 

framework in place for the various regulators to take account of systemic risk
, as opposed to 
narrower mandates
, leaves many holes and gaps in the macroprudential frame
work to address 
financial
-stability risks.
 Everybody recognizes how costly it could be to use monetary policy to address financial 
stability threats, 
in view of
 the potential cost to achieving our macroeconomic goals
.  But on the 
other hand, I think what I™ve heard most of you recognize is, the bottom line probably should be 
to never say never, and that there could potentially be situations in which we might want this 

Committee to take financial stability considerations into account.
  Those situations might
 be 
limited
.  But it™s probably important to think more seriously about what those situations might 
be, whether we could identify them, and how to address them. 
I think perhaps a natural starting place would be to ask 
President Rosengren
 and 
Governor Fischer  
for your committees to collaborate in thinking about what further work we 

could do or exercises we might have.  
I will talk with 
the 
staff
, and we™ll try to follow up and 
consider what more we could do 
in terms of
 research and analysis th
at would clarify what those 
situations might be 
in which 
it would be important for this Committee to be thinking about 

financial stability concerns in our design of monetary policy. 
Thank you all for a very useful, thoughtful discussion, and let™s take a b
reak for lunch.
 [Lunch recess]
 CHAIR YELLEN.   Okay, folks.  Let™s move along in our agenda to item 2, and I™m 
going to call on Simon to deliver the first part of the Desk briefing. 
MR. POTTER.
2  Thank you Madam Chair.  I™ll first cover global financial market 
developments.  Lorie will then review money markets and Desk operations, and I™ll 
conclude with a discussion of the results of the Desk™s recent strategic review of the 

foreign portfolio in
vestment framework.
 The stabilization and recovery in global risk asset prices that started in mid
-February continued into April.  This is reflected in a broad easing across key 
2 The materials used by Mr. Potter 
and Ms. Logan 
are appended to this transcript (appendix 
2). measure
s of domestic financial conditions over the intermeeting period, as shown in 
the top-
left panel of the first exhibit, with interest rates lower, the dollar weaker, 
equit
y pric
es higher, and credit spreads narrower.  However, compared 
with
 levels 
prevailing just 
before
 to last August™s RMB devaluation, financi
al conditions are
 more mixed.
 To gain insight into the relative importance of various
 factors driving global 
financial markets, we again included a special question 
in the Desk surveys, but this 
time 
we 
asked for a ranking of factors that calmed markets
, rather than the Ma
rch 
question on factors that had sparked volatility
.  To allow direct comparison with the 
results of the March question
, we asked respondents to rate the same set of factors.  
As shown in the top-right panel, on average, Chinese FX developments and volatility 

in oil markets again received high ratings, likely reflecting the calming effects of the 

moderation in RMB volatilit
y and the increase in oil prices above $40 over the 

period.  One notable feature of the results is that 
FOMC
 policy was identified as a 
more important factor in calming the volatility than it was in creating it. 
 The 

individual responses, not shown, are especially striking, with most respondents giving 

a higher rating to F
OMC
 policy as a calming rather than a sparking factor. 
 Moreover, 
in aggregate, buy-side respondents ranked Fed
eral Reserve
 policy above all other 

factors in explaining the recent decline 
in volatility.  A consistent feature in the 

Desk™s April surveys was
, buy-side respondents are expecting a more aggressive 
response from the FOMC to deviations from w
hat they perceive as mandate
-consistent trajectories.  More generally, numerous market participants have pointed to 

an increased focus by the FOMC on global financial developments over recent 

months as a significant change in emphasis.  Steve will discuss this more in his 

briefing. 
Some of this sentiment was clearly driven by the March FOMC eve
nts and the 
Chair™s subsequent speech and is directly reflected in a notable adjustment in market 

participants™ near
-term policy expectations.  More specifically, short
-term interest 
rates fell sharply 
around the March meeting, driven by declines in the me
dians of the 
SEP policy rate forecasts
 and the explicit reference in the statement to risks posed 
from abroad.  As shown in the middle-
left panel, the 
two
-year Treasury yield fell 
11 basis points on the day of the meetingŠ
a large adjustment
, though consist
ent with 
historical responses to the raw changes in the median SEP projections.  At the 
most 

recent 
meeting
, Thomas and I tried to reassure President Williams that markets would 
be more nuanced than just looking at the raw change in the median dots, partic
ularly 
given the expectations for a 25 
basis
 point drop in the median dots.  The record 
presented in the panel is more consistent with the headline 
effect
 of the SEP change 
being the driving force behind market reactions. 
The market-
implied probability of a rate hike at or before the June meeting 
declined significantly over the period, as shown by the light blue line in the middle-

right panel.  On the basis of 
current market pricing, the probability of a rate hike at 

the April meeting is effectively zero, a
nd the probability at the June meeting has 
declined to about 20 percent.  Responses to the Desk™s most recent surveys are in
 line 
with this market pricing, with the average probability assigned to a June hike at 22 
perce
nt.  Some market contacts think that
 for a rate increase to be delivered in June, 
the FOMC would have to start preparing the 
market as soon as this meeting™s 
statement.  For context, compared 
with
 the experience last year ahead of liftoff
, as shown in the dark blue line, the market-based pro
bability of a rate hike at or before 
the June meeting is currently below the probability of a hike that was priced in the 

same number of days 
ahead of the December meeting.
 The market-implied path of the policy rate continued to shift down over the 
period, as seen in the bottom-
left panel.  Prior to the March meeting, a 25
 basis
 point 
increase in the fed
eral
 funds 
rate 
target range was fully priced in by the fourth quarter 
of 2016, but this was pushed out to mid-2017 in response to key FOMC 

communications over the intermeeting period.  The survey-implied mean path of 

policy also shifted down.  In particular, in the scenario in which the policy rate does 

not return to the zero bound in the next three years, market participants anticipate the 

policy rate will 
be raised more gradu
ally than previously expected.
 Medium- and longer-term U.S. Treasury yields fell modestly, on net, over the 
period.  Market contacts largely attributed the declines to easier monetary polic
y abroad, which in turn prompted inflows into U.S. Treasur
y securit
ies, particularly 
because
, as shown in the bottom-
right panel, yields on Treasury securities are high 
relative to yields on sovereign bonds in other G-7 countries.  Over the period, 

declines in U.S.
 real yields outpaced declines in nominal yields, leaving market-
based 
measures of U.S. inflation compensation slightly higher.  Inflation compensation 

moved up with the more accommodative FOMC communications and gains in oil 

prices, then fell back somewha
t in response to
 below
-consensus inflation data in mid
-April.
 Lower domestic short
-term rate expectations led to a slight narrowing of interest 
rate differentials 
between
 the 
United States
 and other countries, as shown in the top-
left panel of 
exhibit 2.  The narrowing spread contributed to a decline of 2.6 percent 
in the Bloomberg Dollar Index over the intermeeting period.  
This
 brought the 
cumulative decline in the index over the p
ast two intermeeting periods to over 5 

percent
Šthe largest such decline sin
ce the financial crisis
, with significant declines 
associated with
 FOMC communication.  Incrementally contributing to the dollar 
move, some market participants discussed the possibility of an informal currency 

agreement brokered at the February G
-20 meeting. 
Both the weaker dollar and the more gradual expected path of U.S. policy rate 
increases were perceived by market contacts as supporting domestic risk asset prices 

over the period.  As shown in the 
top
-right panel, the S&P 500 returned to early 
August 2015 levels and is currently within 2 percent of its all-time nominal high.  

Further, option-adjusted spreads on high-yield corporate bonds continued to narrow, 

mirroring an increase in oil prices as the energy subindex accounted for the majority 

of the impr
ove
ment.
 Investors generally perceived China as less of a near
-term risk factor this 
intermeeting period than earlier in the year amid stability in the renminbi
Œdollar 
exchange
 rate, additional easing measures in China, and perceptions that easing 
measures
 are gaining traction. 
 Market participants suggested the broad depreciation 
of the U.S. dollar helped ease pressure on the RMB and lessened the urgency for 
Chinese officials to provide more clarity on its exchange rate policy.  Market 

expectations for a sharp devaluation of the renminbi declined, as reflected in the 

middle-
left panel
.  The relative cost of protection against a depreciation of the RMB, 
as implied by options, eased to the lowest level this year, and similar measures of 

volatility also subsided. 
Beyond China, sentiment toward emerging markets also perked up, supported by 
a trifecta of tailwinds: 
 lower U.S. interest rates, the stabilization in oil prices, and 
moderating concerns over China.  As shown in the 
middle
-right panel, EM equity and 
bond funds registered their first consecutive months of net inflows since 2014, and an 

index of broad EM 
ex China currencies increased against the dollar alongside the 
shift in capital flows.  The MSCI EM equity index rose 6.8 percent, extending its 

strong y
ear
-to-date performance despite the January financial market volatility.
  The 
global search for yield also benefited EM assets, as illustrated by Argentina™s return 

to the international bond market after a 15
-year absence
. 
Despite the continued stabilizati
on and recovery in risk assets over the period, 
concerns 
regarding
 longer-running global themes persist.  Market contacts continued 
to question 
the
 monetary policy efficacy of the Bank of Japan and, to a lesser extent, 
the European Central Bank.  Foreign exchange markets continue to send the strongest 

signal:  Since these two central banks added incremental accommodation in January 

and March, respect
ively, both the euro and yen have appreciated notably versus the 
dollar, as shown in the bottom-
left panel
.  In fact, despite the combined force of the 
yen™s recent sharp appreciation, expectations for the BOJ to add accommodation, and 
mounting expectation
s for intervention to weaken the currency, net positioning by 
speculative investors for further yen appreciation has reached its highest level since 

the 1990s.  For both the BOJ and ECB, market commentary continues to question the 

ability of available tools to realize their policy objectives.  Indeed, five
-year, 
five
-year 
inflation swap rates in the euro area and Japan have fallen since the two central banks 

announced their respective large easing measures, and banks have continued to 

struggle in the low-growth and negat
ive interest rate environment.
 Elsewhere, a new global risk came into focusŠ
the U.K
. referendum vote on 
European Union membership on June 23.  The outcome is currently seen as a close 

call by market participants.  As shown in the bottom-right 
panel, market participants 

seem to be pricing in substantial event risk in the foreign exchange market: 
 The 

relative cost of protection against a large sterling depreciation against the dollar rose 

discretely as the related option expiration
 date spanned
 the referendum date.  More 
directly relevant to U.S. monetary policy, several market participants have suggested 

the referendum could present an obstacle to any desire by the 
FOMC
 to tighten policy 

in June, 
due to
 the possibility of widespread volatility 
in European financial markets 

following a ﬁ
leaveﬂ vote in the referendum and amid a perceived increased 
responsiveness of monetary
 policy to global developments. 
MS. LO
GAN.  Our experience during the intermeeting period continued to 
suggest the operational
 framework has been effective in maintaining control over the 
effective federal funds rate.  As shown in the dark blue line in the top
-left panel of 
your next exhibit, the effective federal funds rate continued to print at the center of 
the target range ou
tside quarter
-end.  On March quarter-
end, the effective rate printed 
at 25 basis points, a smaller decline than the change observed on December 31. 
This control also continues to extend to other money market rates.  The overnight 
Treasury GCF rate, shown a
s the dark red line, mostly continued to trade in the upper 

half of the target range.  This series provides an indication of the rate at which some 

dealers that are perceived as less creditworthy can finance Treasury securities, and 
it is also a useful pro
xy for the rate at which some buy-
side firms obtain financing for 
these securities.  The broader overnight Treasury triparty repo rate, excluding GCF 

and Fed
eral Reserve
 RRPsŠthe rate at which stronger dealers tend to obtain 
financing from money funds and other cash investors, shown in the light red lineŠ

generally traded in the lower half of the range.  Treasury bill rates declined modestly, 

as shown by the light blue line, as Treasury bill issuance began its typical seasonal 

decline associated with 
the Apr
il tax receipts.
 The stability of the effective rate and other money market rates has come in the 
context of low usage of the overnight RRP facility, as shown in the top-right panel.  

Excluding the March quarter-end, when demand for the facility increased to 

$304 billion
, overnight RRP usage averaged less than $50 billion over the 
intermeeting period and reached a trough last seen in December 2013.  Market 

participants have attributed the low usage to the larger supply of
Šand, in most cases, 
higher rates of
fered byŠother money market investments.  As shown in the middle-
left panel, supply of these assets has increased since last year despite the more recent 

seasonal 
tick
-down in Treasury bill supply that I just mentioned. 
Although overnight RRP usage has been lowŠ
certainly lower than market 
participants™ expectations 
before 
liftoff
Šcash investors continue to suggest the 
facility enhances their bargaining power when negotiating rates on money market 

instruments.  In any case, low usage may not persist for two 
reasons. First, estimates 

are for Treasury bill supply to fall roughly another $120 billion through the end of 

June.  This should put further downward pressure on Treasury bill rates and limit 

investors™ reinvestment options when their existing bill holdin
gs mature, particularly 

for government money funds.  
Second, there is considerable uncertainty 
regarding 
how SEC money market fund reform, which takes full effect this October, will affect 

demand for different money market instruments, including Fed
eral Re
serve
 RRP.  As 
we™ve discussed in the past, the reforms are expected to lead to flows from prime 

funds into government funds, increasing demand for government securities and repo 

investments, which could include Fed
eral Reserve
 RRPs.  As shown in the dark blue 

bar in the middle-right panel, the conversion of prime funds into government funds is 

well under 
way
, with
 Fed
eral Reserve
 RRP counterparty prime funds totaling $225 
billion in AUM already having switched to become government funds.  About $800 

billion in prime funds, the red bar, have announced that they will not convert, while 

another $330 billion is yet to be determined.  So far, the money fund industry appears 
to be adj
usting smoothly to the new reforms.  However, it™
s important to note that it 
may not be clear for some time how end investors 
will respond to these changes.
 Money fund preparations for upcoming SEC reforms continue to 
affect
 the RRP 
counterparty list.  Over the intermeeting period, 
5 
RRP counterparties were removed 
from the list.  Money fund counterparties now total 105, with total RRP 

counterparties at 138.  I should note that the staff continues progress on the broader 

Desk counterparty framework, which we intend to bring to the Committee in the fall. 

As part of this framework
, we intend to clarify that our counterparties for foreign 
exchange operations will be required to adhere to best practices, including the 
FX 

global c
ode
 of conduct, which is in the process of being established under the 
umbrella of 
the BIS Foreign Exchange Working Group.  A draft of part of this c
ode
 will be released publicly in late May, and the full code will be finalized next year.
 As discussed in the memo sent to the Committee on April 19, we request 
that 
the 
Committee vote to re
new the standing liquidity swap lines with the Bank of Canada, 
Bank of England, Bank of Japan, 
ECB
, and Swiss National Bank, 
as well as the North 

America Framework Agreement, or NAFA, arrangements with the central banks of 

Canada and Mexico.  The liquidity 
swap lines and NAFA arrangements are a tangible 
and constructive signal of cooperation among central banks, and we view the costs of 

maintaining the lines as minimal.  The liquidity swap lines also support the approach 

that the Federal Reserve
, along with 
other major central banks
, endorsed that there are 
ﬁno technical obstacles
ﬂ to central bank capabilities to provide liquidity quickly to a 
systemically important financial market utility.  In this context, the Desk annually 

tests its NTO operational frame
work with the Bank of England and recently finalized 
a similar NTO fram
ework with the Bank of Canada. 
Importantly, reauthorization does not constitute automatic approval of any request 
to use the lines.  All drawings are subject to the approval of the Chai
r in consultation 
with the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and the Chair or subcommittee would 

consult with the FOMC, 
if possible
, before 
the initial drawing on the dollar or foreign 
currency liquidity swap lines.  Foreign central bank counterparts support the 
renewal 
of these arrangements.
 As shown in the bottom-
left panel, recent usage of the swap lines has been low.  
Other than
 occasional increases in the cost of dollar funding on quarter
-ends, it 
remains cost effective to obtain dollar funding through th
e FX swaps market.  That 

said, FX swap bases, which represent the cost of dollar funding via the FX swap 

market minus the cost of funding directly, have widened over the past two years, 

particularly for the euro and yen, as shown in the bottom-right panel and also 

discussed in Tealbook A.  Market participants do not believe this increase indicates 

acute dollar liquidity pressure.  Instead, they argue that divergent monetary policy 

stances have contributed to an imbalance between the demand for 
dollar-denominated 

assets and the supply of euro
- and 
yen
-denominated liabilities, and that increased 
balance sheet costs, in part as a result of regulatory reforms, have made it more costly 

for banks to provide the FX swaps liquidity needed to arbitrage the difference in 

dollar borrowing costs. 
On a fi
nal swaps-
related note, the Desk recently conducted a 
small
-value 
exercise 
to draw euros from the ECB.  The test was not fully successful, as a delay in trade 
execution and confirmation prevented the movement of euros before the close of the 

euro area™s payment system
Šthough in an actual period of financial stress, the 
ECB 
may have agreed to extend operating hours.  The experience highlights, though, the 

value of these exercises in identifying risks 
to our operations.  A summary of the 
other small
-value exercises conducted over the intermeeting period, along with a list 

of upcoming intended exercises, is shown in the appendix of your handout. 
Finally, to follow up on the previous meeting™s update on SOMA foreign 
exchange reserve
s holdings, I wanted to report that total interest income on the 

portfolio remained marginally 
positive in March, at about $100,000.  As shown in the 
top-
left panel of your final exhibit, we anticipate that income on the euro portfolio 
will turn
 negative in April
.  And although yen portfolio income will likely remain 
positive, we estimate that total
 income, which is not shown, will be negative.  April 

income will be reported publicly for the first time in late May in the financial 

statement of the Treasury Exchange Stabilization Fund, which the Desk manages in 

an identica
l manner to the SOMA portfoli
o. 
The experience of investing the foreign portfolio in a negative rate environment 
has highlighted the need for a more systematic framework for the investment of the 

portfolio, one that would be more flexible to changes in market conditions or 

policymaker
s™ preference
s.  The staff recently completed a strategic review of the 
portfolio with these goals in mind, 
and
 Simon will now discuss 
that in more detail.
 MR. POTTER.  As discussed in the memo I sent to the Committee on April 18 
and outlined in the top-
right panel, the review addressed the policy purpose for 
holding FX reserves, the investment approach, and the internal processes that support 
ongoing FX reserve management.  As we conducted the review, we received 
feedback from the Foreign Currency Subcommi
ttee and U.S. Treasury officials.  As 
Lorie just noted, it™s important to bear in mind that we manage the ESF and SOMA 

portfolios identically.  Both the size and currency composition of the portfolios were 

taken as given, al
though we intend to think furthe
r about those issues in a subsequent 
stage of the project.
 Historically, the Desk has managed the portfolio by laddering investments in 
eligible assets evenly across maturities, subject to a duration limit.  The staff™s 

proposed new investment framework es
tablishes a process for assessing 
policymakers™ investment preferences 
for the period ahead 
and uses a more robust 

risk
Œreturn methodology that 
incorporates those preferences.
 As described in the middle
-left panel, the new investment framework has five 
steps, each intended to be periodically reassessed. 
 The first step is to establish the 

policy purpose for holding FX reserves.  The staff™s assessment is that the purpose of 

the portfolio is to provide resources that can be used to conduct purchases of U.S. 

dollars, giving policymakers an important tool with which to counter disorderly 

conditions in FX markets and influence the exchange value of the dollar.  The Federal 
Reserve an
d the U.S. TreasuryŠthe U.S. monetary authoritiesŠ
have closely 
coordinated on such operations since 1962, 
although, of course, the Treasury has the 
lead role in setting U.S. exchange rate policy. 
The second step is to establish the investment objectives.  Our assessment is that
 the primary investment objective of the portfolio is liquidity, 
as the timing and size of 
an FX intervention cannot be known in advance.  We propose that the next objective 
is safety, which translates into a strong preference for low
-risk investments, and that 
the final objective is return, which suggests that the portfolio should be invested to 

earn the highest expected rate of return 
in view of 
policymakers™ risk preferences.
 The third step is to determine funding needs, estimating the amount of funding 
that U.S. monetary authorities are likely to require in the event of an intervention to 

purchase dollars.  
In view of 
recent history, our current estimates for funding needs 
are based on the assum
ption that U.S. monetary authorities would conduct an 
intervention to either reinforce the signal of a foreign monetary authority or reduce 

FX market volatility.  To arrive at an estimated funding need, we considered the 

history of such reinforcing or market
-calming interventions and scaled up the 
transaction amounts to account for growth in FX markets.  This approach suggests a 

funding need of $8 billion across the SOMA and ESF portfolios, or about 5 billion 

euros or 275 billion yen. 
The fourth step is to establish appropriate risk constraints 
on the basis of 
policymakers™ willingness to bear market, credit, and liquidity risk.  Some of the 

considerations here are given as the fourth item in the middle-
left panel.
  These
 were 
discussed
 in detail in the memo, and I will just focus on the risk
Œreturn constraint 
produced by the need to assure, with high probability, adequate intervention capacity.  

To analyze 
this
, we focused on the concept of expected shortfall from model returns 
at the f
irst percentile.  We recommend limiting the expected decrease in intervention 
capacity in this adverse market scenario to 4 percent or
 less.
 The final step is to formulate an asset allocation for the funding needs and 
investment risk preferences we™ve defi
ned.  This step provides a benchmark 
allocation for managing the portfolio that reflects policymakers™ risk tolerance.  We 

place an additional constraint of no asset sales to ac
hieve the new asset allocation.
 Some features of the new portfolio allocation a
re shown in the middle-right panel.  
For the euro portfolio, the shift would increase holdings of cash and longer-
term 
sovereign debt.  Relative to the current portfolio, the resulting asset allocation would 

increase the projected one
-year market return fr
om negative 23 basis points to 
positive 12 basis points.  It also involves some increase in portfolio risk.  For 

example, if total liquidation of the portfolio was necessary in a very adverse 

environment, intervention capacity would be reduced by 200 milli
on euros 
from that 
of 
the current portfolio.
 For the yen portfolio, the new allocation is affected by the fact that the Bank of 
Japan currently offers a rate of 
0 percent on our deposits despite the negative yields 
on much of 
the universe of Japanese sovereign debt.  In contrast, our deposits with 
the euro system earn, on the margin, negative 55 basis points.  
Due to
 the higher 
return on BOJ deposits, we propose moving maturing holdings into cash.  This 
recommendation would need to be revisited in the event 
that 
the BO
J lowered the 
interest rate offered on official deposits to
 the U.S. monetary authorities. 
As I noted, this allocation, along with our recommendations about the risk 
constraints and their recommended settings, reflect discussions with the Forei
gn 
Currency Subcommittee and U.S. Treasury officials.  We welcome your feedback as 

well.  Our goal is to implement the new framework later this year. 
 These changes to 

the framework also intersect with another effort currently under
 way to revise the set 

of foreign authorization documents, which we will return to at a future meeting.  The 

revisions to the governing documents will require a vote by the Committee. 
Thank you, Madam Chair.  That concludes our prepared remarks.  W
e would be 
happy to take questions. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Lacker.
 MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I just want to say that I applaud the Desk 
staff for undertaking a rigorous look at how we manage the foreign exchange reserves we find 
ourselves with.  
They
™ve grounded their appro
ach in what seems like a reasonably sensible set of 
principles, and I think that should protect us from undue criticism regarding stewardship of these 

funds.  
I think that
™s important.
 I want to point out, though, that the magnitude of the estimate of the funding needs just 
highlights what an anachronistic arrangement these funds represent.  I find it hard to believe that 

anyone believes 
a $6 billion intervention in the euro-
dollar market would make a meaningful 
difference
 and
 would leave some imprint.  
Thi
s 
is trivial
 in relation 
to the size of U.S. reserve 
account balances or European reserve account balances.  And under current operating procedures 

when
 we set the IOER
 rate
, it
™s hard to see how monetary conditions would change in the United 
States
.  So it would be exactly like the old regime in which sterilized foreign exchange 

interventions were basically meaningless.
  Now, the only real effect it could have is if it signaled 
something about the future course of monetary policy.  But because 
the 
Treasury is 
acknowl
edged to be in the lead and have the authority over U.S. dollar policy, 
it™s
 sort of 
problematic for the independence of our monetary policy if we™re perceived to be bending future 
monetary policy at the behest of the Treasury™s desires about dollar policy.
 In Richmond 
we™ve complained about these arrangements for a couple of decades now.  
We don™t expect a lot of action soon
.  [Laughter]  
But
 at some point we need to start educating 
policymakers and the public about these arrangements
, that 
the operations really are 
anachronistic and don™t really do any good, and maybe convince them we could eliminate the 

funds, give the money back to the Treasury, or 
do something else with them.
  Thank you, 
Madam Chair.
 MR. POTTER.  
Just to support President Lacker™s point a little bit,
 if we used the whole 
portfolio tomorrow, it would be less than 2 percent of the daily flow in euro and yen with the 

dollar cross.  So there
™s some evidence to support what you said. 
MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Mr. Manager.  [Laughter] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Fair enou
gh.  But it™
s also been little used
.  And my sense is that 
when it has been used
Šand, if I™
m not mistaken
, 
the last time we intervened was following the 
Japanese earthquake
.  And it was a coordinated, 
small intervention by the G
-7.  O
ur participation 
was c
entrally symbolic to support the Japanese
.  A
nd these do seem like symbolic amounts to 
me.  In that sense
, I take your point
.  B
ut sometimes symbolism and coordination do make a 
difference
.  And we™
re not forced to follow 
the T
reasury.  We typically have gone along with 
them.  But, aside from that, has there been any intervention at all over the past 20 years? 
MR. POTTER.  
The last intervention before that was September 2000
, when w
e purchased euros 
in conjunction w
ith 
other central banks and the U.S. Treasury.  
That was a time 
when there were some doubts about the euro.  Its exchange-rate value was down in the mid-80s, 
and we got
 together and tried to convince people with a signalŠ
not about future monetary 
policy, 
but I
 think that we were happy to acquire euros.  
So those are the two 
most 
recent 
interventions.  If you go back to the 1980s, they™
re much larger.  I have an example of 
the 
equivalent of $80 billion over a few days when it was announced that Chairman Volc
ker 
would 
not be reappointed, 
I believe.
 MR. LACKER.  
ﬁSymbolic
ﬂ is 
a good word for it. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there other comments or questions on anything that Simon and 
Lorie covered?  
[No response]  
Okay.  Seeing nothing, I am going to ask for separate votes on 
the NAFA arrangement and 
the liquidity swap agreements.  Let™s start with the NAFA 

arrangement, our standing swap lines with Canada and Mexico.  Do I have a motion to approve? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved.
 CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Are there any comm
ents on those?  
[No response]  
Okay
, then I™m going to ask 
for 
a vote.  This is only for voters.  All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes]  Any 
opposed?  [No response]  Okay.  So the NAFA arrangement is approved.  
Let™s move along to 
the liquidity swap agreements.  Do I have a motion to approve? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved.
 CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  And then 
again,
 any comments on these?  [No response]  
All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes]  Any opposed?  [No response]  
Okay
, great.  And, finally, I need 
a vote to ratify domestic market operations.  Do I have a motion? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  So moved.
 CHAIR YELLEN.  All in favor?  [Chorus of ayes]  
Okay
, great.  So then we™re going to 
move now into our go-round on the economic and financial situation.  I™
d like to cal
l on Bill 
Wascher to begin the briefing. 
MR. WASCHER.
3  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™ll be referring to the set of 
materials with the cover page that is titled ﬁThe U.S. Outlook.ﬂ 
This is now the third year in a row that I™ve presented the staff economic fo
recast 
at the April FOMC meeting.  And it™s the third year in a row that I™ve had to warn 
you that real GDP growth in the first quarter will be close to zero
Šor possibly even 
negative.  For all our sakes, I might ask David Wilcox to get somebody else to do 
this 

briefing next April.  [Laughter]
 In any event, the incoming data on spending and production for the first quarter 
have once again surprised us to the downside.  Panel 
1 of your forecast summary 

exhibit shows how various nowcasts of first-quarter real GDP growth have evolved 

since the time
 of the March Tealbook.  These nowcasts include the Board staff™s 

weekly judgmental forecast as well as various model
-based estimates produced at the 
Board and elsewhere in the System.  As you can see from the black line, we have 

reduced our judgmental est
imate of first
-quarter real GDP growth to an annual rate of 
just ½
 percent, down from about 2 percent in the March Tealbook.  Nowcasts 
generated using our dynamic factor modelŠ
the red line
Šhave also drifted lower on 
net, and the model™s point estimate is not very different from our Tealbook forecast.  

There is, of course, still a considerable amount of uncertainty about what actually 

happened last quarterŠa fact that is apparent both from the range of nowcasts 

implied by other System models (the blue dashed lines) as well as from the gray 

shaded region, which gives the 70 percent confidence interval surrounding the Board 

staff™s factor model estimate.  Th
e BEA will publish its advance estimate of first
-quarter GDP growth on Thursday. 
As we did in the previous two years, we have treated the weakness in first
-quarter 
GDP 
growth as largely temporary.  As you can see from the black line in panel 2, we 
expect r
eal GDP to rise at an annual rate of 2¼
 percent in the second quarter, a pace 
that is little different from our March forecast.  In coming to this assessment, we have 
taken a strong signal from last month™s employment report, which indicates that the 

labor 
market continued to improve at a pace that was closely in line with our 
expectation from the March Tealbook and suggests to us that the economy™s 

fundamentals remain basically sound.  Our second-quarter GDP growth forecast 

doesn™t appear to be wildly at o
dds with the estimates from the staff™s factor model or 

the available estimates from the System models, although the size of the confidence 

interval 
surrounding 
our factor model forecast gives a good idea of how little hard 

evidence on current
-quarter spending and production weŠor the modelsŠhave to go 
on at this point.
 This morning we received the March advance report on capital goods orders and 
shipments, which looked to be a little weaker than we were expecting.  Our 

preliminary analysis suggests that th
ese data would not affect our first-
quarter GDP 
3 The materials used by Mr. 
Wascher
 are appende
d to this tra
nscript (appendix 3
). estima
te but would subtract one-
tenth or two from our projection 
of 
second
-quarter 
growth. 
Although our forecast of 
near
-term real GDP 
growth 
after the first quarter is not 
very different from our previous pr
ojection, the 
level 
of real GDP is somewhat lower.  
However, as we have often done on previous occasions when the labor market and 
spending data have sent conflicting signals about the state of the economy, we have 

attributed some of the first
-quarter weak
ness in real GDP to statistical noise and made 
a downward adjustment to potential output that, in turn, yields a correspondingly 

smaller revision to our estimate of the output gap.  As a result, our judgmental 

estimate of the economy™s current cyclical pos
ition is only a little weaker than what 
we had written down in March. 
Over the remainder of the medium term, our outlook for real GDP growthŠ
panel 3Šis slightly higher than in our March projection.  Current and expected 

financial conditions
Šincluding the l
ower assumed exchange value of the dollar, a 
lower path of long-
term interest rates, and a higher level of equity prices over the 
medium term
Šare now a little more supportive of economic growth than they were 

in our previous forecast.  Hence, our unemploym
ent rate forecast
Španel
 4Š
is a 
touch lower than in March. 
The bottom two panels of this exhibit provide a small window into the question of 
how widely shared the economic recovery has been by comparing the extent to which 

different racial and ethnic groups
 have experienced a narrowing in two measures of 
labor market slack that we often highlight.  I™ll start with panel 5, which plots the 

unemployment rate for blacks or African Americans (the blue line), Hispanics or 

Latinos (the red line), and whites (the g
reen line).  Note that these groups are not 
mutually exclusive, in that both the black and white categories include some 
Hispanics.  As is typical in a recession, unemployment rates for the two minority 
groups rose more sharply than for whites in 2008 and 2009, peaking at nearly 

17 percent for blacks and at almost 13 percent for Hispanics.  The unemployment 

rates for those groups then fell more quickly over the recovery, eventually bringing 

the differentials in the jobless rates essentially back down to where they were before 

the recession.  While that™s obviously good news, the fact that the blackŒ
white 
unemployment rate differential is no smaller than it was 15 years ago is more 

discouraging. 
Panel 6 provides a similar set of comparisons for those who are 
working part time 
and would like a full-time job but can™t find one.  As for unemployment, the 

percentages of employed blacks and Hispanics who are working part time for 

economic reasons rose more than for whites 
following the 2007 business 
cycle peak
, wit
h the run
-up particularly steep for Hispanics.  The shares for all three groups have 
come down during the expansion.  However, for both blacks and Hispanics, the gap 

relative to whites remains higher than it was in the years preceding the Great 

Recession. 
 The panels
 on the next page summarize the inflation outlook.  Our projections 
regarding 
both total PCE inflation
Španel 7Š
and core PCE price inflation
Španel 8Š
are little changed 
from
 March.  The recent data on core prices, which 
include the BEA™s estimates
 through February and our translation of the March CPI 

and PPI, have come in consistent with our expectations, and we continue to project 

core PCE inflation to step down modestly over the course of this year.  This pattern 

is, in our view, partly attributa
ble to the presence of residual seasonality in these data, 
which causes core inflation in the first part of the year to come in higher than average, 

followed by below
-average readings later in the year.  Additionally
Šand in line with 
our interpretation at 
the time of the March Tealbook
Šwe think that core inflation 
was temporarily boosted in the first quarter by several erratic components of the price 

indexes.  This view seems consistent with the dropback in these components in the 

March CPI data.  Beyond this year, inflation is projected to move up to 1.8 percent by 

2018, as the restraint from energy and import prices wanes and as resource utilization 

tightens further in an environment of reasonably stable long-run inflation 

expectations. 
The next two panels 
reproduce the April Tealbook™s inflation monitor exhibits, 
which show the sources of the revisions that we have made since December to the 

outlook for total and core PCE inflation.  As indicated by the black lines in the panels, 

our total and core inflation projections are, so far, not very different from our 

December Tealbook forecasts.  In addition, with the exception of a small upward 

revision to the contribution that we expect import prices to make to this year™s core 

inflation rate
Šthe blue portion of 
the second stacked bar in panel
 10Šthese panels 
don™t look too different from the corresponding charts that David Wilcox showed you 

at the March meeting.
 As you may recall, in our previous projection we made a downward revision of 
5 basis points to our es
timate of underlying inflation
Šthe gray portion of the stacked 
bars in panel
 10Šin response to the recent low readings from some market
- and 
survey-based indicators of longer-term expected inflation.  As you can see from the 

solid black line in panel 11, t
he preliminary estimate of median longer
-term expected 
inflation from the Michigan survey moved down 0.2 
percentage point in April, 

returning this series to the very low level that prevailed at the time of the March 

Tealbook. 
Finally, the next page resurre
cts the so
-called Lockhart dashboard that provides a 
high-
level summary of some of the key pieces of information that will be available to 
you at the next two FOMC meetings.  Specifically, the data that will first be available 

at the June meeting are in th
e gold
-shaded region of the table, and the additional 
observations that will become available in time for the July meeting are shaded in red.  

The data that are newly available for today™s meeting are shaded in blue.  The April 

Tealbook projections of these variables are shown in regular font, and the 

corresponding projections from the March Tealbook are shown in italics.  On a 

3-month-change basis, we anticipate that headline PCE inflation will pick up over the

near term as energy prices stop declining.  A
s I noted earlier, however, core inflation
is expected to step down.  On a 12-month-
change basis, we expect total inflation to
run at or below 1 percent and core inflation to edge down to 1½ 
percent.  On the real 
side, we expect that job gains will continu
e at a solid pace and that the unemployment 
rate will remain around 5
 percent.  Although revised estimates of Q1 GDP growth 
will be available at each of the next two FOMC meetings, the BEA™s initial estimate 

of second-quarter growth will not be published u
ntil just after the July FOMC 
meeting.  However, if our forecast 
of 
a second
-quarter pickup turns out to be broadly 
correct, we might expect to see some evidence for it in the higher-frequency spending 

data that we will receive between now and the June mee
ting.  Steve will now continue 
the briefing. 
MR. KAMIN.
4  Thank you, Bill.  I™ll be referring to the materials titled ﬁThe 
International Outlook.ﬂ 
Your first panel
 of that exhibit
 shows the results of a word search of FOMC 
minutes over the past 1½ years a
nd indicates the number of times
 that the words 
ﬁdollar,ﬂ ﬁChina,ﬂ or ﬁglobalﬂ appeared in the summary of your discussions.  

Although we in the International Finance Division welcome the increasing attention 

you™ve been giving international matters of late
, we realize that this attention reflects 
concern and not satisfaction with the global situation, and we have been asking what 

it would take for the word count to go down in future meetings.  Accordingly, we™ve 

developed the handy checklist shown in panel 2 to help monitor foreign developments 

and assess whether the headwinds to the U
.S. economy coming from abroad might be 
abating.  Feel free to check the boxes as I go along, but don™t worryŠwe are not 

adding 
this
 to the SEP.  
[Laughter] 
For us to have some 
assurance that the drag 
arising 
from the foreign sector is 
easing, we first need to see some abatement in the dollar™s rise and some pickup in 

the pace of foreign GDP growth.  Here we can check the ﬁYes
ﬂ box.  As you are well 
aware, the dollar has been de
clining since late January; I™ll be discussing its future 
trajectory shortly.  And as shown in panel 3, after growing at a very subdued 1¾ 

percent 
pace in 2015, foreign economic growth is estimated to have picked up to 
a 2¼ 

percent 
rate in the first quarte
r.  Much of that increase was concentrated in Canada, 
which is starting to shake off some of its oil-induced woes and which has a very large 

weight in our trade
-weighted 
foreign GDP 
aggregate.  But 
economic 
growth appears 
to have picked up in other economies, too, including in the euro area and emerging 

Asia excluding China, and indications are that output at least stopped falling in Japan.  

To be sure, Chinese 
economic 
growth fell, by our estimates, from 7 percent at an 

annual rate through most of last year to 5½ percent in the first quarter, but we and 

everyone else had largely anticipated that slowing.  A
nd with indicators for March 
coming in reasonably strong, 
we™
re not taking a very 
strong 
negative signal from the 
first
-quarter slowing.
 Our second condition for an easing of foreign headwinds is some greater 
confidence that, barring significant new shocks, global growth will firm further, 
as predicted in our baseline projection.  Here, too, we are checking the 
ﬁYes
ﬂ box, 
4 The materials used by Mr. 
Kamin
 are appende
d to this transcript (appendix 4
). although this i
s by no means 
a slam
 dunk.  To begin with, after progressively revising 
down the forecast 
of foreign 
economic growth in recent Tealbooks, this round we™
re 
actually revising up our Q1 estimate, 
and our projection further out is 
little
 changed.  
So, all told, that™s posit
ive relative to earlier experiences.  
Additionally, as Simon has 
described, throughout global financial markets, investor sentiment has continued to 
improve, equity prices are up, and credit spreads are down, all of which should 

support growth.  As a relat
ed matter, oil prices
, shown in panel 4, extended their 
previous gains over the intermeeting period.  Ordinarily, we view rising oil prices as a 

negative for global spending and 
economic 
growth; however, at very low levels, 

declines in oil prices may raise
 financial stability concerns and induce rapid belt
-tightening in oil-
reliant economies
.  T
hus, the recent increase in prices may be a 
positive for the global economy.  Finally, our improved confidence in the economic 

growth outlook is bolstered by the res
ults of our statistical model of the probability of 
foreign recessions.  As indicated in panel 6, reflecting stronger incoming data and 

financial market settings, we estimate that the probability of a generalized recession 

abroad occurring over the next 12 
months fell from its February peak to near its 

unconditional mean over the past four decades. 
We recognize
, however, 
that all
 of these positive indications could turn on a dime 
if investor sentiment turns south again.  Accordingly, our third condition for 
an easing 

of global headwinds is some confidence that global financial markets have become 

more resilient
, if not to substantial international shocks, at least to the kinds of minor 

disturbances that the world economy generates as a matter of course.  Here we can at 

best check the box labeled 
ﬁMaybe.ﬂ  The red line in p
anel 7
Šthat™s on your next 
exhibitŠ
shows a measure of financial stress we developed for global financial 

markets 
on the basis of 
a range of indicators
, including money market rates, bond 
spreads, stock market volatility, and credit default swaps.  The upswing in stresses 

evident earlier this year reflected the market™s response to a relatively modest 

depreciation in the RMB and some weak incoming macrodata from around the world
.  
Even at the 
time, it seemed that the market had overreacted to these developments.  
The subsequent upswing reflected some correction of this excessive pessimism along 

with reduced downward pressure on the RMB, which was aided by the broad decline 

in the dollar
; some b
etter macrodata
; and revised expectations of 
FOMC
 policy, of 
which I™ll say more shortly.  More recently, markets have largely shrugged off such 

concerns as Brexit and the failure of the OPEC production talks.  All told, investor 

sentiment is showing a few
 glimmers of increased resilience, but hardly enough for us 
to rule out a future resurgence 
in stresses.
 In particular, we are cognizant of the possibility that, with declines in expected 
U.S. policy rates and the recent broad depreciation of the dollar having helped calm 

markets earlier this year, a return to policy tightening could trigger a return to 

turbulent market conditions.  While we view this as a prominent downside risk, 

however, we have not built it into the baseline.  As shown by the blue line in panel 7, 

which measures the expected 24
-month
-ahead fed
eral
 funds rate, anticipations of 
tighter monetary
 policy do not always depress global markets.  The heightened 
expectation of monetary policy tightening in mid
-2013, highlighted by the first 

shaded region in the panel, did indeed trigger the taper tantrum,
 as many investors 
who™d b
een asleep at the wheel
 were apparently jolted awake by Chairman 
Bernanke™s statements.  However, once awakened, investors took the rise in expected 
policy rates in the first half of 2014
Šhighlighted in the second shaded regionŠ
with 
greater equanimity, and financial stresses act
ually subsided during this period.  By the 
same token, according to many observers, the downshift in the March SEP™s dot plot 

was so calming because it convinced market participants that the 
FOMC
 was not on a 
preset tightening course but would be responsive to global economic and financial 

developments.  Accordingly, it seems reasonable that gradual future policy tightening 

would be accepted without undue distress by markets as long as the tightening 

appeared to be merited by firming economic conditions. 
Of course, even if F
OMC
 policy tightening does not trigger market turbulence, it 
could still boost the dollar.  Our forecast, panel 8, is premised on the f
ederal
 funds 
rate rising 3 percentage points by end-2018, while market expectations are generally 

for a
 smaller rise.  We assume that as market participants become surprised by the 
pace of F
OMC
 tightening, the dollar will rise about 4 percent in real terms against the 
currencies of other advanced economies
, or AFEs. 
 This projection is based on a 

regression
 of changes in the dollar on changes in the f
ederal
 funds rate around FOMC 
announcements, with a 100 basis point surprise to the f
ederal
 funds rate estimated to 
cause a 1.5 percent rise in the dollar.  The tightening of F
OMC
 policy is also expected 
to buoy 
the dollar against EME currencies, but this effect is offset by our anticipation, 

shown in panel 9, that China will hold the RMB nearly flat against the dollar for the 

next year or so before allowing it to appreciate as capital inflows return.  All this s
aid, 
we certainly recognize the possibility that the dollar could rise much faster than we 

are projecting either because the dollar responds more sharply to expectations for 

tightening monetary policy than our econometric estimates would suggest, because 
FOMC
 tightening does indeed trigger market turmoil, because downward pressures 
on China™s RMB reassert themselves, or because downside risks to the foreign 
economy materialize.
 This brings us to our last condition for improved confidence in the foreign 
outlook:  Have the fundamental risks to the global economy that so worried us earlier 

this year substantially abated?  Here we must certainly check the ﬁN
oﬂ box.  To begin 
with, we have a relatively new risk to add to our list
:  Brexit, which may yet disrupt 
markets as the June 23 referendum draws near, especially if it starts looking more 
likely the vote will be for 
the United Kingdom
 to leave the EU.  Even more saddening 
is the return of that old chestnut, Grexit, as the IMF, EU, and Greece square off over 

whether Greece will be granted debt relief, posing further challenges to European 
unity.  Much more consequential for the global economy would be ﬁChexitﬂŠ
that is, 
an exit of China from its path of gradual deceleration into a steeper decline as 

mounting corp
orate debts and an overexposed banking system lead to financial crisis.  

And all of these downside risks become more worrisome in an environment 
in which 

many central banks are already providing extraordinary stimulus and most 

governments see little capaci
ty or inclination to provide fiscal support.  We anticipate 
that the BOJ will announce further 
policy 
accommodation at its 
next 
meeting, and the 
ECB could add to its stimulus through more asset purchases or cutting interest rates 
further into negative terr
itory.  However, it™s doubtful that such measures would be 
up to the task of stabilizing their economies in the face of significant new shocks.
 So, to sum up, in terms of our conditions for a reduction of the time you spend 
discussing foreign developments and risks, we™ve got a strong 
ﬁYes,
ﬂ 
a weak ﬁYes,
ﬂ 
a ﬁMaybe,ﬂ 
and a ﬁN
o.ﬂ  All told, we™re making progress toward an abatement of 
foreign
 headwinds, but I think we have a ways to go.  And now Nellie will continue 
our presentation. 
MS. LIANG.
5  Thank you, Steve.  I™ll be referring to materials 
titled
 ﬁFinancial 
Stability Developments
.ﬂ 
In our current assessment, we view that leverage and maturity transformation in 
the financial sector are subdued relative to historical levels, and aggregate pri
vate 
nonfinancial sector credit is modest.  These indicators suggest a financial system that 
is pretty resilient, consistent with not having observed significant funding stresses or 

margin calls earlier this year when risky asset prices fell and volatility
 rose sharply.  
Since then, prices of risky assets have rebounded notably, valuation pressures have 

risen somewhat, and term premiums remain very low, though 
higher than
 in early 

2013.  And, in terms of risks to financial stability 
that 
reflect both vulner
abilities and 
shocks, the underlying sources for many of the recent shocks have not changed 

materially, as discussed by Steve and Simon 
earlier
, which suggests volatility could 
flare up again. 
Starting with
 your first exhibit and now considering 
asset valu
ations, the forward 
P/E ratio for the S&P 500 in the top-left panel has moved back up, as stock prices 

have risen sharply since mid-February 
while
 earnings have been marked down 
notably.  The forward P/
E for stocks is at 
about the 80
th percentile
, suggesting 
somewhat 
stretched valuations, and the VIX
, the implied volatility,
 not shown
, has 
dropped to multiyear lows.  As shown to the right, the high-yield bond spread has 

narrowed but remains on the wide side for a nonrecessionary period, reflecting 

concerns 
that corporate credit quality has shown signs of 
some 
deteriorati
on, even 
outside the energy sector.  The level also reflects somewhat 
wide risk premiums, as 

measured by the far
-term 
forward spread, the green line. 
In commercial real estate, capitalization
 rates for all property types are at or near 
their historic lows.  As detailed in a staff memo on the CRE market, valuation 

pressures are notable, but credit levels remain moderate, and recent robust growth 

may slow, 
as terms and standards have tightened. 
 Under a stress scenario with a 

sharp decline in prices, we expect losses to be felt most keenly at smaller community 

banks, 
as larger banks are more diversified and have been stressed for such a 

scenario, and the financing of CMBS 
currently 
does not appear to be highly levered.  

Overall, our assessment is that this market does not currently raise broad financial 
5 The materials used by Ms. Liang are appended to this transcript (appendix 5).
 stabili
ty concerns, but downside risks would become more substantial if credit growth 
or leveraged CMBS positions were to pick up. 
Moving to the r
ight, the black line is a summary quantitative measure of risk 
appetite back to 1975 that is in the spirit of the quantitative indicators we started 
showing last year.  This measure reflects risk premiums and lending standards across 

four asset classes:  r
esidential mortgages, business credit, commercial real estate, and 
equity markets.  
Because
 it was designed to provide consistent metrics over a 
reasonably long period, it does not fully capture trends for 
some financial 

innovations, 
such as
 the junk bond 
market and securitization.  It is shown as a 
percentile, with a reading of 100 corresponding to the maximum, 
0 for the minimum, 

and 50 for the median.  The Q1 estimate is near the median, down a bit from last fall, 

consistent with our assessment that valua
tion pressures 
have
 eased.
 The blue dashed 
line in the chart plots the number of asset classes whose 
valuation metric is ½ standard deviation above its historical mean since 1975.  It 

varies between 0, when none of the four components are elevated, and 4, when all 

four are elevated.  The Q1 estimate shows that only one of the four categories, the 

commercial real estate market, is notably high
.  I
f we assumed the current stock price 
and volatility 
measures
 held through Q2, all else being equal, the equity market 

would also be elevated.  Looking back, it is not unusual for risk appetite to be high in 

one or 
two
 asset classes, but it is unusual for 
three
 or four 
to be high at the same time.  
This configuration occurred consistently between 2005 and early 2007, when the risk 

appetite measure 
was
 close to its maximum of 100.  The insight is that when this 
measure peaked, it was because risk premiums and lending standards were unusually 

accommodative across all four asset classes, not just becau
se house prices were high.  
This measure
 might be useful 
for 
gaug
ing 
systemic concerns, as
 it reflects both the 
level and the correlation of high risk appetite across different asset classes.
 In ongoing research, positive impulses to this measure in a 
vector autoregression 
framework are, not surprisingly, expansionary for the economy in the near 
term
, as higher values reflect more favorable conditions.  However, we find a similar impetus 

also leads to a rise in 
the 
private nonfinancial credit-
to-GDP gap 
over a longer 
horizon, starting with about a four-
quarter lag, suggesting a buildup in vulnerability if 
the gap is already high.  High credit-
to-GDP gaps, measured relative to a long
-term 
trend, have been found in cross-country studies to be a robust indi
cator of recessions, 
and this measure has been supported by Basel for setting the level of the 

countercyclical capital buffer.  The relationship between risk appetite and future 

credit gaps provides a reason for keeping an eye on asset valuations. 
As shown
 in the bottom left, the private nonfinancial credit-
to-GDP gap at the end 
of 2015 is still below its estimated long
er-term
 trend, though there is uncertainty 
about what is an appropriate trend line.  As shown to the right, the gap differs notably 

for corp
orate businesses
, the 
red
 line
, and households, 
the blue.
  The very large 
negative gap for households raises the question of whether all o
f the current gap is 
cyclical.
 With reg
ard
 to the financial 
sector, considered in
 exhibit 2
, leverage appears 
modest, and risk transformations of various types, as best we can tell, appear low 
relative to recent history amid ongoing structural reforms.  As shown in the top left, 

stock prices of the large domestic LISCC firms fell especially sharply in January
 and 
February 
on negative earnings news related to concerns about falling oil prices, risks 

to economic growth and negative interest rates, and the health of 
some 
foreign banks.  
CDS for these firms
, the black line, rose but have since fallen back to fairly low 
levels.
  Price
-to-book ratios, shown to the right, the orange bar, 
currently are lower 
than at the end of 2015, the blue bar, and 2014
, the red
.  We interpret the price
-to-book ratios that have persisted below 1 for 
a few
 firms 
for a while
 as reflecting 
concerns 
for earnings prospects and longer-
term shareholder returns, rather tha
n immediate solvency concerns.
 The middle-
left panel provides a 
high
-level
 overview of credit provision by 
domestic financial intermediaries, 
as 
measured by their holdings of loans and bonds 

to the nonfinancial sector.  
While
 the credit market debt
-to-GDP
 ratio has 
risen
 substantially in recent decades, bank credit, the dark blue, has been roughly steady.  

Of course, banks are more important to the financial system than suggested by this 

share, as
 they provide backup lines, originate and warehouse loans for securitization, 

provide financing in various forms to investors, or enable hedging as derivative 

counterparties.  Still, the chart emphasizes that 
there™s much
 to pay attention to 
outside 
the banking sector to assess resilience.
 Looking back, the strongest growth in credit provision by other intermediaries 
leading up to the fin
ancial crisis was at the GSEs
, the light blue, 
and at ABS issuers
, the 
red
 shaded area
.  Recently, ABS issuance has been fairly modest.  As noted to the 
right, new rules have been adopted that require risk retention and greater disclosure, 

which should imp
rove the stability of t
hese structures.
 Looking back at the chart, as shown by the orange, long-term mutual funds have 
about doubled since the crisis.  This growth could be stability enhancing 
as more 
credit is provided by less-
leveraged entities, although
 in 
recent years there™s been
 rapid growth of some mutual funds that use derivatives heavily and of bond and loan 

funds that hold less-
liquid assets whi
le offering daily redemptions.  
The 
Financial 
Stability Oversight Council
 issued a statement last week, 
and as noted to the right, for 
money 
fund leverage, 
they supported recent SEC proposals for more data reporting 
and disclosure, more robust risk-
management practices, and limits on
 leverage 
through derivatives.  In addition, to reduce liquidity and redempt
ion risk, the 
council 
indicated steps should be considered to strengthen funds™ risk-
management practices 
to account for broad market stress, increase clarity 
about the limits 
for permissible 

less
-liquid asset holdings, and facilitate the use of tools to r
educe first
-mover 
advantages. 
The recent growth of bond mutual funds holding less-
liquid assets raises concerns 
about the resilience of market liquidity if widespread redemptions were to force sales. 

We recently
 looked at bonds of oil companies, 
as an exa
mple
, of bonds under stress, 
and our assessment is that trading in the secondary corporate bond market functioned 
pretty
 well in recent months.  As shown in the bottom left, trading volumes for oil 
bonds have trended up since 2014 and did not dry up in recent months.  
Bid
-asked
 spreads for oil bonds, the red line in the right panel, also rose by more than for non-
oil bonds, the blue line, but increases in bid-
asks
 are not unexpected, 
as dealers 
require higher compensation for more volatile prices.  We also didn™t hear from 

market participants of 
serious increased difficulties in executing transactions.  Even 

so, 
as we do not capture trades that do not get completed and adjustments to market-

making models continue, we will want to stay attentive to whether market liquidity is 

suf
ficiently resilient to stress.
 Thank you.  That concludes our prepared remarks.  We™d be happy to respond to 
your questions. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Are there questions for any of the briefers?  Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Steve referred to markets as largely having 
shrugged off Brexit risks.  This is consonant with what I™ve 
heard directly from some market 
actors.  But Simon, in his presentation, noted a fairly significant increase in demand for 

protection against pound depreciation against the dollar, apparently with an eye toward the 

upcoming referendum.  How do I reconcile those two observations? 
MR. KAMIN.  Right.  I will say that I pondered whether I should use that phrase, and I 
received support from my colleagues to do so, with one exception, 
which is in 
FX markets.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.
 MR. KAMIN.  
In 
FX markets, they 
expect 
that 
the bad voteŠ
that is,
 to leave
Šwould 
indeed push down the pound. 
MR. POTTER.  But it might be the right thing to happen.  If they 
leave,
 maybe the pound 
has to depreciate because that
™s the right pricing response. 
MR. TARULLO.  So that
™s what I
 was going to askŠwhether that suggested markets 
were thinking
 that 
the medium-
term economic prospects of the 
United Kingdom don™t look so 
great with Brexit
.  But there aren™t as many immediate 
financial
-stability
-type concernsŠ
that is, 
funding of the banks and things like that. 
MR. PO
TTER.  Possibly, but there
™s a wide 
bid-
ask on where the 
sterling
 might end up 
on June 24.  The event risk is big. 
MR. FISCHER.  
Hasn™t there b
ee
n a substantial 
depreciation
 of the pound 
sterling
? 
MR. POTTER.  There has been
 a 
substantial depreciation 
leading into this.
 MR. KAMIN.  
Well, 
in recent months, it
™s more that it has not risen against the dollar as 
much as other currencies.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Well, it
™s pric
ing in
 some probability of 
Brexit.
 MR. KAMIN.  Yes.  
Exactly.
 MR. POTTER.  It got down to about 140. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  An
d so it
™s declined, and i
f the vote is to stay, the pound 
will likely rally.  And if the vote is to leave, the pound will probably slough a lot.  And, 

currently
, it reflect
s 
some weig
hted average of those two outcomes. 
MR. KAMIN.  But I
™ve 
heard no comments to the effect of, well, it might lower the 
pound, but it would not have other adverse effects.  I think 
a lot of market observers expect that 
if there 
was
 a leave vote
, it could cre
ate 
disruptive 
ramifications.  And it™s
 a bit of a mystery as to 
why it has not 
affected
 other markets
 much. 
MR. TARULLO.  Yes.  I guess that
 was the question I was asking. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  
It doesn™t seem to be priced into other European 
markets
, in which
 people think that there could be some ramifications. 
MR. POTTER.  So the cost of protecting in other markets against it has not risen as 
much.  That could be because there
™s no spillover, or it could be mispriced.  We don™t know. 
MR. TARULLO.  But e
ven if you hypothesize, Simon, that the overnight change in the 
pound would be much bigger than is anticipated by the hedging that has taken place to date, and, 
therefo
re, there could be some 
effects
 on, for example, British financial institutions
, shouldn
™t that be reflected in at least some increase in funding costs for those institutions now?
 MR. KAMIN.  
Right, i
f it were considered material
.  In fact
, funding spreads 
in Britain 
have gone up about 5 basis points, so not very much. 
MR. TARULLO.  So they believe the polls right now, basically. 
MR. 
POTTER
.  But you have to be a little bit careful.  The Bank of England has said that 
it will supply liquidity
 and
 it will
 put 
in extra 
auc
tion
s, so we don™t know whether that is 
reducing the affect.  
I think
 CDS for large U
.K. banks might have moved up a little bit 
since
 last 
year.
 MR. KAMIN.  They have moved up, but not very much. 

MR. 
TARULLO
.  Yes
.  
CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
 MR. BULLARD
.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Just to follow up on this, I thought that 
even if they voted to get out, this would trigger a round of negotiations.  E
ven for financial 
institutions, at least immediately
, their situations w
ould not change for up to two years.  And 
beyond that, it
™s not that clear exactly what their situation would 
be.  So the market might price 
in only a small change for Brexit. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  But it wouldn™t be a good outcome for the U.K. 
economy, because there would be tremendous unce
rtainty over that period.
 MR. BULLARD.  All true.  But this is just a reason why markets might say, ﬁWell, I™m 
not sure how to price Barclays.
ﬂ 
MR. KAMIN.  I think the thinking underlying the adverse ramifications for a leave vote 
would be that, after the vote to leave, they
™d then start a negotiation period
 that could be two 
years
 or longer
, and that the uncertainty over the model of U.K. linkage to the European 
economy that would result from that would be sufficient to put a lot of downdrafts both in 
mark
ets and in real-side spending and confidence. 
MR. BULLARD.  Certainly true.  But my only point would be that
™s a very slow-moving 
process.  We
™ve got negotiations going on all over the 
world all the time.
 MR. POTTER.  But there are capital inflows the 
Unit
ed Kingdom 
relies on
, and 
Governor C
arney
 in particular has pointed that out as a potential 
strain.
 MR. BULLARD.  Absolutely.
 CHAIR YELLEN.  Further questions?  President Williams.
 MR. WILLIAMS.  So this is for Bill Wascher.  
Read
y?  Okay.  [Laughter]  
It™s no 
surprise I
™m going to revisit a topic.  As Governor Powell and I noted at our March meeting, 
productivity growth has been surprisingly bad for the past five years, averaging about ½ 
percent.
  Tealbook 
puts it at 
minus 2.2 percent 
in the first quarter.  It™s
 a huge negative.  
Yet 
in the 
Tealbook forecast
, productivity growth pops back up to 
2 percent
 in the current quarter 
and 
stays 
strong for the rest of the year.  So my question, as it was in March
:  W
hat makes you continue to 
expect that we are on the verge of this extraordinary reversal in productivity growth?
  I
™m usuall
y accused of being optimistic.
 MR. WASCHER.  Some of the pickup reflects a technical
 issue 
with
 hours.  I hate to 
bring this up, but we™ve 
been
 surprised on the upside by the 
strength in
 the component of hours 
that is
n™t captured by the payroll survey, and that
™s been holding productivity down.  We don™t 
project 
it 
being wound back, but we aren™t expecting it to continue, and we get a pickup in 

productivity growth on 
that technical reason.
  More broadly, our view is that as the economy 
improves and investment picks up, we
™ll
 start to see some gradual improvement in 
producti
vityŠonly to, maybe, 1¼ percent, s
o it
™s certainly not high relative to the post
-2005 era.  
In fact, I think the average 
over that 10
-year period
 is about 1
¼ percent.  So we
™re not expecting 
a huge pickup in productivity. 
I guess the other thing I would say is that we
™re
 also nervous about it, and we see 
downside risks.  T
here was an 
alternative 
view
 box in the Tealbook that I thought made a strong 
case that we might not see a pickup like we have in the 
forecast
.  And along with that 
alt
ernative 
view box, we included a couple 
of alternative
 simulations 
that illustrate how the economy might 
respond to a weaker productivity path.  
So in the baseline forecast, we have retained our 
assumption that productivity will move back up to a modest 
1¼ percent
 pace, but I certainly 
agree that there are downside risks
 to that, 
in light of
 what we
™ve seen over the past five years.
 MR. WILLIAMS.  Okay.  Thank you very much. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chair
man
. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  I have a question for Nellie.  On your 
exhibit 1, the chart 
on the lower right, the corporate business sector looks like it might be overextended.  Does it 

matter if the corporate business credit
-to-GDP is going up because 
they™re
 voluntarily changing 
their capital structure by buying back shares, as opposed to going off on some sort of investment 

spending binge? 
I don™t know the answer myself.  I
™m just wondering what your thoughts are on that, 
because it seems 
that
 what
™s happening in the corporate sector 
is, people have looked at the cost 
of credit, they
™ve 
decided the optimal capital structure is different 
from what it was before, and 
they™ve 
moved to that different capital structure.
 MS. LIANG.  
What we can try to look at is, what underwriting standards look like, 
as 
opposed to how well they
™re using the funds they raise.  
This chart
 reflects 
the concern 
we have 
rais
ed since 2013
:  the rise in
 debt in
 the high-yield bond market and the leveraged loans, in 
which we had been starting to see very loose underwriting standards.  
I think at this point, with 
oil prices having fallen and credit growth
 in t
he sector 
having
 really started to slow, 
though 
there
 are
 a few defaults, there
™s some easing of imbalances.  Our sense is
, this debt ratio won™t 
continue to rise
.  But it has risen
, and 
at this
 point 
is that
 the diver
gence
 with household is quite 
unusual. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Because profits are actually pretty high relative to 
their 
past levels.
 MS. LIANG.  The earnings per share growth estimates are coming down
. VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Okay.  Thank you.
 CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
 MR. BULLARD.  Th
ank you, Madam Chair.  I have a question for Bill Wascher.  
Looking at the f
orecast summary, 
chart 3, real GDP
, how should I 
interpret the confidence 
bounds t
here?
  You™ve got a confidence interval 
that
 is a 
70 percent confidence interval and the 
March Tea
lbook looks like it was outside the confidence interv
al for first
-quarter GDP.  I
s that 
how I should interpret this?  That sounds like we got extraordinarily bad news during the interim, 

which couldn™t have happened on the basis of 
historical forecast erro
rs.  That™s how I would 
interpret this
 figure
. 
MR. RUDD
.  So
, President Bullard, if I may
Š 
MR. BULLARD.  Yes
. MR. RUDD
.  We would have 
started 
the confidence interval 
earlier 
last
 round 
because 
we would have put it around our forecast, 
so when
 the confidence interval 
would have expanded 
last
 round, i
t would have been maybe two quarters 
earlier.
  So the M
arch forecast wasn™t outside 
the March 
confidence interval.
 MR. BULLARD.  Yes.
 MR. WASCHER.  But
 nonetheless
, Q1 was surprisingly weak.  I don™t know how it 
would have compared to the confidence interval in March because we don™t have that, but it was 
a pretty big down
ward
 revision t
o our estimate.
 MR. BULLARD.  I see.  So if I put the 
two
-step
-ahead
 confidence bound mentally 
around the red line, I would get inside the black line. 
MR. WASCHER.  
Yes, maybe that would give you a better sense. 

MR. RUDD
.  So even if you look 
close
ly, I think that you might be slightly outside it and 
that 
the Q1 confidence interval 
las
t round was probably ¾ percent on the low end.  A
s Bill said, 
it™s something we weren™t expecting, and it was unexpectedly large. 
MR. BULLARD.  You know, it would be interesting to me if you could provide in future 
meetings a kind of index of how surprisin
g the news was in between meetings from the 

perspective of 
real GDP.  Maybe you do that in other places. 
MR. POTTER.  D
idn™t you have a box in the Tealbook? 
MR. WASCHER.  That™s just a 
retro
spective of forecasters going back, but that™s not 
about a particu
lar quarter.
 MR. BULLARD.  Because it™s kind of informative to say, 
ﬁWell, the news was pretty 
badﬂ or ﬁkind of badﬂ or ﬁ
about what we expected.
ﬂ 
MR. WASCHER.  Okay.
 MR. WILCOX
.  Isn™t that what this 
confidence interval does? 
MR. BULL
ARD.  Well, evidently
, not quite, because the interval around the red line 
would be actually bigger if you put that on this chart. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Any other questions?  [No response]  
Then 
we have an 
opportunity now to comment on financial stability, and I have four people who have indicated a 
desire to do so.
  Let me start with President Rosengren.
 MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I appreciate the staff™s report and the 
comprehensive discussion of emerging risks in commercial real estate, including possible a
ctions 
that could be taken.  In fact, this discussion is not unlike the discussion of emerging risks in the 

COP 
financial
-stability tabletop exercise that was prepared roughly a year ago.  Unfortunately, 
one of the most serious concerns in that tabletop ex
ercise was a continued rise in commercial real 

estate prices and a relatively low interest rate environment.
  Since the tabletop, commercial real 
estate prices over the past year have tracked the simulation quite closely.  Over the past seven 

years, 
multifamily commercial real estate prices have roughly doubled, with the prices of other 
categories of real estate also rising quite rapidly
, as was shown in the QS report.  
Commercial 
real estate is a significant asset class for many leveraged intermediar
ies
, and thus a quick price 
reversal could have serious repercussions.  I personally witnessed this in New England when a 
significant percentage of banks failed or were deeply troubled as a result of falling commercial 

real estate prices in the late 1980s,
 with significant spillovers to the broader economy. 
Starting with this morning™s conversation, 
many people have suggested that if confronted 
with a buildup in financial stability risks, we should use supervisory and macroprudential tools 

as our first line
 of defense.  I agree.  The challenge is finding the appropriate tool and calibration 
of that tool for such a response. 
The c
ommercial real estate presentation illustrates the challenge quite well.  Many of the 
high-
price commercial real estate properties 
in Boston are supported by financing from a mix of 
large banks, many of which are foreign banks, foreign investors, and large nonbank 
intermediaries.
  However, large domestic banks still maintain a relatively modest overall 
exposure to commercial real esta
te.  Smaller domestic banks with assets in the 
$1 billion 
to 
$10 billion
 range have significant exposure to commercial real estate in small multifamily and 
strip mall projects, but these are banking organizations with respect to which we traditionally 

have 
a relatively light supervisory touch
, unless the banks are state member banks.
 If we believe that exuberance in commercial real estate risks a more significant reversal 
of price and thus raises 
safety and soundness concerns for these medium
-size
d banks, w
e can 
address these concerns with 
traditional tools.
  In particular, the 2006 real estate guidance, which 
was greatly w
ater
ed down from its original formulation
, could be strengthened.  That guidance 
could revisit the multifamily concentrations and conside
r more
-binding thresholds of a kind 
similar to what had been done with leveraged lending.  In addition, we could announce increased 

frequency of exams and more-thorough holding company exams for those banks and holding 

companies already outside the paramet
ers of the current guidance. 
Although strengthening the guidance will likely require perhaps torturous interactions 
with our fellow supervisors, the likely long delays in this process suggest that we should start the 

process relatively soon.  Increasing th
e depth and 
frequency
 of holding company exams would 
send a strong signal of our concern.  More-aggressive examinations would also have 
costs
, as they would require significantly more resources than we have budgeted and would likely be 

viewed unfavorably by other regulators unless the primary regulator was also involved.  

Nevertheless, I think we should be considering these measures. 
In the c
ase of the larger banks, the concern is less a supervisory one, 
as the overall 
exposures are relatively low
, than a financial-
stability 
one
.  In this case, the emphasis is on both 
signaling our concern and increasing the resiliency of the banking system to withstand a 
widespread price decline that causes collateral damage beyond that of the direct commercial real 

estate 
exposure.  One way to signal our concern and perhaps increase resiliency 
via
 additional 
capital buffering is to increase a more severe stress scenario in the CCAR exercise.  This in 

effect raises the cost of capital for large banks making commercial real e
state loans, which has 
the benefit of providing large banks an incentive to reduce the risk through their direct exposure.  

I think we should consider this for the next CCAR.  In addition, I view the rapid increase in 

commercial real estate prices as a sig
n of increased risk tolerance and possibly ﬁ
reaching
-for-
yield
ﬂ behavior.  Although 
the countercyclical capital buffer is a blunt instrument, it has the 
virtue of building more resilience into banks should a CRE crash occur.  I would consider 

increasing the buffer
, which is currently at zero
, to reflect the increased risk to financial st
ability, 
with commercial real estate highlighted as 
key 
evidence of that risk.
 What happens if nothing on the supervisory or macroprudential side is done?  I hope 
that™s not the case
, and that regulatory agencies begin to take increasing actions in respons
e to
 this risk.  The policy tools are vested in a variety of regulatory agencies, including the FSOC, the 

Board of Governors, and the other regulatory agencies, 
but
 not the FOMC.
  Due to
 the 
cumbersome governance in the United States, many of these changes would require long lags in 

implementation.  In that case
, were
 the
 risk to increase and no actions taken, I would be inclined 
to consider monetary policy tools, including more quickly shrinking our balance sheet
 or 
raising 
interest rates more quickly than
 we 
otherwise 
would, and highlighting through our formal 
commun
ications that this
, in part, 
reflects some of our financial stability concerns.
  Thank you, 
Madam Chair.
 CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I think 
this QS presentation that Nellie 
made is a good opportunity to make the connection back to this morning™s conversation.   
Looking at 
the volatile market conditions at the outset of the year
, they provided a bit of a 
stress test that helped inform the
 QS assessment this quarter.
  It was notable that U.S. financial 
firms and markets came through the elevated volatility in January and early February looking 

relatively resilient.  This highlights the critical importance of the buffers that have been built
 
since the crisis in the banking system in response to the substantially tougher regulatory 

framework and heightened supervisory expectations. 
In addition, I thought it was interesting that the relatively smooth functioning of the 
corporate bond market in 
the face of very sharp increases in spreads was a
 particular focus, in 
light of
 ongoing concerns about liquidity transformation in mutual funds concentrated in the 

relatively illiquid assets in this sector
, which have been highlighted by the FSOC.  The vol
atility 
underscores the importance of the reforms the SEC is proposing to ensure proper stress testing 

and 
that liquidity is well managed and available in anticipation of 
redemption 
surges as well as 

limits on leverage through derivatives.
 The other dimension that I thought deserved particular attention, as President Rosengren 
had mentioned, is the particular focus on valuation pressures 
in commercial real estate
, in which 
there™s
 been rapid growth in lending, particularly in the multifamily segment and 
in which
 underwriting standards have been weakening and capitalization rates have been falling.
  I think 
the discussions that we™ve had at the Board have very much emphasized the importance of 
ensuri
ng that banks are vigilant to the risks associated with p
ossible price declines in this 
segment of lending as well as interest rate increases.  The Board is undertaking or assessing a 
variety of actions in this arena, including the incorporation of these risks into CC
AR scenarios 
and reinforcement of the guidance on CRE concentrations. 
One of the conclusions that was important 
in the work that was done by the QS staff is 
that a lot of the concentration sits in small banks, though they view it more as a microprudential 

than a macroprudential risk.  One of the interesting analys
es that they shared was the potential 
value to top
-down stress testing to help identify vulnerabilities in small banks and potentially 
help supervisory guidance, 
particularly 
whe
n those vulnerabilities don™t correspond to higher 
CRE concentrations and thus would not have been caught necessarily by the concentration 

guidance. 
The
 conclusion 
I draw 
is simply that this framework 
and this QS is working, I think, the 
way that we would want it to work, and that 
insofar as
 the QS assessment called ou
t risks to 
financial stability more generally that they believed would be best addressed by monetary policy, 

this would be precisely the kind of presentation that would help us move in that direction on the 

basis of
 the kind of framework that we talked abo
ut this morning.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FISCHER.  Nellie, I wanted to try to
 draw out an example in which we moved 
from 
assessment to actually doing some
thing
, which is leveraged lending.  What was it that went from 
recognizing the problem to getting 
out 
warnings 
out 
about it
, actually warnings 
that
 seem to have 
been heeded?
  How did that all work? 
MS. LIANG.  So this was, I would say, 
probably in 2013.
 
MR. FISCHER.  No, it was after
 2013, 
because I remember it.
 MS. L
IANG.  Yes
, well, it was 2011 
when we started.
  High-yield bond spreads were 
reaching near
-historic
al lows, and we were seeing a weakening of underwriting standards in that 
sector.  
Many of these transactions
, like M&A transactions,
 require 
some combination of 
leveraged loans and high-yield bonds.  In the leveraged loan sector, we were seeing debt 
multiples rise pretty quickly
, above six timesŠwhich is pretty high by historical standards, in 
terms of what is going to be repaid at some point.  So we were looking at 
both prices and 

standards and then debt growth for these loans that was starting to 
rise at an annual rate of
 somewhere between 
10 to 15 percent a year.
  At that point, there was
 some discussion of
 whether 
the banks 
were 
doing the underwriting of the leveraged loans
 and were they holding them.  
That 
was the first discussion.
  Would they be bearing future losses?  
And
, for the most part
, while
 they 
were originating them, they were 
not holding them. 
 So there was just a lot of communication 
about this issue in the beginning. 
I think there™s a little history on the leveraged loans.  
We actually wanted to start an 
update of the guidance in 2008, but by then the 
crisi
s had sort of started, so it was a little too late 
to get this guidance out
.  And so it had kind of started on its own, and this was a timely way to 
get it out.  
So,
 I think
, just 
by the metrics we look at, we™re seeing that the debt of the underlying 
firms that were issuing
 the high-yield bonds and the leveraged loans also 
was
 rising quickly.  
That combination suggested starting with communications. 
MR. FISCHER.  And was there interaction with the supervisors as well?
 MS. LIANG.  Oh, absolutely. 

MR. FISCHER.  Yes
.  And Eric 
has talked about the commercial real estate capitalization 
rates.  On that or on anything else that™s in here, are there things we should be worrying about 

and beginning to focus on? 
MS. L
IANG.  I think other than commercial real estate
Šand there we have d
one the 
assessments
Šwe do not think at this point 
that
 it™s a broad financial stability concern.
  The debt 
growth is not as sharp as it was in the high-
yield sector or the corporate sector, but 
in view of 
these prices and incentives, absent shocks and the 
economy recovers, this is probably a place in 
which
 people will start to try to get credit, commercial real estate exposure.  So we would want 
to be paying attention to that.  
Right now, as we said, it™s a small
-bank issue.  The large banks 
have been stressed 
with
 pretty severe commercial real estate price declines on the order of 30 
percent.
 MR. TARULLO.  That™s 
in this year™s 
test too, right
? 
MS. LIANG.  That is also in this year™s
.  It was in last year™s test, and it is a s
imilar sharp 
decline this year.
 MR. FISCHER.  Okay.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  Vice Chairman.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
First of all, I really do 
appreciate all the work that
™s gone into this QS assessment.  I do like the fact that you
™re
 doing 
this topical de
ep dive into commercial real estate.  I think that doing a 
ﬁdeeper dive
ﬂ on emerging 
issues should be part of the exercise on an ongoing basis.   
I would also encourage the staff to consider exploring other areas in which shocks could 
potentially emerge.  It seems to me that there should be two broad considerations shaping the QS 

work
Šone, the likelihood of a large shock, and, 
two, the potential vulnerabilities of the financial 
system asset prices
 should that shock occur.  Up to now, it seems like the QS had been more 

focused on the latter than the former, and I feel, as the process continues to mature, I would very 
much w
elcome a 
more forward
-looking examination of the likelihood of large shocks emerging 
from various sectors of the economy. 
I have to say, when we
™re talking about commercial real estate, I guess I
™m a little bit less 
concerned about that, because it seems to me that this is really not about commercial real estate 
being dramatically overvalued
Šit™s really about the U.S. Treasury market being r
eally 
overvalued.  And then, if you look at the spread of the cap rates relative to U.S. T
reasur
y securit
ies, it doesn™t look that outlandish.  It
™s similar to
 the U.S. equity market.  
The forward 
P/E ratio of the equity market looks elevated, but why is t
hat?  
It™s b
ecause the 
Treasury market 
is at such a low
-level 
yield.  If you look at the equity risk premium, 
it doesn™t look particularly 
out of whack.  So it seems to me, 
when I follow the thread
s, it all comes back to the U.S. 
Treasury market
, and that 
all comes back to us
, because we deliberately pursued QE
, which 
depressed term risk premi
ums.  So, you know, to quote PogoŠ
ﬁthe enemy is us,ﬂ 
in some sense
. 
I think it
™s really important that we not lose sight of the fact that the 
Treasury bond 
market is really an area of significant risk 
and, 
I would argue
, not so much in the United States, 
but more so in Japan and Europe.  
I keep 
thinking about, 
if the Japanese actually
 succeed in their 
aim to push inflation back to their objective, that implies a very, very large adjustment in JGB 
yields, and the same thing would be true in Europe as well.  So I think we should just keep that 

in mind. 
I briefly want to touch on
 three other issues
:  Puerto Rico, an old favorite; Brexit; and the 
potential consequences of the view that some countries may be reaching their limits of monetary 

policy.  With respect to Puerto Rico, the situation continues to go downhill.  We still have a race 

going on between a hard, disorderly default due to lack of a good bankruptcy mechanism and 
cong
ressional legislation that might provide such a regime, which could facilitate an orderly 
restructuring of the island™s debt burden.
 In recent weeks, the government has placed restrictions on the use of government 
development bank deposits.  In response, we at the New York Fed
eral Reserve
 have closed our 
account with the GDB.  The good news is that this was anticipated.  We told them we were going 

to have to do this, and the bulk of the payment accounts were transferred from us to banks on the 

island, so there
™s been very minimal disruption to payment activity.  
The other piece of g
ood news is 
that
 our closure of the GDB account has not gotten much attention in the press, nor has it 
appeared to provoke greater instability.  
So t
hat
™s the good news. 
The bad news is that, on May 1, the GD
B faces a large debt obligation that it™s 
highly 
unlikely to have the funds to meet, and on July 1, the government will be in the sam
e situation 
with respect to sovereign debt.  So unless viable congressional legislation arrives relatively 

quickly, this situation could go downhill very, very fast. 
One area of particular vulnerability 
is that of 
the ﬁcooperativas.ﬂ  
The cooperativas are 
credit unions on the island that provide a significant amount of banking and deposit services to 

island residents.  This is not a great situation.  They don™t have much capital.  They have 

significant Puerto Rican sovereign debt exposure.  The entity that ensures their deposits has very 

little in the way of resources, and the government lacks the fiscal capacity to backstop this sector. 

So the risk of a deposit run on 
the cooperativas is very real.  We
™re
 monitoring the situation very 
carefully.  We don™t see anything yet, which is the good news, but, you know, you ask yourself 

in this
 situation
, when do you get deposit runs?  This is probably pretty high up on your list. 
In terms of 
the 
Congress and the Administration, I think the issue is, are they going to get 
to legislation?  And is the legislation actually going to be workable, 
in terms of providing for an 
orderl
y bankruptcy
?  As I™ve said many times before, the Puerto Rico situation is absolutely 
horrible for the people of Puerto Rico.  People are leaving the island.  The economy is 
contracting.  But the contagion risk back to the U.S. mainland seems to be very, very limited, and 

that hasn™t changed.
 On Brexit, we talked a bit about the issue for the B
ritish, if they were to vote to exit.  I do 
think, though, that that is priced in
to markets, as Simon noted.  
But there are two other issues.  If 
Britain were to vote to leave, I think there really would be a risk of contagion to Europe, because 

I think Brexit could be conceivably viewed as another shoe to drop on the road to European 

Union disintegration, and that
™s not priced in
to markets
.  I think the degree of contagion that 
might occur there is highly uncertain.  I also think that if there was a Brexit
 vote to exitŠI think 
that Predict
It.org yesterday had it as 29 percent probabilityŠi
t could lead to a generalized risk
-off sentiment.
  You know, we™ve gone from 
risk
-on to risk-
off to risk
-on
.  We 
could go back to 
risk
-off
 very, very quickly.  And if 
we saw that, I think we
™d see quite a bit of turbulence in the 
foreign exchange markets and tighter global financial market conditions.
 One key issue here is, what would happen to the Japanese yen
?  If there really was a 
wholesale movement to the Japanese yen,
 how would the Japanese authorities react, and what 
would the tolerance of the rest of the 
G-20 be for Japanese foreign exchange intervention?  So 
that
™s another important wildcard to consider.  This could all go downhill very, very quickly, 
depending on how this unfolds. 
The third issue I want to mention 
briefly 
is the risk we could go backŠand this is going 
to be channeling Steve a little bit
Što the darker days of January and early February should the 

global economic outlook disappoint.  I generally agree with how you summed it up in terms of 

ﬁYes,
ﬂ 
ﬁYes,
ﬂ 
ﬁMaybe,ﬂ and 
ﬁNo.ﬂ  But it seems to me that one important support for the global 
economi
c outlook is this notion that countries have the monetary policy and fiscal capacity to 
respond if they
™re hit with adverse shocks.  And I think that the rather unhappy experience with 
negative interest rates is a cause for concern, at least for me, because
 I think households and 
businesses judge the capacity for an effective response as 
having diminished.  If you were hit 

with a shock, sentiment could turn much more sharply in a negative direction very, very quickly.  

So you could end up in this feedback loop of deteriorating confidence 
and
 deteriorating financial 
conditions with the central banks not having a lot of credible ammunition to use to offset this.
 So I think it
™s good that financial conditions have recovered nicely over the past few 
months, but I
 still feel there
™s some underlying fragility there that
, at least for me
, suggests that 
the risk
s still remain skewed somewhat to the downside.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Governor Fischer.
 MR. FISCHER.  Bill, how sure are you that this is anything but a banker™s attempt to 
prevent negative real interest rates?  And you said the loss of confidence.  Where is the loss of 
confidence coming from?  From the guys who don™t want this? 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  No.  I
™m not so much focused on the bankers not liking 
negative interest rates because of the pressure on their net interest margins.  I
™m more focused on 
the fact that I think households in particular view
 this as sort of a scary regime.  M
y own 
personal opinion 
is that there
™s a subtle confidence channel here, that an environment in which 
you have to pay to hold cash in a bank 
is sort of unnerving.  I can™t prove that 
there™s that
 channel, 
but it certainly seems to me that the general reaction to negative interes
t rates in Europe 
and Japan has been
 more negative than what people anticipated.
 MR. FISCHER.  
Well, but i
f you look at it more closely, you
™ll see that the reaction came 
largely from Germany and from whatever is going on in Japan, which I don™t understand.  The 
ECB h
as sort of turned back a little bit from its statement that this won™t work if we have to go 
further.
  The Swedes, to 
who
m we listened at great length during the IMF meeting, 
are
 very 
happy with what they
™ve
 got and believe they can do more.  So I don™t think we
™re at the end of 
negative rates.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  We may not be at the end, but I
™m talking about people™s 
perception that there
™s a diminishing margin of monetary policy in the toolkit
, that
™s all.  
Because you saw in January and 
early February that the 
swing in sentiment was really 
powerfully negative, and I think that was part of what was driving it.  That
™s just my personal 
opinion.  I hope I
™m totally wrong. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  I suggest we take a 15-
minute break
.  We
™ll
 will get some 
coffee, and then we
™ll start our economic go
-round. 
[Coffee break]
 CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay, folks
, let™s resume
.  I think we can now begin our economic 
go-round.  
And our first speaker is President Williams.
 MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My positive outlook for the economy 
remains essentially unchanged since our previous meeting.  Better financial conditions and 
robust job growth have offset some disappointing spending data.  Overall, I expect 2016 to look 

a lot like 2015, with about 2 percent real GDP growth, sizable job gains, and a gradual decline in 

the unemployment rate.
  I expect underlying measures of inflation to make the final few steps to 
our 2 percent goal over the next few years. 
As we discussed already today, I see the risks
 to the outlook 
as having come down a bit.  
I™ll mention one in particular.  I was concerned about the high degree of uncertainty that was 

holding back, 
potentially
, employment and 
investment regarding ﬁ
Deflategateﬂ and how that 
would be r
esolved.  [Laught
er]  But now that the courts have finally resolved that issue to 
everyone™s satisfaction, I think that uncertainty has also stepped down.  So, overall, 
I see the 
risks to the outlook as roughly in balance. 
Of course, it™s that time of year when we all get 
together to discuss residual seasonality.  
[Laughter]  First
-quarter dips 
in real GDP growth 
have become the norm.  In the past, 
these weak 
first quarters have been followed by systematically strong
er GDP 
growth later in the year, and so 
they provided little signal about the underlying momentum of the economy.  One underlying 

problem is that the BEA uses a bottom-up methodology, which seasonally adjusts the individual 

subcomponents of GDP instead of the aggregate number directly, and this approach allows sm
all 
amounts of seasonal variation at a granular level when aggregated to affect the top-
line numbers.
  So, to correct this problem, my trust
y staff took a top-down approach and applied a second round 
of seasonal adjustment to the published aggregates, and 
they estimate th
at real GDP after this 
second round of seasonal adjustment 
increased at a rate of more than
 2 percent in the first 
quarter.
  The higher number is better aligned with the strong labor market readings 
and
 is more 
consistent with my business contacts who report no recent drop
-off in activity.
 The residual seasonality also reflects the PCE inflation data but to a much lesser extent, 
and it can be sidestepped by focusing on year-
over
-year comparisons.  
The
 Tealbook 
indicates 
that 
core PCE inflation rose 
1.6 percent 
from the first quarter of last year to the first quarter of 

this year, and that™s a jump of 
0.3 percentage point 
from where it was a year ago.
  A big part of 
this step
-up reflects the dissipation of
 transitory factors that were holding core inflation down.  
One notable example is the acceleration of prices for health
-care services.  Medicaid physician 
payments were cut on a one-off basis in January 2015, something I mentioned last year, and that 

lowe
red health
-care inflation and held down year-over-year aggregate core PCE inflation by a 
couple of
 tenths throughout last year.  
Now that we
™ve moved out of that 12-month window, 
price inflation 
for health
-care service
s has been resuscitated, if you will, and it is again adding to 
core PCE inflation.  Unlike the Tealbook, I assume the increases in year-over-
year inflation will 
not be unwound and continue to expect inflation to steadily move back toward our 
target of 
2 percent over the next few years.
 In the 
labor market, there
™s little 
doubt that things are good.  A wide range of labor 
market indicators, such a
s 
initial claims
 for unemployment insurance
, job openings, quit
s 
rates, 
and perceptions of job availability and hiring difficulties
, all point to a la
bor market at full 
employment.  Even labor force participation has rebounded, driv
en by inflow of workers ages 
25 to 54 who are taking advantage of the strong job market. 
One discordant note in the otherwise strong labor market is the elevated number of long-
term unemployedŠ
that is, 
those who have been looking for a job for at least six months.  A 
number of studies have raised the possibility that this increase in long-
term unemployment 
reflects particular characteristics of the long
-term unemployed, such as outmoded or depreciated 
skills, and that these challenges may have persisted well into the recovery.
  To investigate this 
hypothesis, my staff examined the underlying microdata to see why so many long-
term 
unemployed have failed to escape either by finding a job or exiting the labor force.  This 

investigation finds that during the recession, job-
finding rates declined uniformly for all types of 
unemployed individuals, suggesting, 
at least on that basis
, that the long-
term unemployed aren™t 
unique in that 
regard.
  At the same time, the composition of unemployment also shifted toward 
individuals with 
a relatively low propensity to leave the labor force
Šfor example, older workers 
who permanently lost their long
-standing jobs.  These two patterns in combination boosted the 
share of workers who moved into long-term unemployment
.  T
hat is, the growing pool of long-
term
 unemployed are primarily job seekers who are dedicated to staying in the labor force and 
are actively looking for jobs but are finding it difficult to land one.  They don™t appear to be 
individuals who have 
mismatched skills or other unfavorable characteristics.
  In other words, 
from the perspective of our maximum
-employment mandate, the long-term unemployed should 

be counted equally with the rest of the unemployed, and the overall unemployment rate remains 

a good summary measure of the health of the labor market.
 So what should we expect 
regarding
 the long-
term unemployment rate?  My staff 
constructed a simulation of unemployment dynamics that
 incorporates unemployment escape 
rates for the various groups of the short
- 
and long
-term unemployed.  Their analysis suggests that 
the current elevated long-term unemployment 
rate 
reflects longer
-term trend
s in the composition 
of the labor force and is n
ot a sign of anything unusual in the labor market at this time.  
These 

trends include demographic factors such as the aging workforce and the high labor force 

attachment of women
Šthat is, the higher share of long-term unemployed is just part of the ﬁ
new 
normal.
ﬂ 
Finally
, I appreciate
d the Tealbook alternative view box on the outlook for productivity 
growth.  We™ve been repeatedly surprised by weak productivity growth for the past five years, 

and if productivity growth doesn™t rebound sharply this year as assumed in the Tealbook, then 

the alternative scenario
Šconsisting of weaker labor productivity and a stronger labor marketŠ
becomes a more likely outcome.
  In that scenario, unemployment falls below 4 percent, and we 

overshoot our inflation goal.  As I mentioned last time, this is one of the prominent upside risks 

to the achievement of our goals that I see as balancing the downside risk 
arising 
from abroad.  
Thanks. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Lacker.
 MR. LA
CKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Economic con
ditions in the 
Fifth
 District 
have strengthened in recent weeks.  We™re hearing uniformly positive reports from our D
istrict 
contacts, with the exception of those 
in the coal co
untry of southern West Virginia, and our 
survey results have been strong as wel
l.  Our manufacturing index popped up to 22 in March 
after a long stretch of neutral readings.  The April results
, which were released this morning
, remain
ed strong.  The composite index was 14, and the new orders index was 18.  
Our services 
survey, which 
also rose in March
, strengthened further to 15 in April.  The retail component 
remained exceptionally strong at 37, 
with
 sharper traffic in big
-ticket sales registering large 
gains.  The wage indexes remained solidly positive in all our survey 
sectors.
 For
 the national economy, the incoming data did not change my assessment since our 
previous 
meeting or, for that matter, since December.  Financial market turbulence has subsided
, and downside risks to U.S. economic growth look to me to have returned to about where they 
were four months ago.  
I continue to expect real GDP growth of about 
2 percent for the next year 
or two. 
I agree with the Tealbook that there™s no slack left in labor markets
, and measures of 
unemployment and labor force participati
on indicate essentially full utilization of labor 
resources.  So we are as close to our maximum
-employment objective as one could hope for.  In 
the near term, I expect employment growth to continue to outpace growth in the working-
age 
population.  In other words, I think we™re going to reach a state of ﬁ
overutilization of labor 
market resources,
ﬂ 
a phrase I hope to see us use with as much diligence as we used the phrase 
ﬁunderutilization of labor market resources.
ﬂ 
In the past, some have argued that labor m
arket resources are underutilized because 
otherwise we would be seeing increasing nominal 
wage 
growth, but I think 
it is now clearly 
visibl
e in the data.  
While
 some wage measures, such as average hourly earnings or median 
earnings growth, have firmed somewhat, other measures from the household survey that filter 
out composition effects, such as those in the Atlanta Wage Growth Tracker, have accelerated 

noticeably and are running at a rate of 2½ percent or 3 percent or higher.  That might not sound 

like a l
ot of 
growth in nominal 
wage
s. 
 But in an environment with low labor productivity growth 
and low price inflation, it implies meaningful growth in real wages.  In fact, over the 
past
 three 
years, real wage growth has outpaced labor productivity growth, and, 
thus, real unit labor 
costs
 and the w
age income share 
have been increasing, 
which
 is something we usually observe when 
labor markets are relatively tight.
 There™s no question the first-quarter data have come in on the weak side.  At this point, 
though, Q1 
looks just like a blip.  I agree with President Williams
, and
 I™m impressed by 
his 
analysis of the seasonal adjustment problems.
  In light of 
the strong labor market and solid 

readings on consumer sentiment, the dip in consumption growth looks temporary, and I expect 
healthy consumer spending growth to resume.  
Residential investment also appears to be on track 
for strong growth this year.  In fact, our local reports suggest that rising construction costs and a 

shortage of buildable lots are increasingly p
revalent.  One of our contacts, the CEO of the 
nation™s largest supplier of drywall
, reports exceptional year
-over
-year growth in shipments and 
describes his firm as positively giddy about 
its
 2016 prospects.  Business fixed investment 
certainly has been s
oft even before the first quarter, reflecting the effects of the strong dollar, 

global growth concerns, and a contraction in oil and gas drilling.  Looking forward, though, the 

dollar seems to have peaked, o
il prices have stabilized, and the lion™s share of cutbacks in oil and 

gas investment are behind us now.  So I agree with the Tealbook™s outlook for moderate gains in 

business fixed investment in the coming quarters.
 I™d li
ke to say a word or two about productivity.  As the Tealbook points out in 
its
 alternative 
view 
box and 
as was discussed today, labor productivity growth has averaged less 
than ½ percent 
per year
 over the 
past
 six years,
 clearly a subpar outcome compared with the 
period prior to the Great Recession.  
The s
taff has been projecting 
an imminent return to 
a rate 
above 1¼ 
percent for some time
Ša return that
 has
 not materialized
Šand the Tealbook is quite 
candid about 
its forecasting record.
  In their defense
, though, there™s a compelling case for 
expecting a return to more typical produ
ctivity growth rates in general, rev
ersion to the mean and 
all.  Nonetheless, as more time elapses with persistently low productivity growth in this 

expansion, it™s natural to place more weight on the possibility that it™s going to be depressed for 

some ti
me to come.
  Reasonable people can differ on how much more weight, but for me, the 
past
 six years have been pretty convincing.  So for the near term, I™m inclined to expect a 
continuation of about the same 
rate of 
productivity growth we™ve seen since 2011. 
Together with the fact that 
the working-age population is expected to grow at about 
½ percent per year over the next few years, this suggests we should expect to transition to a new 

trend growth rate for real GDP of less than 
1½ percent.
  It is true that 
lower productivity growth 
is generally associated with lower real interest rates, but I don™t think the real 
economic 
growth 

we™ve been seeing comes anywhere close to justifying the level of real rates we currently have.
  Furthermore, there™s a consensus t
hat labor market slack 
is gone, and in my view, 
real GDP and 
employment growth will exceed trend growth in the near term. 
Under 
current settings 
of our monetary policy instruments
, the outlook for labor markets 
and output leaves me increasingly confident t
hat inflation will rise this year.  Indeed, in recent 
months we™ve seen various measures of core inflation rise toward 
2 percent, and a broad firming 

trend now seems evident, notwithstanding the March CPI.  
This is not to say that inflation is 
about to b
reak out immediately and surge above our target, but it does suggest that there are 
growing risks to the upside that deserve consideration.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 
MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  We find ourselves and the economy once 
more in an almost familiar place.  In March, we decided to wait on further developments because 

we were
 not sure whether it was the first six weeks of this year or the following
 four weeks that 
most closely represented the likely state of the economy in the weeks to come.
 At this stage, we appear to have returned approximately to the reality to which we have 
become accustomed 
for 
more than a year.  The labor market remains strong
, perhaps a bit 
stronger than we had expected, as the labor force participation rate has increased for six months 

in a row.  
But GDP growth remains woeful.  We can reconcile the behavior of the labor market 

and that of output by saying that productivity growth is very weak, which it is.  But it would be 

good if we understood why.  Those three points are more or less the position to which we were 
beginning to accustom ourselves at the end of 2015, but now there is an extra factor.  Aggregate 
demand growth se
ems to have weakened in the first few months of this year.  That can be 
accounted for in a variety of ways by saying there
™s been a decline in productivity
, by noting the 
decline in the volume of investment, which is both a decline in aggregate demand and 
a factor 
reducing productivity growth. 
Where are we now before we get into the details of how tough everything is?  Well, first, 
we™re very close to full employment.  Second, now that oil prices appear to have stabilized and 
the dollar has stopped deprecia
ting
Šat least temporarily
, perhapsŠinflation is higher than it was 
most of last year, though lower than it was in January.  Core inflation is about 1.5 percent, which 

I regard as being in hailing distance of our target. 
The st
aff has begun to analyze the challenges posed by the slowing of growth.  There is, 
first, the fact that some of what we are seeing may simply be a result of the first
-quarter blues, a 
disease 
that
 presents itself for what appears to be a severe slowdown in the first quarter.  Data 
revi
sions, at least over the 
past
 two years, then appear to reduce the reported first
-quarter 
slowdown in the following months but 
to not totally dispose of it.
 Second, in the 
alternative view
 box, productivity acceleration will be more gradual, 
which President Williams just referred to.  On pages 22 and 23 of Tealbook A, 
Tomaz Cajner
 analyzes the consequence of the possibility that falling job reallocation associated with declining 
business dynamism appears to be pushing down productivity growth as it had after the year 

2000.  The concluding paragraph of that box consider
ed what would happen if productivity 
growth remains historically low for a long time.  
I quote again:  ﬁA protracted productivity 
slowdown would have much more serious macroeconomic consequences, including continued 

downward pressure on the equilibrium real interest rate, reduced incentives for labor force 
participation, rising fiscal imbalances, and slower improvements in living st
andards.ﬂ  
One 
reaction would be to say, ﬁWell, we know all of that.ﬂ  But knowing all of that doesn™t make it 
any better.  Another reaction would be to say that it would be useful to focus on discovering and 

arguing for productivity
-enhancing policies mor
e intensively than we have so far.  One doesn™t 
sense
Šat least I don™t sense
Šthat there is a very active debate going on about what we need to 
do to get productivity to grow more rapidly. 
Well, not all that has happened since the beginning of the year is bad.  Foreign growth, 
especially in Canada but also in the euro zone, will probably be higher than it was last year.  The 

Chinese government has decided to try to maintain economic growth near 7 percent, albeit with 

the same debt-creating policies whose long-run sustainability is doubtful.  And it seems to have 
decided
 that it does not want a serious devaluation at this stage, which has calmed the unease 
about China™s policies that was part of the uncertainty in the first quarter of this year.
  The dollar 
has weakened.  All those things are helpful for our growth, but the uncertainties of potential 
Brexit
 remain.
 So, what
™s next?  Well, what
™s next is we wait until tomorrow to decide on the policy 
recommendations that follow from the present conj
uncture
.  [La
ughter] 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Rosengren. 

MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  It was a puzzling dichotomy between 
the spending and employment data in the first quarter.  The spending data were a 

disappointment.  The Tealbook expects 
the 
first
-quarter real GDP growth 
rate 
to be only 
½ percent
, which is slow even with diminished assumptions about potential real GDP growth.  
However, like the Tealbook, I am expecting the first quarter to be a lull rather than a trend, and 

one major 
reason is the continued strength evident in the labor market.  We all know the 
aggregate employment numbers have continued to expand rapidly.  Less-
formal information 
reinforces those numbers.
  When talking to officials at colleges around New England, they 
are 
reporting robust results for their seniors about to graduate and an increase in recruiting activities 
on college campuses.  However, it is not just those with high educational attainment that are 

enjoying the results of the tighter labor market.  The strong growth in the participation rate since 

September highlights that as the labor market has tightened
, more people are moving from out of 
the labor force to being employed.  
This also includes sectors of the labor market 
in which 
unemployment is 
elevat
ed, such as minorities and those who have 
limited educational 
attainment.
 I™m fa
irly confident that spending will rebound.  Certainly, an important reason for the 
first
-quarter weakness was low consumption 
growth
.  Like the Tealbook, I expect consumption 
to rebound in the remainder of the year due to favorable trends in the stock market, housing 
prices, and income.
  I also expect the recent weakness in business investment to abate.  Those 

factors alone could push spending growth above potential.  
As it is unlikely that firms would 
continue to 
hire
 if they were expecting sales to weaken, I am placing more weight on the positive 
labor market data than on the first
-quarter GDP lull
.  Nor am I particularly worried that with 
proper monetary policy the labor marke
t will get too tight.
  My forecast calls for some further 
tightening of the labor market.  There are certainly advantages to allowing the labor market to 

tighten somewhat further.  P
robing how low the natural rate of unemployment is currently will 
likely e
ncourage more people to 
reenter the labor force, benefi
ting themselves and the overall 
economy. 
In terms of prices, I am now a bit more confident that we™re
 moving toward our 2 percent 
inflation target.  At the time of our December FOMC meeting, core PCE i
nflation had not yet 

shown a clear positive trend and had been fluctuating somewhat below 
1½ percent
 over much of 
the year.  
However, with core PCE inflation currently at 
1.7 percent
, there is more evidence of a 
positive trend.  This casual observation is 
confirmed by work by my staff that has used a monthly 

error correction model that includes the gap between core CPI and core PCE inflation, along with 

lag
ged changes in inflation rates, the unemployment gap, and the relative prices of oil and non-
oil impor
ts.
  Using this model to conduct a dynamic simulation of the likely path of core PCE, 
they concluded that we are quite likely to see more progress in core PCE approaching our target.  

Private
-sector forecasters seem to be drawing a similar conclusion.  The
 Survey of P
rofessional 
Forecasters, which provides forecasters™ probabilities of different core PCE inflation outcomes, 
is si
milarly showing forecasters placing modestly more weight on the F
OMC
 moving closer to 
its target over the next two years.
 I would also note that the concerns about significant downside risk, as reflected in the 
financial market turbulence over the first several months of this year, have subsided.  Stock 
prices are higher.  Stock volatility is down.  Many interest rate spreads have narrowed, and many 

global financial markets have improved.
  This is consistent not only with my baseline forecast 
but also with surveys that assess tail risk.  Neither 
the 
primary dealers nor participants in the 

Survey of P
rofessional 
Forecasters see a parti
cularly elevated risk of much higher unemployment 
rates in the next year and a half.
 I must admit that with modal private
-sector forecasts expecting
 economic growth above 
its 
potential 
rate 
and, consequently, further tightening of labor markets, as well as surveys not 
indicating a particularly elevated tail risk, I find the pricing in the federal funds futures somewhat 

puzzling.  A divergence between our own views of the likely path of intere
st rates as reported in 
the March SEP and the market™s pricing of very few federal funds increases over the next two 

years or more raises the risk of a taper tantrum reaction when we do raise rates.  I will discuss 

how we should react to this risk in the policy discussion 
tomorrow
.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 

MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Since we last met, the most notable 
improvement has been a significant easing in global financial conditions, which re
flect
s in no 
small part a change in expectations surrounding the path of U.S. monetary policy.  In addition, 

the labor market has remained strong, while
 the data on inflation and aggregate spending have 
disappointed. 
Job growt
h, at 215,000 last month, 
rema
ins strong, and the participation rate rose again.  
Since September of last year, 
while
 the unemployment rate has remained essentially flat, 
participation has increased 
0.6 percentage point.  This is very welcome, and it suggests that 
participation may be more responsive to improvement in labor market conditions than seemed to 

be the case for much of the recovery.  
If it continues, the prospects for growth in potential output 

would be somewhat more optimistic.
  Most of the increase in participation since Se
ptember has 
been among prime
-age individuals whose declining participation over the earlier part of the 
recovery had been puzzling.  
While
 recent increases have 
rais
ed the prime-age employment-
to-population ratio 1¾ percentage points above its trough in mid-2011, the prime-
age 
EPOP
 ratio 
still remains 
1½ percentage points 
below the average level 
before 
the crisis.
  This suggests some 
slack remains, which is reinforced by the relatively elevated share of employees working part 

time who want full
-time work and the still
-subdued pace of wage growth.  As Bill Wascher 
pointed out earlier, the labor force participation rate for adult African Americans is about 
3 percentage points 
below its pre
-crisis level, similar to the gap for whites
, and the gap is 
a little 
over 2 percentage points 
for Hispanics.  
While
 the overall unemployment rate is down near pre-
crisis levels for whites and Hispanics, unemployment among African Americans remains above 
its pre
-crisis level.
  Moreover, 
while
 the participation rate of African 
Americans is roughly equal 
to that of whites, the
ir unemployment rate is twice as high, suggesting scope for further gains.
 On inflation, the most recent data, the February PCE and the March CPI reports
, suggest 
that progress 
toward our 
inflation target is likely to remain quite gradual.  It now appears likely 

that the stronger readings at the start of the year reflected
, in part
, the 
resi
dual seasonality, which 
has tended to produce higher PCE inflation readings in the beginning of the year and lower 

readings toward the end.  Although 
the fall in the dollar since the beginning of the year should 
help boost
 inflation this year, it may not persist.  Indeed, the dollar has moved a bit higher in 
recent days, and 
in view of
 the global outlook, the risk of a higher dollar appears somewhat 
greater than the reverse.
  The subdued price pressures evident in the March CPI look likely to 
continue.  If so, the 12-month change in core PCE prices should move down from the 1.7 percent 
readings reached in January and February to about 1.5 percent this quarter. 
I remain concerned by the risk that continued low inflation will put downward pressure 
on inflation expectations.  Market-
based measures of five
-year inflation compensation 
five years 
ahead
 have edged up since March
, but
 they remain extremely low.
  Household survey-
based 
measures of inflation expectations also remain low
, as we saw in the prel
iminary April Michigan 
survey, which showed the median 10-year inflation expectation moving back down to 

2.5 percent, significant
ly below the longer-
run average.
 The spending data in hand for the first quarter of this year 
are
 also disappointing.  This 
first-quarter weakness, as others have noted, appears similar to a pattern we™ve seen in the 
preceding two years.  However, it is worth noting that the apparent weakness in first-
quarter 
GDP and PCE growth this year comes on the heels of relatively weak fourth-
quarter GDP and 
PCE growth, which is in contrast to 2014 and 2015, when the preceding fourth quarters had seen 

more robust growth.
  Nonetheless, the downbeat data on 
economic 
activity contrast with the 

continued steady improvement in the labor market, which provides reasons to hope that the first-

quarter spending data are once again understating the underlying pace of activity.  The current 

data suggest consumption growth of a little less than 2 percent last quarter, but the fundamentals, 

including continued solid job and real income growth, buoyant sentiment, and rising wealth, 
all 

point to faster growth. 
In contr
ast, the weakness in business investment, lower corporate profits, and still-
elevated bond spreads may presage some slowing in labor demand.  Or
der
s and shipments of 
capital equipment have been trending lower for several months, and investment in intangible 
capital also seems to have softened, with investment in this category edging down over the 

second half of last year.
  When combined with conti
nued sharp declines in energy
-related 
structures, these data suggest a significant decline in business fixed investment last quarter.
 Although weakness in the energy sector is in part responsible for these developments, a 
persistently gloomy foreign outloo
k is likely also weighing on firms™ expansion plans.  Even 
factoring in recent welcome improvements in Canada, recent data on the overall foreign outlook 

continue to suggest weak demand and downside risks.  In Japan, even before the Kumamoto 

earthquake, 
activity had stagnated
.  The outcome of recent wage negotiations was quite 
disappointing, and despite extraordinarily accommodative monetary policy, it has been very 

difficult to raise inflation expectations, and inflation remains distant from the target.
  In Europe, 
economic activity continued its 
gradual recovery in the first quarter, but inflation and market
-
based measures of inflation compensation remain very low.  With monetary policy extremely 

accommodative and no help from fiscal policy, prog
ress on inflation remains vulnerable to 

shocks.  Most immediately, of course, on June 23 
voters in the 
United Kingdom 
will decide 
whether to remain in the European Union.  A ﬁnoﬂ vote could be highly disruptive. 
Nonetheless, following February™s very volat
ile market conditions, we™ve seen a 
substantial easing of financial conditions, which appears to coincide with a shift in expectations 

about the monetary 
policy 
path in the United States and of the dollar.
  Equity prices have 
rebounded.  Oil and other commodity prices have stabilized or increased, and corporate bond 
sprea
ds have come down, although they remain elevated.  
Emerging markets have benefited as 
financing conditions have eased. 
These developments have coincided with a stabilization of the Chinese 
RMB against the 
dollar even as the dollar has declined.  The combination of dollar easing and additional capital 
controls led to a stabilization of China™s foreign exchange reserves in March, along with a 

notable reduction in concerns about a sharp devaluation.  Although Chinese GDP increased at an 

annual rate of only 5.4 percent 
in the first quarter, the most recent monthly data on industrial 

production and credit growth signal a step-up in GDP growth this quarter.  
But as was stated 
earlier, boosting near-
term GDP growth 
through 
credit
-fueled infrastructure investment does 
little to solve China™s excess capacity 
or 
elevated corporate debt
 problems
.  Thus, 
while
 the 
threats to near
-term 
economic 
growth have likely diminished, with overall 
debt-
to-GDP on the 
order of 240 percent and credit growth reaching 
15 percent
 this year, the risks to medium
-term 
growth remain and may even be increasing. 
More broadly, 
while
 conditions have eased, global financial markets remain fragile.  
Developments in the first three m
onths of the year serve to highlight the significant feedback 

loop that connects U.S. policy expectations and exchange rate movements to China™s currency 

management and economic growth challenges, which is then amplified through emerging market 

prospects a
nd commodity market developments.
  Despite recent steps
, China still lacks a 
predictable, transparent framework for monetary policy and exchange rate management.  Thus, 

unexpected moves in the RMB or declines in foreign exchange reserves still have the pot
ential to 
spark further bouts of financial turbulence that could reverberate more broadly.
 On net, the balance of risks to the outlook appear to have improved somewhat since 
March
.  The 
general improvement in financial conditions due at least in part to ex
pectations of a 
more gr
adual path of policy firming in the 
United States
 has strengthened the medium
-term 
outlook in the 
United States
 and helped boost commodity prices, diminishing worries about 
global disinflation, helping to ease the transition
s 
faced b
y emerging market economies.
  But 
while
 the easing 
in financial 
conditions has 
improved the balance of risk in the near term, the 
current global environment contains deeply embedded risks.  These, 
together with persistent 
sub-2 percent inflation readings, the evidence that inflation expectations are low, and the 

asymmetry of policy
, continue to skew the risks to inflation to the downside.  
For these reasons, I 

would not want to rush to judgment 
about the outcome of our policy deliberations in June but 
rather continue to monitor the evolution of the data closely 
in the weeks ahead.
  Thank you, 
Madam Chair.
 CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you very much.  
President Bullard.
 MR. BULLARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My remarks on the economy today will 
focus on two features of the current constellation of data that give me pause about the 
Committee™s normalization strategy.
  The first one is slower real output growth than I expected, 
and the second one is low market-based inflation expectations. 
The core prediction from standard models that inform the discussion on this Committee is 
that promises to kee
p the policy rate at very low levels would induce a boom in consumption and 
a rise in inflation expectation
s.  In my judgment, these effects have not materialized in any 
quantitatively meaningful sense.
  This has left us with low nominal interest rates, wh
ich may not 
be pulling consumption forward and may not be putting upward pressure on inflation.  I think 
this is putting our normalization strategy at risk.  We are now 16 months past the end of 

quantitative easing in the 
United States.
  We have raised the
 policy rate just once
, m
arkets place 
low probability on a move by this Committee in June, and we have no immediate plans to reduce 
the size o
f the Federal Reserve
 balance sheet.
  This seems like a normalization process that is 
grinding to a halt.  In my view, this may be appropriate.  But it should be described somewhat 
differently if this is, indeed, what is happening.  I™ll have some suggestion
s for this in a moment, 
and I will also discuss this in the policy go-
round tomorrow.
 Let me turn to low inflati
on expectations.  Current market-based inflation compensation 
has recovered partially from the levels earlier this year, but not all the way to the levels at the 

time of liftoff last December.  The 
10-
year TIPS breakeven rate, for instance, traded last Fri
day 
at around 1.65 percent.  This number is too low on its face, but, 
in addition, it is CPI based.
  If we subtract 30 basis points to get to a rough calculation for PCE inflation expectations, we arrive 

at just 1.35 percent.  One could arguably subtract risk and liquidity premiums 
from there to 

arrive at an even lower number.
  This is a 
10-year expectation that should not be meaningfully 
different from 
2 percent.  I take this seriously as signaling a possible erosion of F
OMC
 credibility with respect to our
 inflation target.  I think it is very difficult to interpret the TIPS 
numbers favorably at this juncture.
 Let me now turn to slow output growth.  The an
nuali
zed growth rates of real GDP have 
been 2015
:Q3
, 2.0; 2015
:Q4
, 1.4; 2016
:Q1,
 according to the Tealbook, 0.4; 2016
:Q2,
 according 
to the Tealbook, 
2.2.  So as Governor Brainard stressed, it™s not really just the first quarter
Šall 
of the surrounding quarters are pretty low.  The average of these four numbers is 1.5 percent.  
That™s b
elow my estimate of longer
-term trend growth for the U.S. economy.  Many of the 
policy projections I have made over the 
past
 two years envisioned a 
3 percent growth rate during 
this same four
-quarter period.  So these numbers are quite disappointing.  
I think it
™s hard to 
reconcile plans to normalize rates in an environment of below
-trend real GDP growth.
 I rec
ognize that labor markets have been strong and are likely to remain so.  I continue to 
agree with the Tealbook 
that the
 unemployment 
rate 
is likely to fall into the mid
-4 percent range 
over the forecast horizon.  However, I expected stronger output growth at some point, which 
would have been more reflective of recent labor market outcomes.  
In addition, I see effects on 

inflation through a labor market channel as likely to be subdued.  
Eighth District contacts seem 

to concur that very slow growth is the order of the day.  They tend to expect a subdued pace of 

expansion during 2016, tight labor markets notwithstanding.
 What is the core problem?  It is sl
ow growth in productivity.  I appreciated the 
staff™s
 discussion of an alternative view
, that productivity acceleration would be more gradual, on pages 
22 and 23 of Tealbook A.  I especially noted figure 1, which shows how prognostications of 

productivity increases have continually disappointed over the 
past
 six years.  On this topic, 
I agree with comments by Presidents Lacker 
and 
Williams and Governor Fischer.
  In light of 
that 
evidence from 
figure 1 in Tealbook A in the alternative productivity projection
, I think that the 
baseline should no longer be for an acceleration of productivity growth.  Instead, 
we should 

accept that we are likely in a low
-productivity growth regime that probably began in 2005 and 
that has probably worsened in the 
past
 five or six
 years, and we should make the baseline 
projecti
on on the idea 
that we are unlikely to leave the low
-productivity growth regime any time 
soon.  Accelerating productivity growth would then become an alternative to the benchmark and 

not the benchmark itself.
 It may be that our normalization strategy is incompatible with the slow
-growth 
environment in which we find ourselves and in which the Committee often sees important 

downside risks.  As many of you know, I have become more concerned about our normalization 

messaging 
in this environment.
  Our messaging is through the dot plot, which suggests imminent 
incre
ases in rates.  In essence, we are always warning about rate increase
s.  I want to suggest an 
alternative messaging that I think will leave us in a positi
on to accomplish the same goals but 
will put 
us more in sync with financial markets.
 The elements of this approach are as follows.  
But f
irst
 a preamble
 is to recognize that 
we™re now off the lower bound; therefore, rates in principle could go in 
either direction.
  So 
then 
number one would be the Committee would emphasize that, in view of everything that we know 

today, we think that the policy rate is at the correct level.  This is the way we would have 

approached monetary policy in the 
™90s and 2000s.  Number two, the Committee would 

emphasize that
, in light of
 everything we know, risks are balanced at this juncture.  That would 
signal to markets that rates could go up or down depending on how the data come in.  The reason 

we™re at the rate we are 
at today is because we think that™s the right rate 
in light of
 all the 
things 
that we know about the economy.  
I think the balance of risks in the past, as President Lacker has 

emphasized, has been a subtle signal about which way you think rates are going.  I
f we cite 
downside risks in an environment 
in which
 the dot plot says we™re going up, that™s a conflict and 

a confusing thing to markets 
in light of
 how this Committee has behaved in the past.  
So what we 
should do is say we like where the rate is today in light of everything we know.  Given 

everything we know, we say the risks are balanced, which means we could go in either direction 

depending on how the data evolve.  Number three, w
e should also stress appropriately that if 
inflation develops, 
we will 
raise rates commensurately in that case.
  And, number four, we are 
not giving any forward guidance on rates.  We™re at the correct level today, and future 

adjustments up or down will depend on macroeconomic events. 
Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will discuss this approach further in the policy round 
tomorrow. 
CHAI
R YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 
MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Incoming data since the 
previous
 meeting 
provide mixed signals on the strength of the economy.  As has frequently occurred 
over the past 
several years, labor market data suggest greater strength than 
do spending data.  Fortunately, 

labor data have tended to give a more accurate picture of the underlying strength of the economy.  

Moreover, with ongoing job gains of 200,000 per month, income gains should be strong enough 

to maintain solid growth in consumption
, and business investment should rebound to help meet 
rising demand.  Thus, I have some confidence that spending indicators will strengthen in coming 

months. 
That said, rece
nt spending data are indeed weak.  
The 
Board
™s staff now estimate
s 
that 
real GDP increased 
at just
 a ½ percent 
rate
 in the first quarter after growing 
at 
only 
a 1.4 percent 
rate
 in Q4.  Taken at face value, this could cause concern about prospects for 
econ
omic 
growth, 
particularly because much of the weakness is in consumption and investment, the two main 
engines for growth.
  However, some of the low reading for Q1 may reflect residual seasonality.  
Indeed, analysts at the Board think residual seasonality may account for 
½ percentage point of 

the slowdown.  Other analysts estimate that it could be 
1½ percent, which would put 
GDP 
growth in the range of 1 to 2 
percent, a bit less worrisome.
 Looking through these volatile and uncertain quarterly estimates as well as seasonality, 
the four-
quarter change in 
real 
GDP shows GDP growth running at about 2 percent through Q1, 
and my reading of the fundamentals suggests 
that 
2 percent is a pretty good estimate of the 
momentum of the economy and as good a guess as any for the future pace of 
GDP 
growth.  
The 

key factors driving demand over the past year remain in place
:  the high level of household 
wealth and solid job gains propelling consumption, and low long-
term interest rates and 
relat
ively easy access to credit support
ing business investment.  In addition, the recent drop in 
the dollar should reverse some of the drag due to 
past apprecia
tion, and the stabilization of 
financial markets 
and 
the news from overseas suggest that the downside risks 
arising 
from these 
sources are still receding from their elevated February levels.
 In contrast to the spending data, the labor market continues to show solid improvement, 
with businesses relentlessly adding 200,000 jobs per month.  These increases and 
the optimism 
displayed in business surveys support the notion that firms not in 
manufacturing still judge that 

demand is rising at a moderate pace.
  Nor
mally
, job increases of this magnitude would be 
accompanied by a noticeable drop in the unemployment rate, but labor force participation has 

rebounded sharply over the past six monthsŠanother healthy developmentŠand, consequently, 

the unemployment rate has
 flattened out.
 Although 
some of that recent 
bounce 
in participation may turn out to be statistical, I hope 
and expect that some important part of it is the result of a tightening in the labor market as 
individuals recognize that jobs are now easier to get
 and thus enter or return to the labor force.
  This rise in participation is a welcome event
, as it increases the productive capacity of the 
economy, suggests that the maximum level of employment may be higher than we thought, and, 
most importantly, improv
es the lives of many families.
 However, as many have noted, productivity growth remains terrible, and these job gains 
have not been accompanied by the expected increase in output.  This has been a persistent 

feature of the expansion in the U
nited States
 and globally, as noted in the Tealbook box that™s 
been referenced here today.
  I agree with the sentiments offered in the box, and I™m 
hard
-pressed
 to see why we should expect productivity to rebound sharply in 2016.  In fact, I found the two 

alternative simulations
 showing a slower return of productivity to the trend to be closer to my 
thinkingŠo
ne simply a supply-side shock and the other adding 
in continued strong payroll 
growth.  The stronger economic 
growth is really the continuation of more of the same
.  It™s 
2 percent 
economic 
growth
, and it™s 200,000 jobs a month.  A
nd it™s a slower return in 
productivity that gets you to 
a 3.9 percent unemploy
ment rate at the end of
 2018.  In fact, my 
baseline would be located somewhere between the two, probably closer to the 
ﬁWeaker Labor 

Productivity, Stronger Labor Marketﬂ 
scenario
. 
Accordingly, I continue to expect 2 
percent GDP growth will be accompanied b
y ½ percent increase in productivity this year and 200,000 jobs per month.  If participation remains 

at 63 percent, that would imply a 
three
-tenths
 decline in the unemployment rate by the end of the 
year or a steeper decline if 
the 
participation rate begin
s to fall again.
  This ongoing tightening 
in resource utilization should put some additional upward pressure on wages and prices, and I 

remain confident that inflation will rise, particularly as the effects of decline
s in oil and import 
prices fade over time.
  With core inflation now running at 
1½ percent, the underlying core 
inflation rate that looks through effects of the temporary swings in the dollar and energy prices is 

actually much closer to 
2 percent
.  W
ith the dollar and oil prices apparently havin
g stabilized, the 
fading of their influence should move core and total inflation up to 2 
percent over the medium 

term.
 Now, the Tealbook says that we are at full employment, but I™m not at all certain that 
there are
n™t remaining elements of slack, and 
it g
ets harder to argue that with participation 
having increased.  In any case, I™m open to the idea that there may be 
remaining margins 
of 
slack.
  Inflation is below target and real long-
term interest rates are low, and this combination 
indicates either that there is remaining slack or that the economy is still experiencing significant 

headwinds and requires accommodative policy. 
While
 I expect these headwinds to diminish over the next couple of years, I doubt that 
they will fully dissipate 
during 
this cycle, 
which would mean that the federal funds rate and 
longer-
term rates will still be relatively low over the medium term.
  The Committee™s rate 
forecast
s, including my own, have consistently erred to the upside to an extent that is not fully 
explained by unexp
ected economic weakness, and my view is that rates will need to remain 
lower for longer than the Tealbook forecast in order to achieve the baseline.  
One reason for this 

view is that investors have had a heightened focus on the differences between U.S. mon
etary 

policy and that of foreign central banks. 
The Tealbook rate forecast would deliver a very large surprise to markets, and yet the 
dollar would appreciate only gradually.  As the 
Board
™s staff pointed out in a useful presentation 
on Monday and as Steve 
emphasized in his presentation, there™s a real risk that the dollar would 

appreciate much more than the forecast.  The baseline forecast is based on longer
-term 
relationships between interest rate surprises and the dollar.  The dollar has been many times 
more 
responsive since mid
-2014, when the dollar began its appreciation, and that
™s also true for the 
almost 
3 percent
 decline since the March meeting, which is far larger than the adjustment in 
interest rates would have 
been
 implied using historical relationships.
 I would add that when these relationships seem to change, the 
staff is always in the 
position of having to decide whether to go with the old relationships or take new data onboard, 

and it™s the same question with pr
oductivity
.  I am not sure it really matters as long as the risk of 
being wrong is exposed, as has clearly been done in both of those cases.  
So 
on this question, the 

reaction has been appropriate, and the 
risk that™s been identified is another reason to proceed 

cautiously with rate increases.
  More on that tomorrow.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Kaplan.
 MR. KA
PLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I™ll start with energy.  The production freeze 
negotiation among 
OPEC members 
in Doha ended with no agreement.  We™
d expected that these 
negotiations would not have any supplyŒdemand 
effect
 primarily because Iran has consistently 
said
 that 
it is intent on increasing its production to pre-
sanction
 levels.  
Although 
there was much 
made of th
ese 
Doha discussions, most of our contacts in the industry had expected nothing to 
come out of these meetings, and the meetings lived up to expectations.  T
herefore
, the 
breakup of 
these talks really did not materially 
affect
 our outlook for the energy sector, and we think that™s 
one reason why you didn™t really see much of a 
price effect
. 
Our latest estimate is that global energy supply today still exceeds demand by more than 
1 million barrels.  We believe that 
supply and demand will reach rough balance by 
the first 
quarter of 2017, and we think it is this expectation that is the fundamental force driving the 
firming of prices.
  This forecast assumes that global demand will grow by 1.2 million barrels a 
day in 2016.  It also assumes that there will be a sub
stantial decline in non
-OPEC production, 
primarily in the United States in the second half of this year
, as the effects of cuts made over the 
past two years finally lead to production declines as wells run down and are not replaced by new 

wells.
  We believ
e excess inventory in the OECD countries now stands at 440 million barrels, 
which is a record.  We also assume in this forecast 
that, although there have been supply outages 

in Nigeria, Iraq, Libya, and, 
most recently
, Kuwait, all of th
ose outages either h
ave been resolved 
or will be resolved and production will be restored. 
More important, looking ahead and on 
the basis of discussions 
we have had with our 
contacts as well as
 a new energy survey 
that
 we™ve just started and 
that
 will be published in 
JuneŠ
this will be a quarterly energy survey with 
more than
 165 participantsŠit is our judgment 
that the 
breakeven 
price for most shale projects in the United States ranges between 
$35 and $50 
a barr
el, depending on the field.  
So, for
 example, at 
$40 to $45 oil, in our judgment it is simply 
not economic to invest in new wells in much of the Eagle Ford or the Permian Basin, which are 
the two biggest fields in this country.  This tells us that in the 
$40s, 
very few new wells will be 
dril
led in shale
, and very few jobs will come back to the oil industry.  In the range of $50 to $60, 
however, some rigs will begin to be added, you™ll see supply begin to increase, and jobs will start 

to come back.  In addition, 
we™ve learned 
that 
one of the big 
effects
 of the declines over the 
past 
two years has been 
that 
a substantial number of the 
long-
lead
-time
 conventional projects have 
been scrapped.  The very big cuts in c
ap-ex have come from th
ose very long
-lived projects 
that
 take as long as 
7 to 10 ye
ars to complete and have decline curves exceeding well over 20 years.
  These projects fundamentally increase global oil supply.  Shale projects, on the other hand, can 

be developed very quickly and 
are relatively bite
-size in terms of cost, but 
they have d
ecline 
curves of only 2 to 3 years.  Tho
se are useful in providing incremental supply.
 When you combine 
all of these facts
Šand recognizing that OPEC is currently operating 
at a 
historically
 high level of capacity utilization
Šit is our view that as global d
emand continues 
to grow over the next few years, we could likely find ourselves in a global undersupply 
situation 

within three to four years and vulnerable to a price shock on the upside.  I know that™ll be a big 

change in perspective, but we think that is more likely than not as we work through increasing 

shale supply and don™t have these 
long
-lived 
projects to call on.
  But maybe that™s 
wishful 
thinking for people in the industry and it™s going to tak
e a few years.
 In terms of the 
11th District, we now expect job growth in Texas to range between 
½ and
 1 percent in 2016
, down from 3.7 percent growth in 2014.  The change 
reflects job losses in 

Houston 
while jobs 
continue 
to increase 
in Dallas, San Antonio, and Austin.  
The service sector 
in Texas continues to grow, while the manufacturing sector continues to be weak, although our 
recent su
rvey 
indicated that it is showing some signs of stabilizing.  Texas continues to benefit 
from migration of people and 
firms to the state, and this  help
s 
further
 drive the diversification of 
the Texas economy.  Energy is now only 2 percent of employment and 9 
percent of GDP in the 
state of Texas, versus 14 percent of GDP in 2014. 
One l
ast comment on the 11
th District
:  It
 is clear to us that job growth in Texas as well 
as in our D
istrict generally has benefited
 from the 
increas
ing number of trade and production 
partnerships with Mexico.  Texas imports from Mexico, for example, have 40 percent U.S. 
manufacturing content 
on 
average.  These partnerships
, in our judgment, have helped to keep 

jobs in North America as well as 
to 
stimulat
e spending 
in the United States
 by Mexican shoppers 
who regularly come across the border to buy goods and services.  It is an element, 
we believe
, in allow
ing U.S. companies to avoid relocation of even more manufacturing jobs to Asia.  And we 
will continue to watch this dynamic closely because it
™s been a key strength
, in our view, for 
Texas as well as 
to 
the United States
, and 
is 
probablyŠperhaps an understatement hereŠ
misunderstood. 
In terms of the U.S. economy, our economists expect the U.S. consumer to remain strong 
in 2016, and, as a result, we expect GDP growth to rebound in coming quarters.  L
ike others 
around the table, we 
are forecasting
 GDP growth of about 2 percent in 2016.  
We believe there is 
someŠ
but increasingly limited
Šremaining slack in the U.S. labor market, and we expect the 
headline unemployment rate to continue to decline below 5 
percent this year.
 Regarding inflation, through la
st month
, the Dallas trim
med
 mean 
has 
now 
been running 
between 1.8 and 1.9 
percent, although there is some seasonality 
in this
 measure
, and we 
would 
expect it to back off to some degree
.  Nonetheless,
 that gives us some increased confidence that 
headline i
nflation will gradually rise to 
2 percent over the medium term.
  When you take all of 
those fa
cts together, 
they
 cause me to be increasingly constructive about the June meeting, a 
subject 
we™ll
 pick up tomorrow.
 One caution, which surprised me a little bit
 in getting prepared for this meeting
, came out 
of our round of 25 or 30 calls.  In previous calls, our 
corporate contacts described business as 
stronger than they do now.  This time around, m
ost of them 
now 
describe 
their 
business
 in the 
United States
 as flat to down
.  The contact group includes a number in the 
service
s 
sector
, and 
the responses were 
really across industries.
  Several mention
ed the ﬁ
CNN effect
:ﬂ  They believe 
that the consumer should be getting stronger, but househ
olds are
 hesitating to spend 
because of
 political uncertainty as well as potentially 
because of some psychological holdover from the 

financial turmoil during the first two months of the year.
  In the meantime
, 
these companies are 
focused more on cost-
cutti
ng, see relatively little wage pressure except in skilled trades and IT, 
and are holding off on major capital spending and other new projects.  Time will tell whether this 

sluggishness is temporary.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
MR. HARKER.  Madam Chair
. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Yes.
 MR. HARKER.  Just a quick question.  What do your economists think 
will be
 the effect
, if any, of the Saudi sale of A
ramco?
 MR. KAPLAN.  
We don™t think that alone is going to have a significant 
effect
.  The thing 
we are watching
 more closely
Šalthough we don™t believe it™s going to happenŠ 
is whether 
Saudi Arabia and 
Russia are
, as they have hinted,
 actually
 going to increase supply.  The 
privatization is part of an overall strategy for 
the Saudis
 to diversify away from oil.  It i
s one of 
many steps they
™re going to take to try to red
irect
 resources to other parts of their economy and 
be less dependent on oil.  So th
e sale
 is a natural evolution of that.
 CHAI
R YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Evans. 
MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair
.  The reports on economic activity from my 
business contacts were a bit more upbeat than in March.  Notably, no one expressed much 
concern that the first-quarter weakness in GDP would prove to be more than a transitory soft 

patch.  In my 
District
, there c
ontinues to be a large contrast between conditions 
in industrial 
versus consumer-
facing businesses.
  Those producing industrial capital goods who have heavy 
international trade exposure are seeing weak demand.  Those facing the U.S. consumer are more 

positive.
 Some of the weakness in cap
-ex is easy to explain by the strong dollar and low energy 
prices.  Other anecdotal reports are more challenging to square.  A couple of my directors and 

other contacts say that even with low interest rates and plenty o
f cash on hand, firms are 
choosing not to invest, and we heard that just a minute ago.  These firms clearly say that they are 

right-sized for the current level of demand, their outlook for continued slow growth, and the 
potential downside risks.  
So it seems there
™s another factor beyond the dollar and low 
commodity prices weighing on capital spendingŠ
namely
, business caution.  Firms™ baseline 
sales expectations are modest, and they
™re very attentive to what could go wrong. 
With regard
 to the economic 
picture
, the first quarter obviously was quite weak.  My 
staff™s outlook is that 
economic 
growth
 will
 recover to average around 2½ 
percent over the rest 
of the year.  I can™t say 
that
 forecast is wrong.  I am not optimistic myself.  But if residual 
seasonality remains anywhere, it would seem to be in our collective 
early
-year optimism
, which 
is then followed by downward revisions to the outlook 
in the middle of the year.  I guess that™
s seasonality too, isn™t it?  And I could see the same happening with this for
ecast, as realistically 
the risks are probably to the downside. 
With re
gard to inflation, the incoming data were consistent with our forecast of core PCE 
at 1.6 percent for the year, although we continue to see some downside risk 
associated with
 a potential decline in inflation expectations.  In any event, our 
Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago 
forecast
s 
of economic growth and inflation are very similar to the Tealbook™s.  However, we do 
have a somewhat different view of labor market slack.  
We think the labor 
force participation 
rate is still somewhat below trend, and this translates into a little more overall slack in labor 
markets than in the Tealbook. 
An important factor supporting our forecast is the continuation of the improvement in 
credit conditions tha
t started in mid
-February.  This improvement was a major theme among our 
financial market contacts this round.
  Our contact who tracks small business lending reported a 
pickup in demand for credit in February after markedly negative reports in three of the previous 

five months.  Consistent with our real
-side anecdotes, small business lending is strongest among 
consumer-facing firms and firms providing nontradable goods and services.  Our contacts at Ford 
noted that they received a lot of interest from banks
 in the renewal of their credit line syndicate, 
and that the spreads on their commercial paper and other debt were the narrowest in about a year.
  Finally, in line with Simon™s report from the dealer survey, a number of financial contacts said 
that F
OMC
 communication about risk management was a critical factor supporting the recent 
improvement in financial conditions.  In their opinion, the Fed™s willingness to lean against 

adverse tail risk has been an important stabilizing force.
 To sum up, on balance, the domestic fundamentals continue to be good.  My baseline 
scenario has 
economic 
growth recovering from its first
-quarter soft patch and the recent 
improvements of inflation being maintained.  
But
 downside risks remain, and our 
risk
-manage
ment approach 
to guard against those risks continues to be a salient feature of appropriate 
policy.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lockhart. 
MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In preparing for the policy decision at 
this meet
ing, I spent a lot of time considering the 
divergence 
between 
the data on 
economic 
growth in the first quarter and my forecast.  The latest update of our GDP 
nowtracking estimate
 
puts first
-quarter growth at 0.4
 percent
, the same as the current Tealbook es
timate.
  Our first
-quarter nowcast began to deteriorate in mid
-March with the arrival of February data on retail 
sales, durable goods, personal consumption, and international trade.  We will know on Thursday 

how accurate the estimate of 
0.4 percent 
turns o
ut to be.  But there is broad consensus among 
available tracking estimates that first
-quarter 
GDP 
growth is likely to come in below 1.0 
percent.
 A slow first quarter was not my expectation at the time of the 
previous SEP submission.  
I had marked in a firs
t quarter that was close to my assumed run rate for the economy, between 2
 and 2½ percent.  The facts in hand regarding spending growth present the problem of whether to 

take the first
-quarter data weakness as signaling a deceleration or to look through th
e apparent 
weakness and treat it as anomalous in some respects.  So this could be a 
déjà vu
 moment all over 
again.  
In recent years, first
-quarter real
-time readings of the economy have tended to be 
deceptively soft.
 Now, I am not picking up softness in re
ports from my 
District contacts.  Recent 
soundings present a more upbeat picture than the data on spending.  Sentiment among our 

directors and contacts remains positive and showed some improvement since the 
previous
 cycle 
leading up to the March meeting.  
Consumer spending activity overall was characterized as 

stable and is not decelerating.  Business investment activity seems to be steadily growing at a 
modera
te pace, and we sensed no cautionary signals in the mix of investment.  A reasonable 
amount of business fixed investment is being depicted as growth 
oriented.
  Real estate activity 
across the Sixth District remains solid.  Commercial real estate fundamentals remain within a 
range that sounds no alarms.  Residential starts and sales activity continue to
 increase at a slow 
but steady pace in most parts of the 
District.  
 One of the more interesting and generally upbeat contact interviews was with the CEO of 
one of the nation™s largest credit reporting firms.  Its
 credit dashboard through February had 
household debt rising 3.2 percent 
year over year
, so the positive household credit trends evident 
in the flow of funds accounts last year are apparently continuing.  Auto credit led the advance, 

but bankcard extensions were also strong.  And the growth in first-
quarter mortgages has been 
solid.  Delinquencies and write-
offs are holding at modest levels.  So this contact characterized 
the mix, growth, and performance of household credit as healthy and supportive of a good 
pace
 
of spending. 
We did pick up some cautionary vibes from auto industry contacts, particularly our 
director who is CEO of the country™s largest car retailer.  His industry
-wide perspective depicted 
the recent softening in auto sales as likely materially worse but for incentives that are nearin
g 10 percent of the sales price.
  Inventories remain elevated
, and our contact expects production 
schedule cuts soon to restore balance.  Sales numbers have been juiced by expanding fleet sales, 

and there has been a surge in leasing at discounted valuations.  The implication is that auto asset 

value contraction may ripple through the national fl
eet in future years, affecting trade
-in values 
and new auto pricing.  Overall, we came away from conversations with our auto contacts 

concluding that the auto spending tailwind will likely be a headwind over the near to medium 

horizon. 
That s
aid, the pockets of softness we detected in our conversations with D
istrict contacts 
do not appear to suggest a broad-
based deceleration.  At the moment, there seems to be a 
disconnect between anecdote and data.  Something of a disconnect is also evident, of course, 
comparing employment data with weaker signals 
on GDP growth
.  Reports of our contacts on the 
employment situation were in line with the official data prints.  Stories about difficult
-to-fill jobs 
persist in categories like IT, con
struction, trucking, health care, and other technical jobs.  Layoffs 
continued in recent weeks in the oil and gas and gas
-dependent industries.  These reports overall 
were consistent with earlier cycles.  
We did hear more reports than previously that we in
terpret 
as indications of labor market tightening.  For example, we heard that part-
time workers are 
being converted to full-
time
 employment
, and that concerns about retaining talent are causing 
some companies to develop catch
-up plans.  We heard the expre
ssion ﬁwar for talentﬂ for the 
first time in a long ti
me in more than one interview.
 The strong market performance, the fundamentals that should support stronger consumer 
spending, our contacts™ general optimism, and 
some firming of the inflation trend hav
e persuaded me to leave my outlook essentially unchanged from our previous 
meeting.
  However, 
the prospects for a weak first
-quarter GDP print driven by both weak consumer and business 
investment spending and the general ambiguity of the current circumstan
ces give me pause.  For 
that reason, as I
™ll explain in the policy round, I™
m looking past this meeting regarding the rate 
move.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Harker. 

MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Economic activity i
n the Third District 
continues to improve, and our manufacturers may be over the worst of the recent downturn in 

that sector.  Despite some backtracking in our 
Business 
Outlook Survey, there has been a 
signif
icant increase in optimism among our manufacturi
ng contacts.  Employment growth is 
strong, consumer spending is growing moderately, and commercial construction continues to 
grow at a slow but steady pace.
  There is some evidence of increasing overall price pressures in 
the region.  But with regard to re
al estate, and with the exception of the Philadelphia metro area, 
house price appreciation s
till appears to be restrained.
 Our 
Manufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey edged back into negative territory with the 
April general activity index reported at minus 1.6.  Shipments significantly weakened, 
as did the 

employment subindex.  However, unlike previous reports, respondents are seeing price pressures 

developing for both prices paid and prices received.  In direct contrast to readings on current 

activity, manu
facturers in the region have grown increasingly optimistic.  The diffusion index for 
future general activity has jumped 13.4 points to 42.2.  A
ll the future sub
indexes 
reflect a 
rebound in optimism a
s well.
  In contrast, 
a 
diversified manufacturing contact
 in the region 
indicated that 10 of his 12 
business lines will report negative profits this quarter.  January was an 
exceptionally weak month, and although succeeding months are showing some improvement, 
that improvement has not been substantial.  
For the 
year as a whole, most business lines are 

forecasting profitability, but his outlook is not overly optimistic.  So it is with a bit of cautious 

optimism that
, all 
told,
 my take is that the area manufacturers have seen the worst of the 
slowdown. 
In a set of 
special questions directed at expenditures for both data and network security, 
physical security, and expenditures incurred for meeting regulatory burdens, we found that a 

significant majority of firms were increasing outlays on data and network protection
 as well as 
regulatory compliance, but that most were not facing increasing costs of providing for physical 
safety at
 the workplace.
  One fairly frank respondent indicated that his firm didn™t mind the 
increased regulatory burden, 
as it acted as a barrier 
to entry and thwarted competition.   
Nonmanufacturing 
activity in the 
District continues to grow modestly as reflected in our 
Nonmanufacturing B
usiness 
Outlook Survey.  
The h
eadline activity index of 17.8 in March, 
while expansionary, is below its 
nonrecessionary average.
  Like our manufacturers, area service 
providers remained relatively optimistic, with expectations of future activity fairly optimistic.  
Some 68.5 percent of respondents reported increased expenditures on data and network security, 

50 percent showed increases to enhanced physical security, and slightly more than half have 

increased spending in order to satisfy regulatory compliance.
  In light of 
the responses in these 
categories, a reasonable conjecture might be that some of the pro
ductivity slowdown may be due 
to expenditures that, 
one could argue
, produce little in the way of productive output.  They 
simply just protect what you have as opposed to growing output. 
Our Beige
 Book contacts reported a slight 
to modest improvement in ec
onomic 
conditions.  Homebuilders have reported an improvement in traffic, and a large builder reported 

an appreciable increase in backlogs.  Overall, construction activity continues at a slow but steady 

pace.  With the exception of the Philadelphia metro area, house prices, as I said, have not risen 

appreciably. 
Now, 
for the nation as a whole, economic activity appears to have softened significantly, 
although I agree with President Williams™
s analysis of Q1 GDP.  We may be looking at two 

consecutive quarter
s of economic growth averaging in the neighborhood of 1 percent, 
but time 
will tell.  Labor markets, 
however, remain robust, but consumption appears to be more 

restrained.  And 
although I believe manufacturing is bottoming out, I do not anticipate a 
signif
icant 
bounceback. 
My ov
erall view and forecast of real economic activity are fairly consistent with that 
presented by the staff in the Tealbook.  However, my view on inflation is that we will see a path 
that returns to target somewhat faster than the glaci
al pace presented in the Tealbook, perhaps by 

the end of next year.  
With unemployment falling below its natural rate and the significant price 

pressures resulting from various forms of legislation, I don™t believe price increases will be 

delayed for much 
longer.  Recent data on inflation as portrayed by core measures and various 
trim
med
 means reported by my colleagues, as well as the behavior of the dollar and oil prices, 
make me more assured that inflation will return to target.  And I see little evidence
 that inflation 
expectations have become unanchored.  That viewpoint drives me to favor statement language 

that would in no way preclude June from being a live meeting, but more on this tomorrow. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Mester. 

MS. MESTER.  Th
ank you, Madam Chair.  Overall economic activity and sentiment in 
the Fourth District remain consistent with continued moderate 
economic growth.  The Bank™s 
diffusion index for business contacts reporting better versus worse conditions moved up to plus 
16 from the plus 14 I reported at our previous meeting, which had been the highest reading in 

more than
 six months. 
Manufacturing and the energy sector continue to be challenged, but one of our directors 
reports that we may be seeing some bottoming out in 
the energy and primary metal sectors.
  Reports from auto and related manufacturing industries indicate that activity levels remain 

stable.  In contrast to President Lockhart™s contact, auto contacts in the Fourth District remain 

quite upbeat despite the de
cline in vehicle sales in March and a two
-week shutdown of the GM 
auto plant in Lordstown, Ohio, due to supply disruptions caused by the recent earthquake in 

Japan.
  A director from one auto producer noted that his company is expecting motor vehicle 
produc
tion
 to remain stable at 
high
 levels, with
 sales for the year matching last year™s pace of 
nearly 17½ 
million.  The strength in autos led to more positive reports from freight transportation 
contacts who saw the 
volume of shipments increase.
 District labor
 markets continue to show solid progress.  The 
Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland staff estimates that 
District employment grew 1
½ percent over the year ending in 
March
; the D
istrict™s unemployment rate has remained low and stable, estimated to be 5.1 
perce
nt in March.
  A variety of business contacts continue to report tighter conditions in labor 
markets, including rising wage pressures for unskilled occupations in the retail sector and 
difficulty in finding skilled workers in construction, high-
quality manufacturing, and quantitative 
occupations. 
The regional director of a significant national federation of 
labor 
unions who sits on our 
Cincinnati branch board indicated that, 
to alleviate some of the mismatch between jobs and 

skills
, they have established an apprenticeship program in industrial trades similar to the one they 
have for the construction trades.
  After a successful pilot in Wisconsin, they have secured 

funding to expand the program into six other states.  Tho
se types of p
rograms hold the promise 
of partially alleviating some of the country™s longer
-run workforce development issues, which 

remain significant but are not solved by monetary policy. 
Overall, my view of the national economy has changed little from our previous meeting, 
although we didn™t get the pickup in first-quarter growth I was hoping for.  Instead, growth 

remained sluggish.  I am feeling a sense of 
déjà vu
 that 
I hope will continue
, because in 2014 and 
2015, weak first quarters were followed by strong second-
quarter rebounds.
  Anecdotal evidence 
suggests that activity may have picked up toward the end of the first quarter, which is consistent 

with the sharp rebound in financial conditions since our previous 
meeting.
 The dis
parity between modest and moderate output growth and the solid performance of 
the labor market continues.  Payroll growth has averaged nearly 250,000 jobs per month over the 
past six months.  The labor force participation rate and the employment-
to-population ratio
 each 
have risen 60 
basis points since last fall.  Both are above their trend estimates.
  In my view, the 
economy is at maximum employment from the perspective of what monetary policy can do.  I 

note that the Tealbook now assesses there is essentially no slack left in the labor market.
 The strength in the job market and, 
with it
, the rise in personal income, is an important 
fundamental that will support consumer spending.  I found the Tealbook™s analysis of the 
effect 

of energy prices on consumer spending quite useful.  First, it val
idates that consumers have been 
spending at least part of the gain from lower oil prices, although less than the 
FRB
/US model 
predicted.  It appears that many have been saving at least some portion of the gain.  
The marginal 

propensity to consume the windfall will vary by income level, and that may be reflected in the 

stronger spending effect that™s picked up in studies that utilize microspending data.  
The 
Board 
staff suggests that most of the spending gained from falling energy prices may have already been 
realized.  But an alternative view is that consumers have just shifted the spending to a later time 

when they might have more confidence in the health of the economy.  In any case, the increased 

savings will help support future consumption.  We will need to watch for signs of whether some 

fundamental shift in consumer spending is occurring, but so far nothing points to a 
sustained 

pullback in the consumer sector. 
Business investment remained weak in the first quarter.  I have some concerns about the 
implications of this for capital de
epening and, therefore, for longer-
run structural productivity 
growth.  But in the short run, some of the forward-
looking indicators from the national ISM and 
some of
 the regional manufacturing surveys suggest a future pickup in new orders may be 
coming.  Housing continues to grow at a moderate pace. 
Inflation is rising gradually.  You can see this across a broad array of measures.  Inflation 
is behaving like the Committee expected
:  As oil prices and the dollar have shown some 
stability
, the economy has continued to expand, and inflation expectations have remained reasonably well 
anchored.  
Rates of b
oth 
core and headline inflation have increased over the past year and over 
the past six months.  The 
Federal Reserve Bank of 
Clev
eland staff nowcast for April put PCE 
inflation at 1 percent and core PCE inflation at 1
½ percent.  The PCE measure is up 80 basis 
points and the core PCE measure is up 20 basis points, 
compared 
with
 a year ago and compared 
with
 six months ago.  Core CPI inflation, which helps to predict headline, has been running 
above 2 percent this year.  The Cleveland 
Fed
eral Reserve™s median CPI measure has also been 
rising gradually over the past year and now stands at 2.4 percent. 
At this point, I continue to forecast economic growth slightly above trend for the year as 
a whole, some further improvement in labor markets
, and inflation continuing to move up 
gradually to our 2 percent goal.  The economy will be supported by monetary p
olicy that will 

remain very accommodative, even as we bring rates up gradually, which I view as appropriate 

conditional on
 the outlook.  I note that 
my outlook takes into account the expected divergent 
paths of monetary policy here and abroad. 
Of course, risks remain to the outlook.  The risks are centered on global economic 
developments, including the possibility of sustained financial market disruptions caused by the 

United Kingdom™s upcoming decision of whether to stay in the EU.  At this point, I assess 
the 

possibility of a sustained disruption as remote, and, in my view, global risks have 
decreased 

since earlier in the year.  This is reflected in the easing in financial conditions and a return to 
more no
rmal volatility compared 
with
 earlier in the year.
  On the basis of 
the solid performance 
of the labor market, there are some upside risks to the forecast as well.  Overall, I see the risks to 
the outlook as being roughly balanced. 
I am increasingly hearing from contacts in my 
District that our policy com
munications 
are somewhat muddled.  This concerns me.  It™s an indication we have not clearly articulated our 

policy rationale.  I see this as a potential risk to our ability to implement effective policy, a risk 

that we shouldn™t ignore.  
The Committee has
 continued to indicate that we view 
a gradual 

upward path of rates as appropriate and consistent with our outlook.  With our employment goal 

now largely met, with inflation gradually moving up to our target as anticipated, and with 

downside risks subsiding somewhat, the question should no longer be, 
ﬁIs it appropriate to take 
the next step on the normalization path?ﬂ  But, rather, the question should be, 
ﬁIs it really 
appropriate not to take the next step?
ﬂ  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President George.
 MS. GEORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  District economic growth continues to lag 
the nation as low agricultural and energy prices persist and financing conditions continue to 

tighten.  In the ag sector, not much has changed since our 
pre
vious meeting, and ag
ricul
tural 
sector
 bankers are buckling in for a bumpy year of unprofitable farm operations while they 
extend more credit secured by land. 
In energy, the rig count is at its lowest level since at least 1949, and oil inventories are at 
their highest level since 1930.  Stockpiles are expected to begin easing in 2016 as oil production 

declines intensify, which may provide a modest boost to prices.
  But according to various 
Fed
eral Reserve
 energy surveys, the average price needed for firms t
o remain profitable is $53 
per barrel, down from $59 last fall, as firms focus on the best plays.  Still, firms
, on average
, do not expec
t this price to be reached until 2017.  Even when prices do rise, our contacts note they 
will not be able to ramp up activity in any meaningful way for several years 
because of
 the huge 
loss of skilled workers, depreciation of equipment, and tighter financing. 
In addition, natural gas prices remain unprofitable, and, thus, bankruptcies are rising for 
oil and gas companies 
in the region.  Some are relatively smooth 
Chapter 11s, but others, mostly 
small companies, are taking the Chapter 7 route.  As I watch the energy sector in my region, I 

think of a line of 
Hemingway 
in which one 
character sa
ys, ﬁHow 
did you go bankrupt?ﬂ  
The 
other says,
 ﬁTwo ways
.  G
radually
, then suddenly.ﬂ  Coal producers have been particularly hard 
hit.  Three of the four large coal companies that operate in Wyoming, where 44 percent of U.S. 

coal is produced
, have filed for bankruptcy.  Drastically reduced coal production is also 
negatively affecting the region™s rail industry.  However, beyond these commodity-based 

businesses, our business cont
acts remain relatively upbeat.
 For the national economy, my outloo
k is little changed despite a weaker
-than
-expected 
first quarter 
in which consumers held back and investment cuts intensified.  In terms of the 
consumer, the slowdown looks to be limited to goods purchases, which I view as somewhat 

reassuring because a mor
e broad-based slowing, including services, might have pointed to more 
fundamental weakness.
  Despite the decelerating spending growth, the pace of job gains has 
remained robust, still averaging 
more than 200,000 per month this year.  Financial conditions 
have also eased since March.  And
, provided job growth and financial conditions remain stable, I 
expect consumer spending growth will come back.  One of our contacts in the apparel industry 

noted that, although profits were up and sales declined in the firs
t quarter, she projected positive 
sales growth for the rest of the year.  That
™s reassuring
, as clothing and footwear was one of the 
weak categories of real PCE in February.
 Regar
ding housing, the moderate recovery appears to remain on track, though low 
inventories and rising prices suggest that construction of single
-family homes has been a bit slow 
to respond to rising demand.  Looking ahead, I expect residential investment will continue to 
contribute to 
economic growth, though 
I see some risk to the outl
ook for multifamily 
construction.  
Our directors report jitters as a large number of units are coming online across the 

region.  Longer term, the demographics remain favorable for multifamily construction, but right 

now we are seeing 
a 
rise in vacancies in
 some markets.
 An important aspect of the outlook is how the economy will continue to manage through 
the pivot away from manufacturing and energy activity to services.  One implication of this shift 

is 
for 
productivity growth.  My staff estimates that the 
relative decline in manufacturing and 
energy, which are significantly more productive than services industries, has cut overall 

productivity growth by about ¾ percentage point over the 
past
 year.  Although this offers an 
explanation for soft productivity g
rowth the past few years, it doesn™t explain the longer 
downward trend in productivity growth.  Indeed, some portion of the recent weakness in 
productivity seems structural, and I don™t believe monetary policy can do much to change that.  

This raises conce
rns similar to those highlighted in the Tealbook box offering an alternative view 

on the outlook for productivity. 
Finally, my outlook for inflation is little changed and has inflation near mandate-
consistent levels throughout the forecast horizon.  The ef
fects of the past dollar appreciation and 
oil price declines should diminish, particularly with the recent reversals in 
the dollar and oil 
price
s.  The realized gains in inflation increase my confidence that
, with continued improvement 
in economic activity
, inflation will continue moving toward 2 percent over the forecast horizon.  
Thank you. 
CHAI
R YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Tarullo.  
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I was tempted to ask the question 
of what it 
means to say that there™s no slack in
 the labor market or that we™re at maximum or full 
employment 
in the absence of significant 
nominal 
wage 
growth, but, 
as I spoke a good bit 
already today and this 
situation
 may be mooted somewhat over the course of time, I guess I 
won™t address it.  But if
 it™s still relevant in June
, it may be something that would be worth many 
of us talking about. 
I™m going to confine myself to a few comments on risks.  At the March meeting, my 
baseline outlook was for economic growth of roughly 2 percent, or maybe a 
little bit more, this 

year
, and I thought risks were weighted to the downside almost exclusively because of global 
risks.
  Today I think my baseline outlook is 
for economic growth just a tad lower than that 
because of the first quarter.  I still find
 the risks weighted to the downside, but the reason for that 
has changed somewhat.  I formerly thought that 
domestically,
 the 
risks
 were just about balanced
, and that globally, 
they were pretty significantly to the downside.  I think
, for reasons that many 
of yo
u have said, the global risks are somewhat mitigated compared with
 March, but I now find a 
little bit more risk in the domestic outlook.
 The reasons for that are essentially what the staff and a number of you have already 
commented on
.  But I took some signal from the weak first quarter
, and 
the
 reason I do take 
some signal from
 that and the reason why I™m a little bit confused by the invocation of residual 

seasonality as an explanation for why signals shouldn™t be taken 
from that
 is the following:  I 

would have thought that most of us, and particularly those of us inclined to see residual 

seasonality as relatively more important
, would have by now adjusted our Q1 assumptions based 
on the apparent presence of that factor in four out of the p
ast five years.  
That is, you
™ve already 
seen r
esidual seasonality, and you now say, ﬁOkay, t
hat exists
.  And so, therefore, as I do my Q1 
or H1 assumptions, I™m going to take that into account.
ﬂ  Assuming that™s the case, then the 
numbers in Q1
, judging by the March SEP, 
were still a downside surprise that needs to be 

explained
.  A
nd I looked, 
actually
, at some of the public analysis by one of our Reserve Banks 
that I think is at the high end of assessments of residual seasonality, and I saw that their 

description of the o
utlook in December was for a rebound in Q1 growth with strong consumption 
performance.  T
hen the same Reserve 
Bank 
toward the end of March said, ﬁWell, we™re 
expecting flat growth, but that™s because of residual seasonality.ﬂ  
I™m having trouble putting 
those two things together, because why wouldn™t the residual seasonality have been apparent 
from the outset
? 
What are the explanations, then, 
for 
low 
Q1 economic 
growth?
  One is that the slowdown 
reflected an increase
d gap between actual and potential output.  
A second is that it™s just weird 

and anomalous, and it™ll disappear.  Another, however, which is suggested by the continued 
robust growth in employment over that period, is that potential growth needs, once again, to be 
marked down.  Now, this third explanation, when added to the previous markdowns 
in potential
, has, I think, quite complicated implications for monetary policy 
because
 it simultaneously 
suggests, on the one hand, that input marketsŠ
including labor
Šmay tighten sooner, but
, on the 
other, it suggest
s 
that 
r* may be lower than even our revised estimates.
 I™m not sure what the implications for monetary policy decisions are, but if there is 
something to the first quarter other than residual seasonality
Šwhic
h I think there almost has to 
beŠ
I think we are all forced to offer another explanation and almost to allocate how
, among 
those three or others
, would you weight the actual occurrence in the first quarter
?  I think our 
staff roughly split the difference between my first and third, some of which is a markdown in 
what t
hey expect for economic 
growth this year because of some continued underperformance, 
but some was a markdown in potential.  That™s probably as good a resolution as any, but I think 
it does matt
er.
  I would also note, I did go back and look at the Tealbooks for the p
ast three 
Aprils when the first quarter has disappointed and 
then we sort of try to figure out, okay, what 

happens next, and it™s great.  O
ne time we underestimated what the effect
 on the 
rest
-of-the-
year 
economic growth would be.  A second time we overestimated what it would be, and the third 

time we got it just about right.
  I guess my conclusion from that is
, it™s a little hard to tell right 
now, and I hope that by June some of 
this
 will begin to 
be clarified
. 
Globally
, I agree with those of you who say that risks do seem to have, in general, with a 
big Brexit exception, diminished somewhat.  I think 
Governor Brainard
, or someone 
else
 down 
at this end of the table, put it quite well already
, so I won™t repeat all of that
Šon China, the e
uro
 zone, and a little bit of stabilization while Japan continues to struggle.  N
ear term
, I think risks 
are lower elsewhere.  I™d have to say I was str
uck during the 
BankŒFund meetings by the 
admirable straightforwardness in people from the 
euro zone saying, ﬁYou guys 
are
 going to raise 

rates, right?  Because we need that downward pressure on the euro in order to increase our 

performance over time.ﬂ
  Aga
in, I admire their forthrightness, but it did give one a little bit of 
pause.
 Brexit
ŠI really don™t know how to assess Brexit
, 
to tell you the truth.  This feels to me 
more like 
Knightian 
uncertainty than just risk assessment
, because we don™t really have 
preceden
ts for this sort of thing.
  And so
, I suppose, 
if the markets are right and if the polls are 
right and the United Kingdom votes to remain, we won™t have to worry about any of this.  B
ut if 
there is a surprise or a shift, I genuinely don™t know how 
to make an ex ante assessment.
  One 
thing I will say
Šfollowing up on something 
Vice Chairman 
Dudley said, which I thought was 
import
antŠ
is 
if there is 
a ﬁyesﬂ 
vote, then there will be some increasing uncertainty because of 
the prospect that other members might think about exiting.
 I believe that that would be the case, and I believe that in response, influential people in 
the euro zone are going to make it 
very
 hard for the United Kingdom to renegotiate, and that 
those renegotiations will be quite unpleasant
.  And there may even be a little bit of self
-damage 
by the euro zone, 
just because they are afraid that if the U.K. exit makes
 it look like this is 
something that you can manage okay, 
and you can get a free trade agreement right afterward, 
then they really do risk the dissolution of the EU.  I
f the
 United Kingdom votes 
to leave, 
although it™s a little hard for me to see it as a big financial stability event in the short term, I have 

to say I™m leaning toward thinking the macroeconomic effects of this might be pretty substantial 

over the course of the next 
year or so.
 And when you add to that the fact that, as a couple of people have noted, China is kind of 
in a ﬁlet™s keep everything together nowﬂ mode by continuing to amass debt, and the euro 
zone is 
counting on us to increase rates so that the euro goes down, I™m not sure thatŠand 
this,
 I thought, 
was Steve™s point
Šin the medium 
term
, the underlying forces that are creating risk 
have actually dissipated that much, even though in the short term they have. 
Putting all of this together, these changes strike me as about a wash in the overall balance 
of risks, which I still see as 
moderately to significantly to the downside, albeit somewhat 
differently composed than six weeks ago.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  A two
-hander.  
President Williams.
 MR. WILLIAMS.  You talked about our analysis. 

MR. TARULLO.  Yes
, I™m talking about you 
all
.   
MR. WILLIAMS.  
Yes
, let™s be 
transparent.  [Laughter]  But can I respond? 
MR. TA
RULLO.  But I wasn™t going to talk about the 49ers and their prospects this year. 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Oh, why did you even do that? 
MR. TARULLO.  Well, who started it
? 
MR. WILLIAMS.  Throw me off my game.  Okay.  I have an answer to the question. 
MR. TARULLO.  Okay.
 MR. WILLIAMS.  The question is a good one.  The question was how our own thinking 
evolved.  First of all, in 2015 the BEA actually did a pretty thorough analys
is of this residual 
seasonality
 and wrote a white paper on 
it.  The 
BEA
 claimed that 
it had attacked most of the 
aspects of this, including PCE and QSS and other things.  
And so we
 took on board that we 
were 
probably going to be 
rid of most of the residual seasonality in
 GDP.  B
ut then Glenn Rudebusch 
and his colleagues redid the analysis and found, much to their surprise, 
that most of it was still 

there
, at least in GDP.
  That™s where we came up with the numbers I mentioned today.  So that 
was a bit of a surprise to us after the
 BEA
 had done this Manhattan Project, if you will, on this. 
My other 
comment is
, I tend to focus on four-
quarter changes in GDP
, just like I do on 
PCE prices and 
other things,
 because I know there™s noise 
in the data.  In our view
, GDP growth 
on a four-quarter basis hasn™t moved around very much.  It™s 2 to 2¼ percent, and as 
I said, I™m 
at 
2 percent now.
  I think it™s probably the easier way to avoid some of these issues
 on a four-

quarter basis
.  But the answer to your question is how our thinking evolved 
on that.  We actually 
thought that was probably going to go away, 
or at least mostly go away, and were somewhat 

surprised that it hasn™t.
 CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Kashkari. 

MR. KASHKARI.  Thank
 you, Madam Chair.  The Ninth District economy suffered a 
major shock last week with the death of Prince.  The good news is that this was not a 
desta
bilizing shock, but it really unified people across the D
istrict and the 
Bank celebrating his 
life and his 
music.
 In other economic news, the Ninth District continues to perform relatively well.  
However, the global weakness in commodity prices is having a notable 
effect
 on oil, as we have 
heard, 
as well as on
 mining and agriculture.  Oil production in North Dakota is now down about 
10 percent below its peak in December 2014, and a large bank in our D
istrict has increased its 
expected losses on oil business lending.  
Other industries in the 
District are generally faring 
much better, and there are some emerging s
igns of labor tightening.  For example, a national 
retailer with a large local presence has just raised its minimum wage to $10 an hour, and 

anecdotal evidence suggests that other retailers are following suit.
 At the national level, the risk of recession s
eems to have declined somewhat since earlier 
in the year.  Although 
first
-quarter 
economic 
growth has been very weak, as we have just 
discussed, a variety of leading indicators 
suggest a rebound 
ahead
.  In particular, the stock 
market has risen, the VIX 
is low, and con
sumer confidence remains high.
 In the labor market, the rapid pace of hiring has continued, 
as we have discussed at 
length.  I personally think the continued rise in labor force participation is very welcome news 

and is very important, and I don™t have confidence that there is no more slack in the labor 

market. 
 I think that, if anything, we™ve learned that there is a lot that we don™t understand about 

what
™s happening in the labor market.  And if we can continue to bring people into the labo
r market while 
the headline 
unemployment rate remains fixed, I personally think that we should 

allow that to continue.  And, on the other hand, weak productivity growth is troubling for all of 

us. 
Inflation
 and the inflation outlook also remain weak.  Oil 
and commodity prices 
are still
 low
; the dollar remains strong.  Although 
some large employers are raising pay, this has yet to 
show up in aggregate wage measures, and measures of inflation expectations remain at extremely 
low levels.
 Looking overseas, the 
IMF has again downgraded its forecast for global economic 
growth in 2016.  In addition, global inflation remains very low, 
and, as a result, there is very 

little prospect of imminent monetary policy tightening in any developed economies. 
In summary, I am cautiously optimistic that moderate growth will continue in the U.S. 
economy.  I hope that continued improvement in the labor market will eventually bring inflation 

and inflation expectations back up to 2 percent.  But I have to admit that, as yet, I don™t 
see any 

concrete evidence that this is occurring.  I continue to agree with the Tealbook that risks to the 

outlook appear to be tilted to the downside.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Vice Chair
man
. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  My
 views don™t differ 
materially from what I
™ve heard around the table.  The economy appears to have slowed rather 
sharply in Q1, but most of the fundamentals remain supportive of economic 
growth.  In 

particular, job gains remain sturdy, household real incom
es have been rising at a decent clip, 
fiscal policy is s
timulative, and financial conditions are now much easier compared 
with
 just a 
few months ago.  
So m
y baseline view is pretty much the same as everybody else, that growth 
will pick up in coming quarter
s and that real GDP will rise at about a 2 percent pace this year.
 All that said, however, I am still somewhat concerned about the outlook.  
I don™t fully 
understand the forces behind the first-quarter real GDP slowdown.  And I very much have the 

same view
 as Governor Tarullo that we
 already knew that there was this residual seasonality 
issue
 in our forecast, and so most of us have been surprised by the first-quarter slowdown.  I 
don™t want to put it all on the residual seasonality.
 I think there is some ri
sk that rather than GDP speeding up to meet payroll growth, we 
could see payroll growth slow down a little bit so 
that 
it rises at a pace more consistent with the 
modest growth rate in
 the economic activity.  I also am somewhat concerned about the weakness
 in consumer spending growth.  In some ways, I feel like that™
s the bigger issue because the 
fundamental supports for consumption in Q1 were really very positive in terms of employment 
growth, declining gasol
ine prices, and a saving
 rate that looked rather 
elevated relative to 
disposable income.  Yet we see this real weakness in consumption that I think is very hard to 

explain. 
One potential explanation is that we™
re just too optimistic about where we think the 
saving rate is supposed to go.  I can think of a number of reasons why the saving rate might be 

higher than what we think it should be.  When we look at the 
bivariate/univariate comparisons
 of 
net worth to income and where the saving rate is, we are leaving out all sorts of other variables.  

Some of the things that might point to a higher desired household saving rate would be, one, 

scarring
 from the financial crisis:  P
eople are saving more for precautionary reasons, or lenders 
are
 more unwilling to lend
.  Remember, this is a net savings rate
, and so the lending side also 
weighs on that.  The increasing skew in terms of income distribution would also point to a higher 

saving rate.  The aging of the population would tend to point to a higher saving rate.  The decline 

in real interest rates and how that
 affects expectations about future rates of return,
 how much 
savings people need to have a comfortable retirement, would also all point in the same direction.  

I think there is this notion in our mind that Q2 is going to be the inverse of Q1.  Spending is 
going to ri
se faster than income, and the household saving rate is going to decline.  I just think 
that is not necessarily obvious to me. 
In terms of Governor Tarullo raising the issue of lower potential GDP growth, I think the 
implications for policy are 
frankly 
pretty straightforward
.  It seems to me 
that
 if you have lower 
potential growth
, you™re going to run out of capacity sooner
; you™re going to run out of slack in 
the economy sooner
; and y
ou™re going to be less tolerant of a rise in
 nominal 
wage 
grow
th because the 
rate of 
nominal 
wage 
growth consistent with your 2 
percent inflation objective is 
going to be somewhat lower.  It seems to me it points to going a little bit sooner, but then it also 

implies a lower terminal federal funds rate because
, presu
mably
, r* is lower.  I guess I would say 
it™s sooner, but a lower terminal rate.  Maybe that
™s what the bond market is sensing, because 
10-year Treasury
 bond yields seem pretty low.
On the inflation side, I continue to be of 
the very boring view that if we get the 2 percent 
real GDP growth, then we™
ll get a gradually tighter labor market.  
If we get a gradually tighter 
labor market, we
™ll see rising wages.  And with that, we™ll eventually see an upturn in core 
inflation.
  I continue to take quite a bit of positive signal from the fact that the core inflation rate 
has been pretty steady over the past year on a year
-over-year basis despite the stronger dollar, 
weaker energy prices, 
and 
the decline in some measures of inflation e
xpectations.  T
hat is 
actually a pretty good performance when you factor all of those things into the equation.  I
f second
-quarter economic growth does rebound and labor market momentum remains broadly 
intact, then I think that points to another increase in our federal funds rate target.  But there is 

this small problem of the timing of the Brexit vote, 
and 
I want to talk a little bit about th
at.
 I think the risk of a leave vote 
does raise the bar a little bit for June because we are not 
going to know the outcome of the Brexit vote, or the market response to the Brexit vote, at the 
time of th
e June meeting.  
For me, it wouldn™t be that comforta
ble to vote for a rate hike on 
June 15, have Britain vote to leave the EU on June 23, and have 
that trigger a big selloff of 
financial markets and 
a significant tightening of financial conditions soon thereafter.
  The 
obvious question that 
such a decision 
would raise would be
:  We
ll, if 
the FOMC knew that there 
was going to be this Brexit vote and 
they knew there were risks associated with this Brexit vote, 

why didn™t they just wait a little bit longer?  Another way to think about this is that waiting for 

more information does have option value, and that option value should be weighed against the 

cost of waiting.  Now, obviously, if the prospects of a leave vote 
at the time of the June meeting 

are 
very
 low, then the option value of waiting is also very low.  
In my mind, it is going to really 
depend on 
where we are at the June meeting, what that probability of exit looks like at that time.
 What I think is going to happen is, 
if there 
are
 no real new events in Europe, the 
probability of the leave vote is 
likely
 going to fade gradually.  The reason why I think it™
s as high 
as 29 percent right now is there™
s a good deal 
of time 
during which
 bad things can happen in 
Europe that could push the probability of leaving upward.  And if nothing bad happens in the 

interim
, I think what will happen is that probability 
will erode.
  I hope that when we get to the 
meeting, the probability of a leave vote will be very low, and then we can just not worry about 

that in terms of thinking about the June 
tim
ing.  
But 
I am not really
 sure how to think about this 
and how much it should weigh on the rate decision in June, and I am very curious and would be 

very interested, in 
sidebars
 or tomorrow when we talk about monetary policy, just to hear what 

people think about how they™
re factor
ing in Brexit in terms of how they think about the timing of 
June, one way or the other. 
Finally,
 I have a couple of thoughts about why financial market conditions have 
improved.  I think we need to think about that because it does have implications for monetary 
policy. 
 I 
see a number of factors
 as having been
 at play
:  r
ecovering oil prices
ŠI never knew 
that higher oil prices were good for financial conditions, but I guess it™
s true at some point
; stronger Chinese economic data
; a weaker dollar, which has 
eased the pressure on the R
MB and 
made Chinese currency policy a less pressing issue
; and the shallower expected path of 
tightening with respect to U.S. monetary policy.  If you think that expectations about U.S. 

monetary policy are an important factor behind the recovery in financial markets, and you view 

the improvement in financial market conditions as mostly desirable, then I think that does have 

implications for U.S. monetary policy.
 I am still in the 
ﬁtwo
 more
 rate
 hikes 
this year
ﬂ 
camp
.  If we did this, it probably would 
result in somewhat tighter financial market conditions, 
as this would be somewhat more than 
what
™s expected by market participants.  But I currently expect that some tightening in financial 
conditions will be appropriat
e at some stage this year, 
in view of 
the tightening labor market and 
the likelihood that inflation 
will
 be somewhat higher over the medium term.
  But at the end of 
the day, how much we will need to do in the end will not just depend on how the forecast 

evolves, but also on how much our actions affect financial conditions
, and I just don™t think we 
have a very good feel for that at this stage.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you, and thanks to everyone for a very interesting round of 
comments 
on the economic outlook and the risks.  What I™d like to do is wrap up with a couple 

of observations of my own.  Before I get started, though, let me say that our photographer is 

going to come in now and take a couple of pictures.  And before he does that, 
let me ask you, if 
you have any confidential material sitting in front of you, to cover it up. 
[Short break] 
CHAIR YEL
LEN.  Okay
, let me start off.  As many of you have noted, the news from the 
labor market continues to be good.  Monthly payroll gains averaged almost 210,000 over the past 
three months, just a little slower than the robust pace last year.  And labor force participation was 

up again in March, continuing the recent trend that™
s allowed the unemployment rate to remain 
roughly flat since October even as the employment-
to-population ratio has risen markedly.  
The 
pool of potential workersŠthe unemployed plus those who would like a job but are not actively 

looking for work
Šhas continued to shrink.  These developments show that labor utilization is 

continuing to rise. 
That said, I still see some room for further improvement.  Involuntary part
-time 
employment has moved sideways since the fall and remains elevated relative to its pre
-crisis 
level.  Wage growth continues to be sluggish.  The unemployme
nt rate is still 
¼ percentage point 
above my estimate of its longer-run level.  And some undershooting would be highly desirable in 

order to return inflation to 2 percent more quickly.  
This is a point illustrated by the alternative 
optimal policy simulati
ons reported in the Tealbook.  These alternative simulations, unlike the 
usual ones, more sensibly assume that welfare losses occur only when the unemployment rate 

rises above the natural rate, not when it falls below.  As a result, it becomes optimal to p
ush the 
unemployment rate to a very low level for a time, and this result holds even if the Phillips curve 

is much steeper than the staff estimates.
 Unfortunately, in contrast to the labor market data, spending and production indicators 
have been surprisingly weak.  The downward revisions in the staff™s real GDP forecast for Q1 

are concentrated in private domestic final purchases, which are generally viewed as a more 

reliable indicator of underlying 
economic 
growth 
than 
GDP itself.
  Consumer spending, in 
particular, has slowed markedly from the robust pace seen last year despite solid income gains, a 
rela
tively high level of household wealth, and healthy readings on consumer sentiment.  In 
addition, drilling activity is still contracting, other types of busi
ness investment remain soft, and 
net exports continue to be a substantial drag on the overall economy. 
Taken together, these developments suggest that a persistent slowdown in aggregate 
spending may be under way, which could hinder further improvement in l
abor market 
conditions.  This recent spate of weak spending and production data represents a new source of 
downside risk to the forecast.  But like many of you, I have not significantly altered my baseline 

outlook.  I agree with 
the 
Tealbook™s assessment that the weakness we have seen in aggregate 
spending is likely to prove transitory.  That strikes me as pretty consistent with what I heard 

around the table.
  A few of you did mention rather downbeat anecdotes from your contacts, but, 

by and large, outside 
the sectors that are most strongly 
affected
 by declining commodity prices, 
weak global economic growth, and the strong dollar, I did not hear many reports from your 

business contacts suggesting any obvious pronounced downturn in economic activity or any 
significant negative reassessment of future sales prospects.
 As several of you noted, the Q1 slowdown may partly reflect measurement problems and 
other transitory factors
, such as the financial market swoon in the first quarter that is now 
entirely reversed.
  Moreover, as the year progresses, both the contraction in drilling and the drag 
due to past dollar appreciation should fade.  Although downside risks relating to domestic 
spending may have increased somewhat, 
I see the risks relating to global economic and financial 

conditions as having diminished. 
One factor contributing to this improvement has been the downward shift in market 
expectat
ions concerning the likely pace of our own policy tightening.  Partly in response, 
financial conditions have significantly improved with the dollar down about 2½ percent, longer-
term 
Treasury yields and mortgage rates down roughly 20 basis points, risk spreads on corporate 
bonds narrower, and equity prices up almost 5 percent.  
Overall, therefore, neither my baseline 
economic outlook nor my assessment of the balance of risks has changed appreciably, on net, 

since the 
previous meeting.   
With regard 
to infla
tion, the data we have received since the March meeting suggest that 
the March Tealbook was correct in viewing the unexpectedly high readings on inflation in 

January as likely to be largely transitory.  The current Tealbook forecast that core PCE inflation
 will come in at about 1
½ percent on a four-
quarter basis this year, with headline inflation running 
closer to 1 percent, strikes me as entirely reasonable.
  Absent further shocks to oil prices and the 
dollar, I continue to expect that inflation will move 
up to 2 percent by late 2018 with some 

further improvement in labor market conditions.  I also continue to view the risk to this outlook 

as tilted slightly to the downside in light of the low readings on inflation compensation and the 

slippage over the past couple of years in some survey measures of expected long
er-run inflation.
 Anticipating tomorrow™s discussion, let me say that in my view
, incoming data create 
sufficient concern about the outlook that it makes sense to leave the federal funds rate unchan
ged 
at this meeting.  But we definitely need to keep our options open for June, and I would see a 

strong case for raising the target range for the federal funds rate another 25 basis points at our 

next meeting if incoming data confirm that GDP growth is pi
cking up about as expected, 
if the 
recent pace of improvement in the labor market continues, and barring other developments that 

we judge to appreciably alter the balance of risks.  
And
, of course, in that regard, I am concerned 
about the potential for sig
nificant financial market turbulence in the run
-up to the Brexit vote.  
It™s something we will have to watch very carefully and consider, as the odds evolve and we 

watch financial market reactions, what our appropriate 
response 
should be. 
Looking for
ward, if employment continues growing at anything close to its recent pace, 
our policy deliberations will need to grapple with the issue of how long that can continue without 
the economy overheating.  Payroll gains surely need to moderate substantially at some p
oint to 
avoid too large an undershoot 
of unemployment below its long
er-run sustainab
le rate
.  But it™
s entirely possible that labor for
ce participation may continue to surprise to the upside for a while 
longer.  Estimates of the level of the trend particip
ation rate are unavoidably imprecise. 
 And 
even though the staff has revised up its estimate of the trend in response to the recent surprises, a 

tighter labor market could potentially draw yet more people back into the labor force on a 

sustained basis.  Su
ch a development would be of great benefit to the nation, and we need to be 
wary of inadvertently blocking it by tightening monetary policy too quickly or too much. 
Further increases in labor demand may also be partially satisfied by reductions in 
involunt
ary part
-time employment, which is still 
1 percentage point above its pre
-crisis level.  I 
recognize that this persistence may reflect structural changes that have permanently increased the 
demand for part
-time workers, but employment practices also depend 
on the ease 
and
 cost of 
finding workers who are willing to work less than full 
time, something that may become 
increasingly hard to do as the economy nears full employment.  And in this regard, I think it™
s noteworthy that a number of major retailers
Šincluding J. Crew, the Gap, Abercrombie & Fitch, 
and Pier 1 I
mports
Šare now phasing out their use of on-
call scheduling, which is a practice that 
is extremely convenient for managers but one that
™s highly unpopular with workers. 
We will also have to wrestle wi
th the implications of low productivity growth should it 
continue.  Our longer-
run SEP 
numbers 
for real GDP growth suggest that many of us, like the 
staff, have been assuming 
that 
trend labor productivity will accelerate appreciably over time to a 
pace more in line with its historical average.  But as the Tealbook warns, and 
as many of you 
emphas
ized in your comments today, productivity growth may remain low for the rest of the yea
r and beyond.  If such an expectation is already incorporated into household and business 
decisions, as assumed in one of the Tealbook simulations, then continued low productivity 

growth could cause the unemployment rate to fall appreciably over the next f
ew quarters despite 
relatively slow real GDP growth.  In this event, we may need to tighten policy more quickly than 

we currently anticipate.
  But as another Tealbook simulation shows, if households and firms are 
also surprised, then slower productivity growth over the next several years might have only 

limited implications for the paths of both employment and monetary policy.  In this case, the 

level of aggregate demand would shift down roughly 
one for one
 with surprising weak 
productivity.  Another possib
ility not simulated in the Tealbook is that productivity growth might 

surprise everyone by being permanently lower, and that™s something that would likely result in a 

much slower than 
anticipated pace
 of tightening because it would reduce the long-
run 
equi
librium funds rate.  
In light of 
these and other ambiguities, we will have little choice but to 
monitor developments carefully and avoid being overly confident in any projection. 
So with those remarks, let me stop there.  W
e have a lot of time tomorrow for
 the policy 
round, so I suggest letting Thomas begin 
with his policy remarks first thing tomorrow morning
.  We have dinner and a reception across the street.
 [Meeting recessed]
 April 27 Session
 CHAIR YELLEN.  Good morning, everybody.  My gavel has been 
restored
.  [Laughter]  
To 
start off this morning, I want
 to turn to Steve Kamin to 
talk
 about this morning™s trade report.
 MR. KAMIN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  Today we received the advance report on U.S. 
trade.  J
ust to be clear
:  The full report on March U.S. trade, including exports and imports of 
both goods and services, is going to come out next week.  But today
™s release is
 the preview, 
based 
just 
on nominal merchandise exports and merchandise imports.  And th
ese data are
 going 

to be used in the advance GDP release that will come out tomorrow. 
We were expecting that the trade balance for March would be a $
47 billion deficit, which 
would have been th
e same as in February.  In the event
, merchandise 
exports, which we expected 
would stay more or less the same, fell 
$2 billion, but merchandise imports fell about $8 
billion
, compared 
with 
a small rise that we were anticipating.
  As a result, 
our 
estimate 
for the trade 
balance in March has fallen from 
$47 billion to $
41 billion.  
Assuming we don™t get any 
surprises either in trade prices, which we have not yet received, or in trade in services, which we 

have 
also 
not yet received, we would lower our estimate for the net export drag on U.S. GDP 

growth in Q1 
from our current estimate of 
0.7 percent to only 
0.1 percent.
 CHAIR YELLEN.  Wow.
 MR. KAMIN.  
So, i
n principle, if that full change in our net export estimate w
as passed 
through to U.S. GDP growth, it woul
d actually raise 
our 
Q1 
estimate of real 
GDP growth by 
0.6 percentage point.  T
hat
™s what we know on the trade side, but Bill will expand on that 
a bit
. 
MR. WASCHER.  
In terms of the components, what detail there is in the trade report 
suggested that there
 was a big drop in capital goods imports, which may mean that we would 
offset a little bit of the smaller drag arising 
from net exports by weakening our investment 
forecast a bit.
  So 
I guess at this point
, I™d say our Q1 estimate for GDP growth is going to be 
somewhere between 
¾ percent and 1 percent
, still up noticeably from the 
0.4 percent 
that we had 
in the Tealbook. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  
Are there a
ny questions for Steve? 
MR. FISCHER.  Doesn™t a decline in imports say something more than about capital 
goods?  
It™s also about other demand, isn™t it? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Consumer spending?
 MR. WASCHER.  It could be.  Again, we have a lot of information on consumer 
spending, so we don™t take a lot of signal, on the basis of 
the trade data
, for our consumer 
spending estimates for Q1 at this point.
 MR. KAMIN.  
Of course, when the BEA writes in its guesses for services for March, we 
don™t expect any big changes, but it™s possible that they would surprise us, and the 
net 
export 

drag that would 
be in tomorrow™s GDP data might be a little different than we expect
.  But right 
now, we think there™s clearly been a shortfall in our estimate, and that should show up. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Well, let™s begin our policy round.  I™d like to call on Thomas 
to start us off.
 MR. LAUBACH.
6  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will be referring to the handout 
labeled ﬁMaterial for the Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.ﬂ
 As Simon noted yesterday, your communications following the March FOMC 
meeting, accompanied by some good news on foreign economic activity, appear to 
have contributed importantly to calming global financial markets over the 

intermeeting period.  As illustrated in the top
-left panel of the exhibit, sovereign 
yields here and in other advanced economi
es declined across the curve.  While such 
widespread declines often have been associated with investors seeking to reduce their 

exposure to risky assets, in this instance it seems to have reflected investors™ 

assessment that central banks would act to redu
ce downside risks to the global 
economy.  Consistent with that perception, equity prices rose around the globe, and, 

as illustrated in the top
-right panel, corporate bond spreads reversed their run-up of 
6 The materials used by Mr. Laubach are appended to this transcript (appen
dix 6).
 earlier in
 the year.  Steve noted in his briefing that the firming in oil prices and the 
depreciation of the dollar
Šdevelopments that might be viewed as negatives for the 
global outlookŠalso appeared to support the improved tone in financial markets.  

The continuing rebound in oil and other commodity prices 
seemed to ease the pain for 
commodity producers and reduce tail risks for U.S. energy firms, while the softness 

of the dollar made a more disruptive RMB devaluation against the dollar less likely, 

at least for a time.
 By contrast, as Bill Wascher discusse
d in his briefing, the incoming information 
on domestic economic activity, the labor market, and inflation has been challenging 

to interpret.  The draft of alternative B you are considering today acknowledges the 

crosscurrents in the recent data but indicates that the Committee anticipates the 

economy will get back on a track of moderate expansion with further strengthening of 

the labor market and with inflation rising to 2
 percent 
over the medium term.  If the 
incoming information on the economy between now and the June meeting supports 

that outlook, alternative B is intended to leave the possibility of an increase in 
the 

federal funds rate in June firmly on the table without pre-
committing to 
a particular 
decision. 
A separate question is whether alternativ
e B positions the Committee to respond 
appropriately to outcomes off its baseline trajectory.  The draft alternative 

communicates that you are less concerned about 
risks associated with 
global 
economic and financial developments than in March, though still concerned.  It does 

so by replacing the sentence 
in the March statement
 that 
indicated that global 
developments pose risks to the outlook with new language that says you will closely 

monitor global developments and inflation indicators.
 The middle-
left pa
nel highlights three sources of uncertainty on which you may 
have some greater clarity by the time of your June meeting.  For instance, the 

spending indicators might pick up, or they might remain weak and cast doubt on a 

continuation of labor market improv
ement, which in turn might leave the Committee 
less confident in its baseline view. 
 Alternatively (or in addition)
, a renewed 
deterioration in financial 
conditionsŠpossibly triggered by the looming Brexit 
referendumŠ
might be seen as a factor that could ca
use the Committee to 
stay its 
hand in June.  The wording in alternative B continues to 
recognize that developments 

abroad may significantly affect how the U.S. economy will evolve. 
The middle-
right panel highlights some of the fundamental medium
-term 
uncertainties you are confronted with that the data you will receive during the 

intermeeting period will not materially reduce.  As highlighted in the alternative view 

box presented in Tealbook A, the evolution of productivity during the current 

expansion raises the possibility of a more sobering longer-run growth outlook than we 

currently anticipate.  By current estimates, labor productivity has risen between 2011 

and 2015 by just under ½ percent per year, on average, the worst five-
year 
performance in postwar U.S. history.  Whether continued weak productivity growth 

would result in a commensurate slowdown in demand over the medium term or in a 

faster take
-up of resource utilization and attendant inflation pressures is a key 
questi
on for the outlook beyond the n
ear term.  
Another risk is that inflation might 
fail to rise as expected later this year.  It may be that a combination of slow 
economic 
growth and a decline in inflation would pose 
the most difficult challenge in light of 

the limited space that 
remains for conventional monetary stimulus in the advanced 

economies.
 In a new question in the Desk surveys of primary dealers and market participants, 
respondents were asked about their perceptions of your likely reaction if economic 

developments over the
 remainder of this year deviated significantly from the outlook 
summarized by the March SEP medians.  The matrix in the lower
-left panel shows 
the level of the federal funds rate that the median respondent would expect to see at 

the end of this year if cor
e inflation and/or the unemployment rate deviated 50 basis 
points in either direction from the medians reported in the March SEP.  This panel 

was lovingly referred to by some of my colleagues as the Mondrian box, and, in fact, 

I asked my RA to make a versi
on of it that would remind you very much of that.  
[Laughter]  But perhaps for the sake of legibility, I thought we should go with a more 

restrained version.  The shaded box at the center shows that, if economic conditions at 

the end of the year match the 
March SEP medians of 1.6 percent for core PCE 

inflation and 4.7 percent for the unemployment rate, the median respondent to the 

Desk™s surveys expects the federal funds rate to be 88 basis points.  
The other boxes 

tell us two things about dealers™ and market participants™ perceptions.  First, they 

believe
 you would respond more strongly to deviations in inflation from your 

projection than to deviations in unemploymentŠ
that is, there are greater variations in 

the entries as you move up or down the table than when you move left or right.  

Second, they believe that you would respond more strongly 
to inflation outcomes that 

leave you even further below your 2 percent goalŠmoving from the middle row to 

the upper row
Šthan to higher
-than-
expected inflation.
 The draft of alternative B for this meeting would report in paragraph 2 that the 
Committee is continuing to ﬁclosely monitor inflation indicators and global economic 

and financial developmentsﬂ and would retain in paragraph 4 the language that ﬁthe 

Committee will
 carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward its inflation 

goal.ﬂ  That is, the Committee would be stating that it will be alert to the types of 

scenarios that could result in a shortfall of core inflation from the Committee™s 

baseline expectatio
nŠthose that might fall in the upper row of the matrix.  In such 
circumstances, respondents to the Desk™s surveys expect that you would react 

relatively strongly, at least for any unemployment rate outcome within the range 

shown. 
They also anticipate that 
you would raise the funds rate more steeply if, over the 
next several quarters, the economy was on a track to both higher inflation and a 

sharper
-than
-expected drop in the unemployment rate by year-endŠ
the outcome in 
the bottom-
left corner.  But they seem to anticipate a more cautious reaction to higher 
inflation if the unemployment rate comes in as expected (the middle cell in the 

bottom row), and they project that you would increase rates even more gradually if 

the higher inflation occurred at a time when
 the unemployment rate was increasing 
(the bottom
-right cell).
 Why do res
pondents think that you will react more to lower-
than
-expected 
inflation than to inflation reaching 2 percent faster than anticipated?  One possibility 
is that they believe policymakers are concerned about the potential for the economy 

to become mired in a low-growth, low-inflation state.  Monetary policy would have 

limited scope to stimulate real activity in this situation, 
as these developments would 
reduce the equilibrium real inter
est rate further and so increase an already 
considerable risk of being persistently stuck at or near the effective lower bound.  The 

red dots in the lower-right panel show that the median respondent to the Desk™s 

surveys sees the neutral real federal funds
 rate at the end of this year as having drifted 

down significantly since last summer.  The same is true for the median estimate of the 

longer-
run real federal funds rate, the blue triangles, under the assumption of inflation 
attaining the 2 percent objecti
ve over time.  With scope for providing monetary policy 

accommodation possibly further diminished, the cautious outlook for future rate 

increases described in paragraph 4 remains appropriate.
 Thank you, Madam Chair.  That concludes my prepared remarks.  Th
e March 
statement and the draft alternatives are shown on pages 2 to 9.  I™ll be happy to take 

the Committee™s questions.
 CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Are there a
ny questions for Thomas?  
[No response]  
Okay.  Seeing none, why don™t we begin our go-round, and I™
d like to start with President 
Rosengren. 
MR. ROSENGREN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
alternative
 B.  It is appropriate 
to see whether the weakness in spending for the first quarter is reflecting more than a temporary 
pause in real GDP growth.  My expectation is that the second quarter will be stronger.  If the 
incoming data between now and the June meeting confirm that real GDP is growing at least as 

fast as potential GDP and labor markets are continuing to improve, then, in my view, it will be 

appropriate to raise the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. 
On account of
 my expectation that we will not move at this meeting and my assessment 
that it will be appropriate to move at the next meeting, I do have communications 
concerns.  My 

reading of a
lternative B is that it is unlikely to significantly increase market perceptions of the 
probability attached 
to a tightening in June.  
If that is correct, the market probably has too low a 
probability regarding both a tightening in June and our likely policy 
rate 
path over the forecast 
horizon.  T
he market™s expectation that we may move only 75 basis points through 2018 reflects 
much more pessimism than I have about the economy and, in my view, risks a taper tantrum 
response as the market realizes that
, while policy will be accommodative from our perspective, it 
will not be nearly as accommodative as financial markets currently expect.
  If the incoming data 
over the next two months are consistent with the Tealbook forecastŠ
and recognizing that we 

will not h
ave another SEP to signal policy intentionsŠ
we will need to communicate more 
clearly before the June meeting about the likely path of policy.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Let me say that I do have a speech that I
™ve scheduled for June 6, 
which is the very last day before 
the blackout period.  I know that™
s pretty close to the meeting, 
but I did schedule it in order to be able to communicate reasonably clearly if it becomes 
utter
ly 
evident that there
™s a gap between
 market expectations and our likely behavior.  A
nd I know 
others also will be speaking. 
MR. 
FISCHER
.  Do you know which ones? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  
Lots of people, I suspect.
  [Laughter]  Now, Governor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B.  As Thomas 
indicated, the change in the language in paragraph 2 indicates a slight downgrading of concerns 

about the global economy.  As I said yesterday, that™
s consistent with my own assessment of the 
risks that I think we can more or less ge
t our arms around.  As I also said yesterday, I don™t quite 
see how to get our arms around the Brexit risk.  It™
s closer to 
Knightian uncertainty than to some 
risk that we can do an assessment of.
  Having said that, I don™t think it would be the wisest thing 
in the world to refer to that either directly or indirectly, so I
™m okay with the language as it exists 

here.  My own position with respect to June is not a tilt toward raising rates, although I™m open-
minded on 
the topic, and I think the virtue of 
this alternative as presented is that it maintains 
everyone™s optionality.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Brainard. 
MS. BRAINARD.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As always, I found the comparisons in the 
Tealbook among the various p
olicy rules very helpful.  In particular, the optimal control rule that 

places greater weight on deviations of inflation from its target than on unemployment running 

below its assumed natural rate has some intuitive appeal, both because we have some uncert
ainty 
about what the natural rate is in the wake of the crisis and because it
™s hard to see the welfare 
cost
s 
associated with
 having unemployment run a bit low temporarily
, as distinct
, of course, 
from any possible implications that may have for inflation.
 I took two lessons from this analysis.  First, even with this policy rule that places greater 
weight on inflation, we have to work pretty hard to get inflation back up to its target, which it 

does not reach until 2018.  In fact, interestingly, this is the only policy rule that gets inflation 
back to 2 percent by 2018.  
The slow rise in inflation is
 due in part to a very flat Phillips curve
.  But even assuming nominal 
wage 
growth 
is four times more responsive to the unemployment 
gap than it currently appear
s to be
Ša setting that
 might be associated with a nonlinearity in the 
Phillips curve near the natural rate of unemployment
Šinflation doesn™t get back to 2
 percent 
until 2018, with a policy 
rate path that is shallower than 
that in the 
March SEP.
 Of course, achieving our target on inflation under these scenarios requires that 
unemployment 
will run below what we currently believe to be its natural rate, and 
that
 inflation 
will 
run about 
one- 
to two
-tenths
 above 2 percent 
from
 2019 to 2020.  And, of course, the public 
would need to believe that the FOMC would tolerate such a modest overshoot due to the 

symmetry of our inflation target around 2 percent.
  I think that
™s an important thought exercise
Šremembe
ring that
, in 70 out of the 74 months since the beginning of 2010, the 12-month change 
in core PCE 
inflation 
has been below 2 percent and that we are indeed comfortable 
with being 
symmetric 
around the 
2 percent target.
 Turning to today™s context, I see the interme
eting 
period as mixed.  On the one hand, 
financial
 market conditions have improved notably, but I believe this is in no small part a 
response to a perceived softening in the expected rate path in the U
nited S
tates
 and its spillback 
effects through pressures on China™s currency peg and, through that, to br
oader emerging market 
risks.
  Oil appears to have reached an inflection point, and China™s stimulus, while it raises some 
questions about long
-term sustainability, appears to be supporting near-
term 
economic 
growth. 
Here at home, however, despite ongoing strength in the labor market, domestic spending 
indicators have disappointed for the second consecutive quarter, and there™
s some concern that 
U.S. consumption may be softening despite important supports coming 
from income, 
the 
behavior of gas
oline
 prices, and sentiment.
  Importantly, t
he data suggest 
that the earlier 
improvement in core inflation may have been relatively short
 lived, and measures of inflation 
expectations and inflation compensation remain low. 
Progress in the labor market has continued.  Interestingly, the composition o
f that 
progress has changed with a shift toward the participation margin, suggesting a greater elasticity 

of labor supply than previously thought.  Wages have been subdued, and, as in March, there still 

appears to be 
just a little more slack remaining.
 The
 broad-
based easing in financial ma
rkets has brightened the medium-
term outlook a 
bit and made the balance of risks more favorable.  B
ut it
™s important to recognize how closely 
tied this improvement in financial conditions is to recent monetary policy comm
unication, 

particularly including
, I think
, the downward shift in the policy 
rate
 path implied by the SEP, 
which
 has suggested an awareness on the part of this Committee of the risk
s posed by the global 
environment and the need to shape policy in accordanc
e with those risks.
 With realized economic conditions relative to our goals, particularly inflation, little 
changed s
ince March
, and with the medium-term outlook also only modestly changed, especially 
after taking into account recent monetary policy commun
ication, it seems appropriate to leave 
the federal funds rate at its current level.
  At our next meeting we
™ll have received two more 
labor market reports, two more PCE inflation reports, two esti
mates of first
-quarter GDP growth, 
and some of the spending dat
a relevant for assessing second
-quarter GDP.  These 
data will be 
important for me in helping to determine whether the weakness that we
™re seeing currently is 
likely to prove persistent as well as whether we
™re seeing any improvement in progress on 
infla
tion and on, importantly, inflation expectations. 
This leaves me very comfortable with the wait
-and-
see approach 
that 
the Committee has 
adopted and that 
is captured in 
alternative B.  My preference is to reserve judgment about 
possible actions in June and 
to let the data do the talking.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  President Lacker. 

MR. LACKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I believe this would have been a fine 
meeting to raise the target federal funds rate.  Short
-term real interest rates lie well below all of 
the benchmarks we use for evaluating where real rates ought to be
Šbenchmarks derived from 

estimated policy rules that capture our successful past behavior and from estimates of the natural 

real rate
, taking into account that real rates may have been trending downward.  Even under 

plausible assessments of the secular decline in real rates, we are more than 
1 percentage p
oint 
below where we need to be.
 One ar
gument for keeping our policy rate low is that inflation is below our target.  But in 
recen
t months, we™ve seen various measures of underlying inflation rise toward 2 percent, and, 
as I said yesterday
, I believe a broad firming trend is now evident, notwithstanding the March 
CPI.
  The lag between policy actions and inflation responses leaves me expecting this trend to 
continue.  Of course, many of our benchmarks take into account the difference between current 
inflation and our objective.  Even with the remaining gap, they indicate th
at rates
 should be far 
higher. 
When we lifted off in December, we expected to close the gap between the actual policy 
rate and the levels indicated by our benchmarks at a gr
adual but deliberate pace.  Early in the 
first quarter, financial market developments at home and abroad raised prospects of downside 

risks to U.S. growth.  Those risks seem
ed to have diminished substantially by the time of our 
March meeting
, but, nonetheless, we left rates unchanged and pulled down our rate projections.  
Now that those risks have dissipated more conclusively and the U.S. economic outlook is in line 
with what we were projecting in December, we need to return policy toward 
the path we though
t to be appropriate back then.  
At this meeting, therefore, it would be appropriate for us to resume 

gradually pushing rates toward a more normal level. 
Yes, data dependence implies that when downside risks appear to rise, both the policy 
rate and the expe
cted rate path should respond.  And if those risks subside, the policy 
rate 
path 
should respond accordingly in the opposite direction.  If notŠ
if we delay raising rates in 

response to every episode of financial market heartburn but never correct course whe
n the 
turmoil dies down
Šwe will leave ourselves with a shortfall in rates that I fear we may not be 
able or willing to close fast enough when the time comes.  It looks 
like
 we™re at risk of doing just 
that in June if Brexit heartburn stays our hand.  I hop
e we can all agree that if we delay because 
of 
Bre
xit 
and then it turns out to be a manageable event, we don™t necessarily have to wait until 
September to see if we want to move again.
 If it is correct that monetary policy is too easy and has been for some time, then the 
stability of inflation expectations is a remarkable testament to our credibility.  The longer we 
deviate from our policy rate benchmarks, however, the more we draw from the reservoir of that 

credibility.  I cannot claim to know how or when 
we will reach its limits.  Indeed, the evolution 

of expectations, as Governor Tarullo noted yesterday, is hard to predict.  It is possible that even 

staying put through the end of the year would not test it, but I see it as a significant ri
sk 
as long 
as we
 delay closing gaps to our benchmarks.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
MR. TARULLO
.  Madam Chair.
 CHAIR YELLEN.  Two
-handerŠGovernor Tarullo. 
MR. TARULLO.  President Lacker, becaus
e you did refer to me, 
can I ask, 
you™re 
worried about expectations becoming unanchored, in view of where inflation is right now? 
MR. LACKER.  I
™m not worried about them being unanchored tomorrow. 
MR. TARULLO.  But you™re worried that the approach to 2 percent may unanchor 
inflation expectations, 
while
 you weren™t worried that, for a num
ber of years, the failure to reach 
2 percent could have unanchored those expectations? 
MR. LACKER.  Inflation has gone from below 2 percent to well above 2 percent before.  
We had 
this experience in 
2003 and 2004, when we thought it was below 1, and within 
12 months, 
it was close to 3
, and we were 
off to the races
 and ended up with 2.9 percent 
inflation.
 MR. TARULLO.  
Right.  But, with the exception of that, 
for almost
 all of 
the period from 
the financial crisis until today? 
MR. LA
CKER.  Was I worried about downside risk? 
MR. TARULLO.  Yes.
 MR. LACKER.  Sure.  We a
ll were.
 MR. TARULLO.  Okay.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Two
-handerŠ
President Bullard.
 MR. BULLARD.  Madam Chair, Brexit has been brought up, and it™
s a vote on a 
particular day.  Is it feasible to think about calling a meeting after the Brexit vote and mak
ing the 
decision at that point? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  As an intermeeting move?
 MR. BULLARD.  Intermeeting, yes.  I
f we felt like
 we want
ed to go, but we want
ed to 
see the outcome of the Brexit vote, then you could have a meeting after the Brexit vote.  Is that 

something
 to consider? 
CHAIR YELLEN.  
My mind isn™t closed on it, but it would suggest a level of urgency.  
We will be meeting in July and have an opportunity 
then
.  I don™t quite know what message it 
would send that we felt it was utterly urgent to have an intermeeting move.  But it™
s obviously 
not impossible. 
MR. BULLARD.  Okay.  Thank you. 

CHAIR YELLEN.  President Bullard.
  It™s your turn.
 MR. BULLARD.  Oh.  I guess I didn™t need th
is two
-hander. 
MR. POWELL.  You two-handed yourself.  
It™
s illegal.  [Laughter]
 MR. BULLARD.  I didn™t know I was violating the rules.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I 
support 
alternative
 B for today.  My remarks are concentrated on the June meeting.  I think we™
re 
in poor position for June even though many around the table have penci
led in an increase in the 
policy
 rate at that meeting.
  Financial markets at this juncture are putting only a 20 percent 
probability on a move.  That implies a substantial uphill climb in the next six weeks or so in 
Federal Reserve
 communication.  The data 
are
 running against a move as of today, the trade 
report this morning notwithstanding. 
My view is that if we do not move in June, our normalization program will be paralyzed 
and our credibility on this issue will be significantly damaged.  The conclusion 
of financial 

markets may be ﬁDo not listen to the Fed.ﬂ  This may make the FOMC policy less effective 
in 

the future
.  At the June meeting, we will be 18 months past the end of QE in the United S
tates
.  During that period, we will have raised the policy rat
e once, and just 25 basis points.  We have 
no current plans to reduce the size of the balance sheet.
  I do not think it is meaningful to say that 
we are normalizing interest rates at a pace of 25
 basis points per year, which is what we would 
likely be doin
g if we d
o not move in June.  This sort of pace is so slow as to be essentially 
meaningless.  It would take four years to raise the policy rate 100 basis points at that pace.  This 
pace is also well outside the historical experience on which our econometri
c estimates of the 
effects of monetary policy are based.
 I think it is very awkward for the Committee to present an upward
-sloping median policy 
rate dot plot to the public but then constantly cite downside risks to the U.S. economy.  In the 
past, if the C
ommittee was thinking about raising the policy rate in the future, it was because 
upside risks existed
, which, if the Committee did not react to them in an appropriate way, could 
lead to mandate
-inconsistent outcomes.
  This seems to me to be one element of
 our current 
policy that is causing considerable confusion in global financial markets.  In short, I think we 

need a plan.  We need to change our messaging to better fit the situation in which we find 

ourselves.  An advantage of changing our messaging is that we could get in much better sync 
with fina
ncial market expectations and therefore cause less turmoil as we try to react to 
macroeconomic developments appropriately.
  In particular, I think our dot plot from December, 
combined with a weak spate of data in January and February, caused a lot of consternation 
internationally
, and the method that I
™m suggesting would help us get out of that kind of a loop. 
My goal would be to get out of the box of projecting rate increases in the SEP, which can 
be interpreted as quasi commitments, and simultaneously citing downside risks, including global 

events, slower productivity growth, or low inflation expectations.  I™m just putting this on the 

table as a suggestion
, one part of 
which
 would be to 
eliminate the port
ion of the dot plot that 
gives forward guidance on the policy rate.  This is causing more problems than it™s solving.  It is 

essentially announcing a relatively hawkish policy in a situation in which 
the Committee may 
well not be all that hawkish.
  This wo
uld force markets to pay more attention to the data and less 
attention to the dot plot.  They wouldn™t have a dot plot to look at, I guess. 
Because we are now off the lower bound, we could use the idea that the policy rate could 
go up or down in the future.  Communication could emphasize that, in light of all we know 

today, the policy rate is exactly the right level that the Committee intends it to be for today.  A 

statement on risk
s 
would then emphasize whether the Committee saw the next move as more 
likel
y to be up or down.  We could stress that if inflation develops, we will 
raise the policy rate 

commensurately.  This would be more consistent with how the Committee has behaved in the 

past and how the Committee has used the statement of risks in the past.
  If we adopted this 
approach, we could still normalize in about the same way that we currently expect, but without 

constantly sending out the hawkish signal that comes out of the upward-sloping SEP median.  

We could also do so in a way that is more consist
ent with the historical practice of the 
Committee.  We could get rid of the dynamic 
that
 announces a relatively hawkish policy
 for the 
period a
head through the dot plot but tempers that policy by citing downside risks in speeches 
and Committee communicatio
ns.  
The risk
s statement would become something close
r to what it 
was historically.
 The bottom line is, I think the Committee is at substantial risk for the June meeting, and 
better messaging would possibly be very helpful for managing U.S. monetary policy.  We would 
very much like to, 
I think
, better align policymaker expectations with market expectations.
  My 
suggested changes might be helpful in this regard, and perhaps we could think about them in the 

next several weeks.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR Y
ELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Lockhart.
 MR. LOCKHART.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I support the policy recommendation 
in 
alternative B and the statement as written.
 Coming out of the March meeting, my position was that the April meeting should be kept 
alive 
for a rate move if the incoming data proved to be largely confirming of a beginning-of-the-
year real
-side outlook of moderate economic 
growth between 
2 and 2½ percent, provided that 
growth 
momentum
 was accompanied by continuing strength in labor reports and evidence of 

inflation firming.
  The 
economic growth signals have not been confirming that outlook, although 
the employment and inflation data have mostly cooperated.  So I have backed off any inclination 

to move at this 
meeting.  I advocate a wait
-and-
see posture.
  I believe June ought to remain a live 
option, and I™m satisfied that the language 
in a
lternativ
e B adequately preserves that option.
 Unfortunately, 
as the 
data calendar presented in 
Bil
l Wascher™s presentation yesterday
 shows
, there will not be a lot of inform
ation on hand on second-quarter economic growth by the 
June meeting
.  And, to state the obvious, as everyone has mentioned, the pending Brexit vote has 
the potential to be a very si
gnificant event.
  So 
I think we could be facing ambiguous 
circum
stances again in June.  If progress toward the Committee™s mandated objectives moves 
along with even soft, below-
forecast 
economic growthŠ
below 
2 percent
Šand otherw
ise mixed 
incoming data, pol
icy
-setting in
 conditions of ambiguity may be our curse for a good while.  
Circumstances may force the Committee to more explicitly explain its reaction function as 
regards normalization and, 
as a participant
, may force the 
question of my preferred policy
-setting 
decision framework. 
The approach I expect to apply is to test my baseline assumptions against accumulated 
incoming data, looking for evidence that invalidates those assumptions.  This is a lower bar than 

requiring an improved and broadly 
affirmative constellation of data that sounds the all
-clear.
  I™
m concerned we will always have some reason not to act, and
, although I perceive little potential 
cost associated with a patient, wait
-and
-see posture, at this moment I doubt we can rely on such 
conditions indefinitely.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Kashkari.
 MR. KASHKARI.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I support 
alternative B, and I share the 
Tealbook baseline outlook of continuing employment gains and inflation slowly picking up.  

Under that outlook, a very gradual path for the fed
eral
 funds rate seems appropriate.  As I said in 
March, I believe that
, while inflation remains low, it™s appropriate for the Committee to keep 
rates low to support continued job creation, especially 
as recent job gains reflect rising labor 
force participation rather than a falling unemployment rate.
 When I think about June, I think about two communication challenges.  One is changing 
market expectations in advance of such a move; as you said, you have a speech coming up when 

you can do that.  The second communications 
challenge is really the data.  We™ve said that we™re 

data 
dependent, and if, between now and June, we haven™t seen a move in inflation or inflation 
expect
ations and if we haven™t seen a move in wages or in the headline unemployment rate, how 
do we explain the move?  I struggle with being able to point to data in any of our key indicators 
that would justify the move, so 
that
™s something I
™d like us to think about. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Evans.
 MR. EVANS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
I support 
alternative B.  Both my December 
and March SEP paths assumed two funds rate increases sometime in 2016.  I™m sticki
ng with 
that assessment today.
 My outlook for 
economic 
growth over the remainder of the year is basically on track with 
my earlier forecast
s.  
Here t
he improvement in financial conditions we™ve experienc
ed since 
midwinter is an important factor.  Otherwise
, I would
 have carried some of the first
-quarter 
weakness into my outlook for the remainder of the year.  The incoming data have also led me to 

stick with my March inflation forecast
, which had the four-quarter change in 
core PCE 
prices
 in 

the fourth quarter of 2016 at 1.6 percent. 
I do not think, however, that one of those two policy moves should occur today.  First, I 
prefer waiting until the incoming data on spending corroborate my forecast of recovering 

economic growth.  Second, the improvement in financial conditions supporting my forecast 
is 

due in good part to the more accommodative policy 
rate 
path that markets began to expect during 

the winter and that we delivered on in the March SEP.  We should not hazard undoing that 

welcome support, especially at a time when the risk
s 
to both the 
economic 
outlook and inflation 
forecasts are tilted to the downside and our policy rate is still close to the effective lower bound.
 For today, 
I believe 
alternative B
 serves us well, and I support it as written.  It clearly 
communicates our assessment of appropriate policy
, in view of the outlook and surrounding 
risks, for achieving our dual
-mandate objectives.
  Furthermore, in view of 
the uncertainties 
and 
risks
, at the moment I think we should be agnostic about when the next rate hik
e is likely to take 
place.  Alternative 
B as written neither commits us to a move soon nor takes June off the table, 
and I think that™s a good place to be. 
Becaus
e President Bullard mentioned his lack of support for the dot plot, I just want to 
register that I support the dot plot very strongly.  W
ithout it
, I think our statement would need to 
convey a much better, stronger consensus view of our policy expectations, and that™s historically 

been difficult 
to accomplish 
within our statement.  
The dot plot adds more information, all of this 

at a time when the ultimate renormalization would be on the order of 250 to 300 basis points 

eventually.  I think that™s tough.  If we took it away, we™d have to replace it with something, and, 

in the past, we™ve talked about constructing a consensus forecast.  I™m not optimistic about our 

ability to deliver 
on that, but 
it would be an alternative.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Kaplan.
 MR. KAPLAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
alternative
 B.  Between now and 
the next meeting
, I™m hoping to see evidenceŠjobs growth, PCE data, 
and other measures
Šthat
 is more consistent with my GDP forecast 
of approximately 2 
percent 
growth for 2016.  I do 
believe we will see that improvement, 
in light of the strength of the consumer and the strong jobs 

market, but time will tell.
  While I remain concerned about risks outside the United States, I also 
believe t
hat the 
FOMC
™s 
slowing of 
its expected pace of rate increases as well as firming prices 
of oil have helped stabilize financial conditions and have helped ease the adjustment process 

that™s going on in China and other non-U.S. countries. 
Assuming I see firm
ing economic data, I will likely be advocating that we remove some 
amount of accommodation 
at our June meeting
.  A
nd I believe 
that if we see that firming
 in 
incomi
ng dataŠ
even though 
we won™t have 
a GDP 
estimate
Šmarket expectations of a June 
move will 
rise
.  So I think the 
data 
may
, to some extent, 
help resolve that issue.
 I would like to see any removal of accommodation be slow, gradual, and cautious.  In 
that regard, I would like to have the option of waiting more than a quarter to observe the 
effe
cts
 of our next move.  So, 
to me
, moving in June is attractive because it 
would 
give us the time 
needed to be patient and assess the 
effe
ct of 
that
 move, and I think it would give us greater 
options 
with regard 
to 
mov
ing 
at least a second time this year.  In 
my view, waiting beyond June 
reduces our options.
 I™m also mindful that the world is very different
Što me
, at least
Šthan it was 
10 years 
ago, particular
ly because of key secular forces
, which I™ve talked a lot about:  overcapacity 
globally, ag
ing
 demographics, and high levels of debt to GDP in advanced economies, which, 
all 
things being equal, tend to put downward pressure on potential GDP growth and inflation.  In a 
world
 that is
 more interconnected than we had even 10 
years ago, the transmission of these 
forces affects the U.S. economy and has a greater potential to spill over into overall financial 

conditions. 
To me, a
ll of that reinforces
 the desire to have a 
slow, gradual, and cautious removal of 
accommodation.  Th
at said, I remind
 myself that there is 
a cost to excessive accommodation.  It 
hurts savers.  It creates distortions in investment decisions
, some of which we talked about 

yesterday.  It affects asset allocation and hiring decisions
.  And some of these imbalances can be 
painful to absorb and unwind and are easier to recognize in hindsight.  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Harker.
 MR. HARKER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  In view of 
the recent near
-term weakness in 
economic activity, I am supportive of no change in the funds rate at this meeting.  Inflation 
remai
ns below target, and some patience is called for as more data allow us to better assess 
whether current economic weakness is largely transit
ory, perhaps partly driven by residual 
seasonality in the data, as mentioned yesterday
.  B
ut as I 
noted yesterday as well, my modal 
outlook is for economic activity to g
row slightly above trend and for inflation to return to target 
relatively quickly.
 If this outcome transpires, then it will be appropriate to continue on the path toward 
normalization at the June meeting.  Doing anything else would most likely require an entirely 
new narrative.
  However, if market probabilities of a June increase do not rise
 from their 
exceptionally low levels, then raising rates in June will be made unnecessarily difficult.
  Thus, 
the language in the statement is of paramount importance, and I am skeptical that the language in 

alternative B is up to the task.  I prefer 
parag
raphs 1 and 2 in a
lternative C
, which give a more 
upbeat view of the economy.  
That said, we will have significant amounts of new data between 

today and the June meeting, and there are other avenues of communication that can and should 
be used to influence 
market sentiment.
 So 
I can support 
alternative 
B as written for today.  Monetary policy is quite 
accommodative and
, as emphasized in the Tealbook, will still be accommodative in the event of 
a few future rate hikes.
  If economic data come in much weaker t
han I envision or if inflation 
retreats from its firming trend, then
, of course, 
no rate hike will be called for
.  But in order 
for 
monetary policy to normalize in a predictable and coherent way, all meetings must 
be 
ﬁlive
.ﬂ  
And our statement language mus
t ensure 
that 
this is the case.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Mes
ter.
 MS. MESTER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  The unemployment part of our mandate has 
largely been met, and inflation is gradually moving toward our goal of 2 percent.  In my view, 
risks 
to the outlook are roughly balanced.  Although economic 
growth remain
ed sluggish in the 
first quarter, the signals from the labor market 
continue to be
 quite strong
, and those have proven 
to be more reliable as the economy has 
con
tinu
ed to be 
resilient through financial market 
volatility, the drop in oil prices, the higher dollar, and relatively weak 
economic 
growth abroad. 
With that as backdrop, I believe it
™s appropriate for the fed
eral
 funds rate to continue to 
be on a gradual 
upward path.  Even consider
ing that estimates of the short
-run 
equilibrium
 real 
rate are still very low, monetary policy is very accommodative
, and I expect it to remain 
accommodative for some time because the ant
icipated pace of normalization is slow.
  Thus, 
policy will continue to provide some insurance against downside risks even as we implement 
gradual reductions in the level of accommodation to provide some insurance against the upside 

risks.
 I do not think th
e FOMC is 
ﬁbehind the curve,ﬂ 
but while there are risks 
associated with
 moving too soon, there are also risks 
associated with
 waiting too long, on account of 
the lags 
with which monetary policy affects the economy.  If we wait until every piece of data lin
es up or 
all uncertainty is resolved, then we will surely have waited too long.
 We should have the courage to act when the economic outlook calls for it, as I believe it 
currently does
.  And if the economy evolves in an unexpected way, we should have the courage 
to change course if necessary.
  I view that as essentially the mean
ing of running policy in a data-
dependent way.  Data dependency was meant to give us flexibility so that we could react 

appropriately to evolving economic conditions, but, 
in reality
, I think it has actually come to 
constrain our flexibility.  It hasn™t given the public enough indication of our own reaction 

function.  It has not helped the public understand the economic considerations that will drive our 

policy decisions this year and next. 
At the s
ame time, we don™t want to act in a way that surprises the public.  Thus, we™re at 
an impasse.  The public is not expecting us to raise rates at this meeting, and the policy 
rate 
path 
that market participants c
urrent
ly anticipate is quite a 
bit shallower than the path we™ve indicated 
in the 
March
 SEP as most likely to be appropriate.
  As long as we are ineffective in conveying 
our interpretation of economic developments and the outlook, the market™s policy expectations 

need not align with our
s.  If we are
, then
, unwilling to act in such a situation, we have essentially 
ratified the market participants™ expectations and not our own. 
I can go along with alternative B today 
becaus
e we haven™t prepared the public for 
anything else, but I would lik
e us to be in a position to raise rates in June because of the actual 

progress we™ve made on our dual-mandate goals.
  That means we need to be working on our 
message throughout the inter
me
eting period.  Conditional on the economic outlook, my 
operating ass
umption is that we will likely raise the funds rate in June
, and only if we get some 
negative surprises w
ould 
we back off from that.
 We™ll need to start preparing the public.  Unfortunately, I don™t think today™s statement is 
going to be much of a help.  Indeed, I think it could very well be read as indicating a lower 

probability of a rate increase in June
, 
because the statement is silent on whether we view risks as 

having receded since March and because the tone of paragraph 1, in which 
most of the
 changes 
appear
, could be read more negatively than intended.  
I appreciate the Chair making a speech the 
day before the next blackout period, but I hope the Chair will take on the burden of speaking 

publicly throughout the interme
eting period to ensure that we do indeed have the flexibility to 
raise rates in June should the economy evolve as expected.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President George.
 MS. GE
ORGE.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  
Since the March meeting
, potential downside 
risks
 have softened or shifted but, of course, not entirely disappeared.  With financial conditions 
calmer, however, my modal outlook is unchanged from our 
March
 meeting, and I see current 
economic outcomes as well aligned with our mandated objectives.  
Labor m
arkets are near 
maximum employment.  Prices are rising at a rate commensurate with the economy™s long
er-run 
potential.  In this context, I see economic fundamentals consistent with a 2
5 basis point rate 
increase at this meeting and consistent with a gradua
l and patient approach.  My other concern 
with 
alternative B is that it seems likely
 to be read as placing more weight on transitory financial 
and economic factors and too little weight on our modal outlook for 
economic 
growth, 
employment, and inflation. 
It is increasingly unclear what framework will guide our policy decisions.  Policy rules 
appear to be carrying little, if any, weight.  Tealbook B shows we are likely to be well behind 

even the prescriptions from the inertial Taylor 
(1999
) rule for some tim
e.  However, many 
frameworks suggest that the equilibrium real rate is lower, 
though 
we seem reluctant to adjust the 
stance of policy in response to changes in the equilibrium real rate.  For example, Tealbook B 

shows 
that the current real federal funds ra
te has fallen, while the Tealbook
-consistent measure 
of 
r* has risen.  The widening spread suggests 
that 
monetary policy has become more 
accommodative since the March FOMC meeting during 
a period when conditions might suggest 

less accommodation would be appropriate.  
In fact, the spread between the Tealbook
-consistent 
measure of 
r* and the current real fed
eral
 funds rate is at the widest level at any point
, according 
to my staff™s look at Tealbooks, 
over at least the past 
10 years.
 In addition, recalling the January 2015 Board staff memo that compared the ﬁearly and 
gradualﬂ 
approach to normalization with the 
ﬁlate and steep
ﬂ approach, it is striking to look at the 
distr
ibution of the funds rate under these two strategies.
  Our curre
nt policy setting is below or on 
the boundary of the lower bound of the 90 percent confidence intervals in either case.  Yet 
current inflation and unemployment are well inside the 70 percent confidence bands.  Certainly, 

the discrepancy reflects concerns a
bout downside risks, 
although 
risk
s 
were viewed as balanced 
last December at liftoff.
 Finally, the current Tealbook offers another framework, one that attaches asymmetric 
losses to the unemployment rate gap.  This approach takes the projected path closer t
o what is 
implied by the current SEP projections but still suggests a slightly faster removal of 

accommodation. 
Essentially
, none of the frameworks align with our policy settings.  As we approach the 
June meeting, I would like to see our policy choices begin to align with such decisionmaking 

frameworks more closely.
  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
President Williams.
 MR. WILLIAMS.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support a
lternative B as written.  The 
statement sets us up to react appropriately at the upc
oming meetings to the incoming data on 

labor markets, economic activity
, and inflation. 
Since our March meeting, concerns about global economic and financial developments 
have ebbed.  Therefore, I think it™s appropriate that paragraph 2 no longer puts a spotlight on 

these as specific sources 
of 
risk
s.  Indeed, as we think about future policy, changes in the outlook 
for inflation are particularly important 
because
 we™re already essentially at or very near our full 
employment goal.  Alternative B correctly em
phasizes 
that 
we™ll closely monitor both inflation 
and global developments. 
I rec
ently looked back at my 
forecast 
and the Tealbook™s forecast from a year ago, April 
2015.  For both core inflation and unemployment, the economy is currently very close to the 
path 
that we forecast a year ago.  In fact, the main miss is core inflation over the past year, and
, in the 
current quarter
, it™s been just a tad stronger than expected a year ago.
  The fact 
that 
the expansion 
remains on track
 gives me confidence
 that we 
can and should soon make another gradual move 
to normalize the fed
eral
 funds rate.  In addition, there are potential risks to waiting too long, 
as our discussion yesterday of monetary policy and financial stability highlighted. 
In light of
 these considerations, I like to think ahead about the statement language 
that 
may be used when we raise rate
s.  Alternative C is a good starting point.  One concern, though, 
is 

that 
paragraph 2 of 
alternative C mentions the balance of risk
s 
for economic ac
tivity and the 
labor market but not for inflation.  It would be good to emphasize the risks 
to both of our 
mandate goals, and that™s easily remedied by moving the risk assessment to the end of paragraph 

2 and then being symmetric about the two parts of the 
mandate.
  For example, we might say, 
ﬁThe Committee sees the risk
s to its outlook for both economic activity and inflation as nearly 
balanced but is monitoring inflation indicators and global economic and financial market 

developments closely.ﬂ  Thank you.  
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Powell. 

MR. POWELL.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I will support alternative B, and I support the 
statement as written.
 My base case is that we should proceed with a gradual pace of interest rate increases, 
including probably two increases this year, provided that the economy continues on its projected 

path.  As for June, if we have two more months of continued labor market progress and some 
indica
tion of a brighter picture on spending, then I could support another rate in
crease as soon as 
June. 
I have to say 
that,
 sitting here today, the question of whether to move in June strikes me 
as a particularly tricky one for two reasons.  First, U.S. and global financial conditions are 
significantly improved since early February, and that is due, 
in large part
, to the perceived shift 

in U.S. monetary policy, which was validated by the March SEP.  I would like to see things 

come together for an increase in June.  I™m not at all certain that they will
.  And that™s partly 
because of the data 
that are
 incoming
, as President Lockhart indicated.
 The second thing is Brexit.  There was a lot of discussion on it yesterday and some today.  
The June meeting ends on June 15, eight days before the Brexit vote.  As of June 15, the result of 

the Br
exit vote may or may not be in serious doubt, and markets may or may not be in turmoil 
over that.  
So 
I™m just saying I can imagine circumstances in which I would think it risky to 
proceed with another rate increase, and I can also imagine circumstances in
 which it might be 
safe, assuming the data also justify it.
 I would not want to tighten going 
into a situation 
in which it™s highly uncertain what™s 
going to happen.  I think we don™t need to be in that kind of a hurry.  
So I™ll leave it there.  Thank 

you, Madam Chair.
 CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  Governor Fischer. 

MR. FISCHER.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  I support 
alternative 
B.  The probability that 
we will raise the interest rate in our June meeting is likely lower today than the parallel 

probability for a December 2015 
increase
 was at our October 2015 meeting.  I regard today™s 

probability as somewhere around 40 percent. 
Obv
iousl
y, our decision on June 15 will depend on what happens between now and then 
and on our expectations of the development of the U.S. economy and the global economy in the 
months and years following June 15, 2016.  Our decision will depend, 
to a consider
able extent, 
on the conclusions we will have reached by then about 
economic 
growth in the fourth quarter of 

last year and the first quarter of this year and 
on the implications of those conclusions for the 

growth of the economy in the remaining three quarters of this year.  And that conclusion will 

depend, to a considerable extent, on whether the labor market continues to strengthen. 
Before our next meeting we will receive two employment reports, on May 6
 and on 
June 3.  The probability that we will wa
nt to raise the rate seven weeks from now will be higher 
if these reports confirm the basic dilemma we
™ve had to
 deal with for well over a year
Šthat the 
labor market is strong, while economic 
growth is disappointing.
  I continue to go with the advice 

to fo
cus on the labor market
, which I was given soon after arriving here. 
Of course, there™ll be many other factors that we™ll take into account when we make the 
next interest rate decision
, among them current and expected rates of inflation and wage growth 
and 
current and expected exchange rates
.  But there
™s no point at this late stage in our discussions 
in trying to summarize our collective reaction function not only in terms of the arguments that 

enter our explicit or implicit monetary rule, but also in terms of what determines our beliefs 

about that rule and about future values of those arguments. 
So, to save time, I™ll conclude by mentioning only two key issues, both of which have 
been mentioned several times already in this discussion.
  The first is 
the
 message we want to 
send about the probability of our raising the interest rate on June 15.  Probably most of us prefer 

not to surprise the markets
, at least unnecessarily.  If that is our approach, we need to raise the 
markets
™ 
estimated probability of an in
crease in June.
  That could be done both through today™s 
statem
ent and by messages that we send in the next seven weeks.  I do not think that 
alternative 
B will send the message that I 
believe
 conveys the right probability.  And if our aim is to not 
create
 surprises, we should not wait too long to send the message that the probability of an 
increase in June is well above the 20 percent number we™
ve heard several times this week.
  I hope that the statement and
, in particular, 
the minutes will be useful in th
is regard.
 Second, we confront the issue of what to do about the possibility of Brexit, which was 
discussed yesterday by several people, including in some detail by 
Vice Chairman
 Dudley, and 
again today by others.  In principle, the way we should handle th
e Brexit issue seems clear.  If 

the odds on Brexit are low on June 15, we should go ahead and make the decision on the interest 

rate
, ignoring the possibility of Brexit.  If the odds on 
a ﬁleave
ﬂ Brexit
 vote
 result 
are close to or 
above 50 percent, we should delay our decision on the rate, particular
ly if the tentative decision 
would have been to raise the rate, until the July meeting.  
This has one extra advantage.  That 

could be the ideal occasion to show that, 
in practice
, all 
of our meetings are liveŠ
that is to say
, we really can make an interest rate decision at any meeting.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Vice Chairman.
 VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY.  Thank you, Madam Chair.
  I support 
alternative B as 
written.  I th
ink we need to acknowledge both the weakness in recent economic activity, which I 
believe
 we d
o in paragraph 1, and the fact that financial conditions have improved so that the 
downside risks 
arising 
from this source have diminished somewhat, and I think the changes in 

paragraph 2 address
 this
. 
Unlike some others, I expect the statement will be viewed as slightly on the 
ﬁhawk
yﬂ 
side, in view of 
the elimination of the ﬁ
continue to pose 
risk
sﬂ language.  How much so is 
difficult to tell.  I don™t read the sta
tement as indicating a bias one way or another about June.  
But with the market expectations for June at only about 
a 20 percent probability, it seems to me 
this statement, 
even if it really is not indicating a lean to June, should push the probability up 
a little bit, and I view that as a good outcome.
 Yesterday I discussed the Brexit issue.  I™m pretty much where Governor Fischer is on 
that.  I think that if it
™s obvious 
at the 
next meeting that we would like to tighten ex Brexit and 
the probability of Brexit is low, we should just go ahead.  B
ut if the probability of a leave vote is 
high, then it may very well make sense to wait. 
I do think that there is 
an option to potentially have a very hawky s
tatement in June and 
then make 
it clear in the press conference that we
™re very close to tightening monetary policy, 
setting up the expectation
s that the July meeting would be live.  And I agree with Governor 
Fischer that tightening in July has 
some other attractions
, because it would eliminate this idea 
that we 
can tighten only at press conference meetings.
  Thank you, Madam Chair. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Thank you.  
Well
, I think I™ve heard broad-based support for 
alternative B for today and heard many of you emphasize the importance of communications 

between now and June.  A
nd if we see a divergence between what markets think and what views 
are developing in the Committee, 
I will be very attuned to 
try to
 remedy that.
 For today, 
let me ask Brian to call for a vote on alternative 
B as written and the 
associated directi
ve. 
MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you, Madam Chair.  As you mentioned, this vote will be on the 
policy statement for 
alternative B as indicated on pages 6 and 7 of Thomas™s 
briefing materials 
and on the directive to the Desk as included in the implementation note on
 page 10 of those 
materials.
 Chair Yellen
  
Yes
 Vice Chairman Dudley
 Yes
 Governor Brainard 
 Yes
 President Bullard
  
Yes
 Governor Fischer 
 Yes
 President George
  No President Mester
  Yes
 Governor Powell 
 Yes
 President Rosengren
 Yes
 Governor Tarullo 
 Yes
 MR. MADIGAN.  Thank you. 
CHAIR YELLEN.  Okay.  Thank you. 
VICE CHAIRMAN DUDLEY
.  It™s a
 new record.   
CHAIR YELLEN.  
Well, i
t is a record, and while I™m an early eater for lunch [
laughter], 
I think we™re pushing it. 
The date of the next meeting is Tuesday and Wednesday, June 14 and 15.  Linda 
Robertson is prepared to give us an update on legislative affairs, and l
unch will be available at 
11:30 for those of you who want to stay.  The meeting is adjourned at this point, and Linda is 

welcom
e to begin whenever she
™d like.
 END OF MEETING
 